 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology 1
S E C T I O N
I
Anesthetic Equipment 
& Monitors
 2 The Operating Room Environment 9
Charles E. Cowles, MD
 3 Breathing Systems 29
 4 The Anesthesia Machine 43
 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 87
 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 123
S E C T I O N
II
Clinical Pharmacology 
 7  Pharmacological Principles 143
 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 153
 9 Intravenous Anesthetics 175
 10 Analgesic Agents 189
 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents 199
 12 Cholinesterase Inhibitors & Other 
Pharmacologic Antagonists to 
Neuromuscular Blocking Agents 223
 13 Anticholinergic Drugs 233
 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists 239
Contents
 15 Hypotensive Agents 255
 16 Local Anesthetics 263
 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia 277
S E C T I O N
III
Anesthetic Management
 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, 
& Perioperative Documentation 295
 19 Airway Management 309
 20 Cardiovascular Physiology 
& Anesthesia 343
 21 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Cardiovascular Disease 375
 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular 
Surgery 435
 23 Respiratory Physiology 
& Anesthesia 487
 24 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Respiratory Disease 527
 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 545
 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia 575
 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 593
 28 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases 613
iv 
CONTENTS
 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia 631
 30 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Kidney Disease 653
 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary 
Surgery 671
 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia 691
Michael Ramsay, MD, FRCA
 33 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Liver Disease 707
Michael Ramsay, MD, FRCA
 34 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Endocrine Disease 727
 35 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Neuromuscular Disease 747
 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic 
Surgery 759
 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic 
Surgery 773
 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery 789
Edward R. Mariano, MD, MAS 
 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & 
Emergency Surgery 805
Brian P. McGlinch, MD
 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology 
& Anesthesia 825
Michael A. Frölich, MD, MS
 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 843
Michael A. Frölich, MD, MS
 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 877
 43 Geriatric Anesthesia 907
 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating 
Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based 
Anesthesia 919
S E C T I O N
IV
Regional Anesthesia & 
Pain Management
 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks 937
 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 975
Sarah J. Madison, MD and Brian M. Ilfeld, MD, MS
 47 Chronic Pain Management 1023
Richard W. Rosenquist, MD 
and Bruce M. Vrooman, MD
 48 Perioperative Pain Management & 
Enhanced Outcomes 1087
Francesco Carli, MD, MPhil and 
Gabriele Baldini, MD, MSc
S E C T I O N
V
Perioperative & 
Critical Care Medicine
 49 Management of Patients with 
Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 1107
 50 Acid–Base Management 1141
 51 Fluid Management & 
Blood Component Therapy 1161
 52 Thermoregulation, Hypothermia, 
& Malignant Hyperthermia 1183
 53 Nutrition in Perioperative 
& Critical Care 1193
 54 Anesthetic Complications 1199
 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 1231
Martin Giesecke, MD and Srikanth Hosur, MBBS, MD
 56 Postanesthesia Care 1257
 57 Critical Care 1277
 58 Safety, Quality, & Performance 
Improvement 1325
Index 1331
v
Gabriele Baldini, MD, MSc
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec
John F. Butterworth IV, MD
Professor and Chairman
Department of Anesthesiology
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine
VCU Health System
Richmond, Virginia
Francesco Carli, MD, MPhil
Professor
Department of Anesthesia
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec
Charles E. Cowles, Jr, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology 
and Perioperative Medicine
Chief Safety Offi  cer
Perioperative Enterprise
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Houston, Texas 
Michael A. Frölich, MD, MS
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham, Alabama
Martin Giesecke, MD
M.T. “Pepper” Jenkins Professor in Anesthesiology
Vice Chair, University Hospitals
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, Texas
Chapter Authors
Srikanth Hosur, MBBS, MD
Consultant in Intensive Care
QuestCare Intensivists
Dallas, Texas
Brian M. Ilfeld, MD, MS
Professor, In Residence
Department of Anesthesiology
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, California
David C. Mackey, MD
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and 
Perioperative Medicine
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
Sarah J. Madison, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor of Anesthesiology
Department of Anesthesiology
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, California
Edward R. Mariano, MD, MAS (Clinical Research)
Associate Professor of Anesthesia
Stanford University School of Medicine
Chief, Anesthesiology and Perioperative Care Service
VA Palo Alto Health Care System
Palo Alto, California
Brian P. McGlinch, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
Colonel, United States Army Reserve, Medical Corps
452 Combat Support Hospital
Fort Snelling, Minnesota
Michael Ramsay, MD, FRCA
Chairman Department of Anesthesiology 
and Pain Management
Baylor University Medical Center
President Baylor Research Institute
Clinical Professor
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School
Dallas, Texas
Richard W. Rosenquist, MD
Chair, Pain Management Department
Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
vi 
CHAPTER AUTHORS
Bruce M. Vrooman, MD
Department of Pain Management
Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
John D. Wasnick, MD, MPH
Steven L. Berk Endowed Chair for 
Excellence in Medicine
Professor and Chair
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
School of Medicine
Lubbock, Texas
vii
Kallol Chaudhuri, MD, PhD
Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Swapna Chaudhuri, MD, PhD
Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
John Emhardt, MD
Department of Anesthesia
Indiana University School of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana
Suzanne N. Escudier, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Aschraf N. Farag, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Herbert Gonzalez, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Kyle Gunnerson, MD
Department of Anesthesiology
VCU School of Medicine
Richmond, Virginia
Contributors
Robert Johnston, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas 
Sanford Littwin, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
St. Luke’s Roosevelt Hospital Center and Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons
New York, New York 
Alina Nicoara, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, North Carolina 
Bettina Schmitz, MD, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Steven L. Shafer, MD
Department of Anesthesia
Stanford University School of Medicine
Palo Alto, California
Christiane Vogt-Harenkamp, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Gary Zaloga, MD
Global Medical Aff airs
Baxter Healthcare
Deerfi eld, Illinois
This page intentionally left blank 
ix
Jacqueline E. Geier, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
St. Luke’s Roosevelt Hospital Center
New York, New York
Brian Hirsch, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
Texas Tech University Medical Center 
Lubbock, Texas
Shane Huff man, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
Texas Tech University Medical Center 
Lubbock, Texas
Rahul K. Mishra, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
Texas Tech University Medical Center 
Lubbock, Texas
Research and Review
Cecilia N. Pena, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
Texas Tech University Medical Center Hospital
Lubbock, Texas
Charlotte M. Walter, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
Texas Tech University Medical Center
Lubbock, Texas
Karvier Yates, MD
Resident, Department of Anesthesiology
Texas Tech University Medical Center
Lubbock, Texas
This page intentionally left blank 
xi
Foreword
A little more than 25 years ago, Alexander Kugushev, 
then the editor for Lange Medical 12s, 
approached us to consider writing an introduc-
tory textbook in the specialty of anesthesiology that 
would be part of the popular Lange series of medi-
cal books. Mr. Kugushev proved to be a convincing 
salesman, in part by off ering his experience with 
scores of authors, all of whom opined that their most 
satisfying career achievement was the fathering of 
their texts. We could not agree more.
Now in its fifth edition, the overall stylistic goal 
of Clinical Anesthesiology remains unchanged: to be 
written simply enough so that a third year medical 
student can understand all essential basic concepts, 
yet comprehensively enough to provide a strong 
foundation for a resident in anesthesiology. To quote 
C. Philip Larson, Jr, MD from the Foreword of the 
first edition: “The text is complete; nothing of conse-
quence is omitted. The writing style is precise, con-
cise and highly readable.” 
The fifth edition features three new chapters: 
Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, and Office-
based Anesthesia; Perioperative Pain Management 
and Enhanced Outcomes; and Safety, Quality, and 
Performance Improvement. There are approxi-
mately 70 new figures and 20 new tables. The adop-
tion of full color dramatically improves the aesthetic 
appeal of every page.
However, the biggest and most important 
change in the fifth edition is the “passing of the 
baton” to a distinguished and accomplished team of 
authors and editors. We were thrilled to learn that 
Drs. Butterworth, Mackey, and Wasnick would be 
succeeding us. The result of their hard work proves 
our enthusiasm was justified as they have taken 
Clinical Anesthesiology to a new level. We hope you, 
the readers, agree!
 
G. Edward Morgan, Jr, MD
 
Maged S. Mikhail, MD
This page intentionally left blank 
xiii
Preface
Authors should be proud whenever a book is suf-
fi ciently successful to require a new edition. Th is is 
especially true when a book’s consistent popular-
ity over time leads to the succession of the original 
authors by a new set of authors. Th is latter circum-
stance is the case for the fi ft h edition of what most 
of us call “Morgan and Mikhail.” We hope that you 
the reader will fi nd this new edition as readable and 
useful as you have found the preceding four editions 
of the work.
This fifth edition, while retaining essential ele-
ments of its predecessors, represents a significant 
revision of the text. Only those who have written a 
book of this size and complexity will understand just 
how much effort was involved. Entirely new subjects 
(eg, Perioperative Pain Management and Enhanced 
Outcomes) have been added, and many other topics 
that previously lived in multiple chapters have been 
moved and consolidated. We have tried to elimi-
nate redundancies and contradictions. The number 
of illustrations devoted to regional anesthesia and 
analgesia has been greatly increased to adequately 
address the rapidly growing importance of this 
perioperative management topic. The clarity of the 
illustrations is also enhanced by the widespread use 
of color throughout the book. We hope the product 
of this endeavor provides readers with as useful an 
exercise as was experienced by the authors in com-
posing it.
• Key Concepts are listed at the beginning of 
each chapter and a corresponding numbered 
icon identifi es the section(s) within the 
chapter in which each concept is discussed. 
Th ese should help the reader focus on 
important concepts that underlie the core of 
anesthesiology.
• Case Discussions deal with clinical problems 
of current interest and are intended to 
stimulate discussion and critical thinking.
• Th e suggested reading has been revised and 
updated to include pertinent Web addresses 
and references to clinical practice guidelines 
and practice parameters. We have not tried 
to provide a comprehensive list of references: 
we expect that most readers of this text would 
normally perform their own literature searches 
on medical topics using Google, PubMed, 
and other electronic resources. Indeed, we 
expect that an ever-increasing segment of our 
readers will access this text in one of its several 
electronic forms.
• Multiple new illustrations and images have 
been added to this edition.
Nonetheless, our goal remains the same as that of 
the fi rst edition: “to provide a concise, consistent 
presentation of the basic principles essential to the 
modern practice of anesthesia.”
We would like to thank Brian Belval, Harriet 
Lebowitz, and Marsha Loeb for their invaluable 
 assistance.
Despite our best intentions, various errors 
may have made their way into the fifth edition. We 
will be grateful to readers who report these to us 
at mm5edition@gmail.com so that we can correct 
them in reprints and future editions.
John F. Butterworth IV, MD
David C. Mackey, MD
John D. Wasnick, MD, MPH
This page intentionally T 
 1
 The Practice of Anesthesiology 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R1
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
Oliver Wendell Holmes in 1846 was the ﬁ rst 
to propose use of the term  anesthesia to 
denote the state that incorporates amnesia, 
analgesia, and narcosis to make painless 
surgery possible. 
Ether was used for frivolous purposes (“ether 
frolics”) and was not used as an anesthetic 
agent in humans until 1842, when Crawford 
W. Long and William E. Clark independently 
used it on patients. On October 16, 1846, 
William T.G. Morton conducted the ﬁ rst 
publicized demonstration of general 
anesthesia for surgical operation using ether. 
The original application of modern local 
anesthesia is credited to Carl Koller, at the 
time a house oﬃ  cer in ophthalmology, who 
demonstrated topical anesthesia of the eye 
with cocaine in 1884. 
1
2
3
Curare greatly facilitated tracheal intubation 
and muscle relaxation during surgery. 
For the ﬁ rst time, operations could be 
performed on patients without the 
requirement that relatively deep levels 
of inhaled general anesthetic be used to 
produce muscle relaxation. 
John Snow, often considered the 
father of the anesthesia specialty, was 
the ﬁ rst to scientiﬁ cally investigate 
ether and the physiology of general 
anesthesia. 
The “captain of the ship” doctrine, which 
held the surgeon responsible for every 
aspect of the patient’s perioperative care 
(including anesthesia), is no longer a 
valid notion when an anesthesiologist is 
present. 
4
5
6
 Th e Greek philosopher Dioscorides fi rst used the 
term  anesthesia in the fi rst century  AD to describe 
the narcotic-like eff ects of the plant mandragora. 
Th e term subsequently was defi ned in Bailey’s  An 
Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) as 
“a defect of sensation” and again in the  Encyclopedia 
Britannica (1771) as “privation of the senses.” 
 Oliver Wendell Holmes in 1846 was the fi rst to 
propose use of the term to denote the state 
that incorporates amnesia, analgesia, and narcosis to 
make painless surgery possible. In the United States, 
use of the term  anesthesiology to denote the practice 
or study of anesthesia was fi rst proposed in the 
1
second decade of the twentieth century to emphasize 
the growing scientifi c basis of the specialty. 
 Although anesthesia now rests on scientifi c 
foundations comparable to those of other special-
ties, the practice of anesthesia remains very much 
a mixture of science and art. Moreover, the practice 
has expanded well beyond rendering patients insen-
sible to pain during surgery or obstetric delivery 
( Table 1–1 ). Th e specialty uniquely requires a work-
ing familiarity with a long list of other specialties, 
including surgery and its subspecialties, internal 
medicine, pediatrics, and obstetrics as well as clinical 
pharmacology, applied physiology, and biomedical 
2 
CHAPTER 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology
alcohol, and even phlebotomy (to the point of uncon-
sciousness) to allow surgeons to operate. Ancient 
Egyptians used the combination of opium poppy 
(containing morphine) and hyoscyamus (contain-
ing scopolamine); a similar combination, morphine 
and scopolamine, has been used parenterally for 
premedication. What passed for regional anesthesia 
in ancient times consisted of compression of nerve 
trunks (nerve ischemia) or the application of cold 
(cryoanalgesia). Th e Incas may have practiced local 
anesthesia as their surgeons chewed coca leaves and 
applied them to operative wounds, particularly prior 
to trephining for headache. 
 Th e evolution of modern surgery was hampered 
not only by a poor understanding of disease pro-
cesses, anatomy, and surgical asepsis but also by the 
lack of reliable and safe anesthetic techniques. Th ese 
techniques evolved fi rst with inhalation anesthesia, 
followed by local and regional anesthesia, and fi nally 
intravenous anesthesia. Th e development of surgical 
anesthesia is considered one of the most important 
discoveries in human history. 
 INHALATION ANESTHESIA 
 Because the hypodermic needle was not invented 
until 1855, the fi rst general anesthetics were des-
tined to be inhalation agents. Diethyl ether (known 
at the time as “sulfuric ether” because it was pro-
duced by a simple chemical reaction between ethyl 
alcohol and sulfuric acid) was originally prepared in 
1540 by Valerius Cordus.  Ether was used for 
frivolous purposes (“ether frolics”), but not as 
an anesthetic agent in humans until 1842, when 
Crawford W. Long and William E. Clark indepen-
dently used it on patients for surgery and dental 
extraction, respectively. However, they did not pub-
licize their discovery. Four years later, in Boston, on 
October 16, 1846, William T.G. Morton conducted 
the fi rst publicized demonstration of general anes-
thesia for surgical operation using ether. Th e dra-
matic success of that exhibition led the operating 
surgeon to exclaim to a skeptical audience: “Gentle-
men, this is no humbug!” 
 Chloroform was independently prepared by 
von  Leibig, Guthrie, and Soubeiran in 1831. 
Although fi rst used by Holmes Coote in 1847, 
2
technology. Recent advances in biomedical technol-
ogy, neuroscience, and pharmacology continue to 
make anesthesia an intellectually stimulating and 
rapidly evolving specialty. Many physicians entering 
residency positions in anesthesiology will already 
have multiple years of graduate medical education 
and perhaps even certifi cation in other medical 
specialties. 
 Th is chapter reviews the history of anesthesia, 
emphasizing its British and American roots, and 
considers the current scope of the specialty. 
 The History of Anesthesia 
 Th e specialty of anesthesia began in the mid- 
nineteenth century and became fi rmly established 
less than six decades ago. Ancient civilizations had 
used opium poppy, coca leaves, mandrake root, 
 TABLE 11 Deﬁ nition of the practice 
of anesthesiology within the practice of 
medicine. 1 
Assessment and preparation of patients for surgery and 
anesthesia.
Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of pain during and 
following surgical, obstetric, therapeutic, and diagnostic 
procedures.
Acute care of patients during the perioperative period.
Diagnosis and treatment of critical illness.
Diagnosis and treatment of acute, chronic, and cancer-
related pain.
Cardiac, pulmonary, and trauma resuscitation.
Evaluation of respiratory function and application of 
treatments in respiratory therapy.
Instruction, evaluation of the performance, and supervision 
of both medical and paramedical personnel involved in 
perioperative care.
Administration in health care facilities, organizations, 
and medical schools necessary to implement these 
responsibilities.
Conduct of clinical, translational, and basic science research.
1 Data from the American Board of Anesthesiology Booklet of 
Information, February 2012.
 
CHAPTER 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology
3
in 1992), has many of the desirable properties of 
isofl urane as well as more rapid uptake and elimi-
nation (nearly as fast as nitrous oxide). Sevofl u-
rane, has low blood solubility, but concerns about 
the potential toxicity of its degradation products 
delayed its release in the United States until 1994 
(see Chapter 8). Th ese concerns have proved to be 
largely theoretical, and sevofl urane, not desfl urane, 
has become the most widely used inhaled anes-
thetic in the United States, largely replacing halo-
thane in pediatric practice. 
 LOCAL & REGIONAL 
ANESTHESIA 
 Th e medicinal qualities of coca had been used by the 
Incas for centuries before its actions were fi rst 
observed by Europeans. Cocaine was isolated from 
coca leaves in 1855 by Gaedicke and was purifi ed in 
1860 by Albert Niemann.  Th e original applica-
tion of modern local anesthesia is credited to 
Carl Koller, at the time a house offi  cer in ophthal-
mology, who demonstrated topical anesthesia of the 
eye with cocaine in 1884. Later in 1884 William Hal-
sted used cocaine for intradermal infi ltration and 
nerve blocks (including blocks of the facial nerve, 
brachial plexus, pudendal nerve, and pos terior tibial 
nerve). August Bier is credited with administering 
the fi rst spinal anesthetic in 1898. He was also the 
fi rst to describe intravenous regional anesthesia 
(Bier block) in 1908. Procaine was synthesized in 
1904 by Alfred Einhorn and within a year was used 
clinically as a local anesthetic by Heinrich Braun. 
Braun was also the fi rst to add epinephrine to pro-
long the duration of local anesthetics. Ferdinand 
Cathelin and Jean Sicard introduced caudal epidural 
anesthesia in 1901. Lumbar epidural anesthesia was 
described fi rst in 1921 by Fidel Pages and again 
(independently) in 1931 by Achille Dogliotti. Addi-
tional local anesthetics subsequently introduced 
include dibucaine (1930), tetracaine (1932), lido-
caine (1947), chloroprocaine (1955), mepivacaine 
(1957), prilocaine (1960), bupivacaine (1963), and 
etidocaine (1972). Th e most recent additions, ropi-
vacaine and levobupivacaine, have durations of 
action similar to bupivacaine but less cardiac toxic-
ity (see Chapter 16). 
3
chloroform was introduced into clinical practice by 
the Scot Sir James Simpson, who administered it to 
his patients to relieve the pain of labor. Ironically, 
Simpson had almost abandoned his medical prac-
tice aft er witnessing the terrible despair and agony of 
patients undergoing operations without anesthesia. 
 Joseph Priestley produced nitrous oxide in 
1772, and Humphry Davy fi rst noted its analgesic 
properties in 1800. Gardner Colton and Horace 
Wells are credited with having fi rst used nitrous 
oxide as an anesthetic for dental extractions in 
humans in 1844. Nitrous oxide’s lack of potency (an 
80% nitrous oxide concentration results in analge-
sia but not surgical anesthesia) led to clinical dem-
onstrations that were less convincing than those 
with ether. 
 Nitrous oxide was the least popular of the 
three early inhalation anesthetics because of its 
low potency and its tendency to cause asphyxia 
when used alone (see Chapter 8). Interest in nitrous 
oxide was revived in 1868 when Edmund Andrews 
administered it in 20% oxygen; its use was, how-
ever, overshadowed by the popularity of ether and 
chloroform. Ironically, nitrous oxide is the only one 
of these three agents still in widespread use today. 
Chloroform superseded ether in popularity in many 
areas (particularly in the United Kingdom), but 
reports of chloroform-related cardiac arrhythmias, 
respiratory depression, and hepatotoxicity eventu-
ally caused practitioners to abandon it in favor of 
ether, particularly in North America. 
 Even aft er the introduction of other inhala-
tion anesthetics (ethyl chloride, ethylene, divinyl 
ether, cyclopropane, trichloroethylene, and fl urox-
ene), ether remained the standard inhaled anes-
thetic until the early 1960s. Th e only inhalation 
agent that rivaled ether’s safety and popularity was 
cyclopropane (introduced in 1934). However, both 
are highly combustible and both have since been 
replaced by a succession of nonfl ammable potent 
fl uorinated hydrocarbons: halothane (developed in 
1951; released in 1956), methoxyfl urane (developed 
in 1958; released in 1960), enfl urane (developed in 
1963; released in 1973), and isofl urane (developed 
in 1965; released in 1981). 
 Two newer agents are now the most popu-
lar in developed countries. Desfl urane (released 
4 
CHAPTER 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology
fi rst time, operations could be performed on patients 
without the requirement that relatively deep levels of 
inhaled general anesthetic be used to produce mus-
cle relaxation. Such large doses of anesthetic oft en 
resulted in excessive cardiovascular and respiratory 
depression as well as prolonged emergence. More-
over, larger doses were oft en not tolerated by frail 
patients. 
 Succinylcholine was synthesized by Bovet in 
1949 and released in 1951; it has become a stan-
dard agent for facilitating tracheal intubation during 
rapid sequence induction. Until recently, succinyl-
choline remained unchallenged in its rapid onset 
of profound muscle relaxation, but its side eff ects 
prompted the search for a comparable substitute. 
Other neuromuscular blockers (NMBs; discussed in 
Chapter 11)—gallamine, decamethonium, metocu-
rine, alcuronium, and pancuronium—were subse-
quently introduced. Unfortunately, these agents were 
oft en associated with side eff ects (see Chapter 11), 
and the search for the ideal NMB continued. Recently 
introduced agents that more closely resemble an ideal 
NMB include vecuronium, atracurium, rocuronium, 
and  cis -atracurium. 
 Opioids 
 Morphine, isolated from opium in 1805 by Sertürner, 
was also tried as an intravenous anesthetic. Th e 
adverse events associated with large doses of opioids 
in early reports caused many anesthetists to avoid 
opioids and favor pure inhalation anesthesia. Inter-
est in opioids in anesthesia returned following the 
synthesis and introduction of meperidine in 1939. 
Th e concept of  balanced anesthesia was introduced 
in 1926 by Lundy and others and evolved to include 
thiopental for induction, nitrous oxide for amne-
sia, an opioid for analgesia, and curare for muscle 
relaxation. In 1969, Lowenstein rekindled interest 
in “pure” opioid anesthesia by reintroducing the 
concept of large doses of opioids as complete anes-
thetics. Morphine was the fi rst agent so employed, 
but fentanyl and sufentanil have been preferred by a 
large margin as sole agents. As experience grew with 
this technique, its multiple limitations—unreliably 
preventing patient awareness, incompletely sup-
pressing autonomic responses during surgery, and 
prolonged respiratory depression—were realized. 
 INTRAVENOUS ANESTHESIA 
 Induction Agents 
 Intravenous anesthesia required the invention of 
the hypodermic syringe and needle by Alexander 
Wood in 1855. Early attempts at intravenous anes-
thesia included the use of chloral hydrate (by Oré 
in 1872), chloroform and ether (Burkhardt in 1909), 
and the combination of morphine and scopolamine 
(Bredenfeld in 1916). Barbiturates were fi rst synthe-
sized in 1903 by Fischer and von Mering. Th e fi rst 
barbiturate used for induction of anesthesia was 
diethylbarbituric acid (barbital), but it was not until 
the introduction of hexobarbital in 1927 that barbi-
turate induction became popular. Th iopental, syn-
thesized in 1932 by Volwiler and Tabern, was fi rst 
used clinically by John Lundy and Ralph Waters in 
1934 and for many years remained the most com-
mon agent for intravenous induction of anesthesia. 
Methohexital was fi rst used clinically in 1957 by V. 
K. Stoelting and is the only other barbiturate used 
for induction of anesthesia in humans. Aft er chlor-
diazepoxide was discovered in 1955 and released 
for clinical use in 1960, other benzodiazepines—
diazepam, lorazepam, and midazolam—came to 
be used extensively for premedication, conscious 
sedation, and induction of general anesthesia. Ket-
amine was synthesized in 1962 by Stevens and fi rst 
used clinically in 1965 by Corssen and Domino; it 
was released in 1970 and continues to be popular 
today, particular when administered in combina-
tion with other agents. Etomidate was synthesized 
in 1964 and released in 1972. Initial enthusiasm over 
its relative lack of circulatory and respiratory eff ects 
was tempered by evidence of adrenal suppression, 
reported aft er even a single dose. Th e release of pro-
pofol in 1986 (1989 in the United States) was a major 
advance in outpatient anesthesia because of its short 
duration of action (see Chapter 9). Propofol is cur-
rently the most popular agent for intravenous induc-
tion worldwide. 
 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents 
 Th e introduction of curare by Harold Griffi  th and 
Enid Johnson in 1942 was a milestone in anesthesia. 
 Curare greatly facilitated tracheal intubation 
and muscle relaxation during surgery. For the 
4
 
CHAPTER 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology
5
anesthesia, which went through fi ve editions. Snow, 
Clover, and Hewitt established the tradition of phy-
sician anesthetists in England. In 1893, the fi rst 
organization of physician specialists in anesthesia, 
the London Society of Anaesthetists, was formed in 
England by J.F. Silk. 
 Th e fi rst elective tracheal intubations during 
anesthesia were performed in the late nineteenth 
century by surgeons Sir William MacEwen in Scot-
land, Joseph O’Dwyer in the United States, and 
Franz Kuhn in Germany. Tracheal intubation during 
anesthesia was popularized in England by Sir Ivan 
Magill and Stanley Rowbotham in the 1920s. 
 American Origins 
 In the United States, only a few physicians had spe-
cialized in anesthesia by 1900. Th e task of provid-
ing general anesthesia was oft en delegated to junior 
surgical house offi  cers or medical students, if they 
were available. 
 Th e fi rst organization of physician anesthetists 
in the United States was the Long Island Society of 
Anesthetists formed in 1905, which, as it grew, was 
renamed the New York Society of Anesthetists in 
1911. Th e International Anesthesia Research Soci-
ety (IARS) was founded in 1922, and in that same 
year the IARS-sponsored scientifi c journal  Current 
Researches in Anesthesia and Analgesia (now called 
Anesthesia and Analgesia ) began 12. In 
1936, the New York Society of Anesthetists became 
the American Society of Anesthetists, and later, in 
1945, the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA). Th e scientifi c journal  Anesthesiology was fi rst 
published in 1940. 
 Four physicians stand out in the early devel-
opment of anesthesia in the United States aft er 
1900: F.H. McMechan, Arthur E. Guedel, Ralph 
M. Waters, and John S. Lundy. McMechan was 
the driving force behind both the IARS and  Cur-
rent Researches in Anesthesia and Analgesia , and 
tirelessly organized physicians specializing in 
anesthesia into national and international orga-
nizations until his death in 1939. Guedel was the 
fi rst to describe the signs and stages of general 
anesthesia. He advocated cuff ed tracheal tubes 
and introduced artifi cial ventilation during ether 
anesthesia (later termed  controlled respiration by 
Remifentanil, an opioid subject to rapid degradation 
by nonspecifi c plasma and tissue esterases, permits 
profound levels of opioid analgesia to be employed 
without concerns regarding the need for postopera-
tive ventilation. 
 EVOLUTION OF THE 
SPECIALTY 
 British Origins 
 Following its fi rst public demonstration in the 
United States, ether anesthesia quickly was adopted 
in England.  John Snow, oft en considered the 
father of the anesthesia specialty, was the fi rst 
physician to take a full-time interest in this new 
anesthetic. He was the fi rst to scientifi cally investi-
gate ether and the physiology of general anesthesia. 
Of course, Snow was also a pioneer in epidemiol-
ogy. He helped stop a cholera epidemic in London 
by proving that the causative agent was transmitted 
by ingestion of contaminated well water rather 
than by inhalation. In 1847, Snow published the 
fi rst book on general anesthesia,  On the Inhalation 
of Ether . When the anesthetic properties of chloro-
form were made known, he quickly investigated 
and developed an inhaler for that agent as well. He 
believed that an inhaler should be used in adminis-
tering ether or chloroform to control the dose of 
the anesthetic. His second book,  On Chloroform 
and Other Anaesthetics , was published posthu-
mously in 1858. 
 Aft er Snow’s death, Dr. Joseph T. Clover took 
his place as England’s leading anesthetist. Clover 
emphasized continuously monitoring the patient’s 
pulse during anesthesia, a practice that was not 
yet standard at the time. He was the fi rst to use the 
jaw-thrust maneuver for relieving airway obstruc-
tion, the fi rst to insist that resuscitation equipment 
always be available during anesthesia, and the fi rst 
to use a cricothyroid cannula (to save a patient 
with an oral tumor who developed complete air-
way obstruction). Aft er Clover, Sir Frederic Hewitt 
became England’s foremost anesthetist at the turn of 
the last century. He was responsible for many inven-
tions, including the oral airway. Hewitt also wrote 
what many consider to be the fi rst true textbook of 
5
6 
CHAPTER 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology
 The Scope of Anesthesia 
 Th e practice of anesthesia has changed dramatically 
since the days of John Snow. Th e modern anesthesi-
ologist is now both a perioperative consultant and a 
primary deliverer of care to patients. In general, 
anesthesiologists manage nearly all “noncutting” 
aspects of the patient’s medical care in the immedi-
ate perioperative period.  Th e “captain of the 
ship” doctrine, which held the surgeon respon-
sible for every aspect of the patient’s perioperative 
care (including anesthesia), is no longer a valid 
notion when an anesthesiologist is present. Th e sur-
geon and anesthesiologist must function together as 
an eff ective team, and both are ultimately answer-
able to the patient rather than to each other. 
 Th e modern practice of anesthesia is not con-
fi ned to rendering patients insensible to pain 
( Table 1–1 ). Anesthesiologists monitor, sedate, and 
provide general or regional anesthesia outside the 
operating room for various imaging procedures, 
endoscopy, electroconvulsive therapy, and cardiac 
catheterization. Anesthesiologists have tradition-
ally been pioneers in cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
and continue to be integral members of resuscitation 
teams. 
 An increasing number of practitioners pur-
sue a subspecialty in anesthesia for cardiothoracic 
surgery (see Chapter 22), critical care (see Chap-
ter 57), neuroanesthesia (see Chapter 27), obstetric 
anesthesia (see Chapter 41), pediatric anesthesia 
(see Chapter 42), and pain medicine (see Chapter 
47). Certifi cation requirements for special com-
petence in critical care and pain medicine already 
exist in the United States. Fellowship programs 
in Adult Cardiothoracic Anesthesia and Pediatric 
Anesthesiology have specifi c accreditation require-
ments, and soon those in Obstetric Anesthesiology 
will as well. A certifi cation examination will soon 
be available in Pediatric Anesthesiology. Education 
and certifi cation in anesthesiology can also be used 
as the basis for certifi cation in Sleep Medicine or in 
Palliative Medicine. 
 Anesthesiologists are actively involved in the 
administration and medical direction of many 
ambulatory surgery facilities, operating room 
suites, intensive care units, and respiratory therapy 
6
Waters). Ralph Waters made a long list of contribu-
tions to the specialty, probably the most important 
of which was his insistence on the proper educa-
tion of specialists in anesthesia. Waters developed 
the fi rst academic department of anesthesiology 
at the University of Wisconsin in Madison. Lundy 
was instrumental in the formation of the American 
Board of Anesthesiology and chaired the American 
Medical Association’s Section on Anesthesiology 
for 17 years. 
 Because of the scarcity of physicians specializ-
ing in anesthesia in the United States and the per-
ceived relative safety of ether anesthesia, surgeons 
at both the Mayo Clinic and Cleveland Clinic began 
training and employing nurses as anesthetists in the 
early 1900s. As the numbers of nurse anesthetists 
increased, a national organization (now called the 
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists) was 
incorporated in 1932. Th e AANA fi rst off ered a 
certifi cation examination in 1945. In 1969 two 
Anesthesiology Assistant programs began accept-
ing students, and in 1989 the fi rst certifi cation 
examinations for AAs were administered. Certifi ed 
Registered Nurse Anesthetists and Anesthesiolo-
gist Assistants represent important members of the 
anesthesia workforce in the United States and in 
other countries. 
 Oﬃ  cial Recognition 
 In 1889 Henry Isaiah Dorr, a dentist, was appointed 
Professor of the Practice of Dentistry, Anaesthet-
ics and Anaesthesia at the Philadelphia College of 
Dentistry. Th us he was the fi rst known professor of 
anesthesia worldwide. Th omas D. Buchanan, of the 
New York Medical College, was the fi rst physician 
to be appointed Professor of Anesthesia (in 1905). 
When the American Board of Anesthesiology was 
established in 1938, Dr. Buchanan served as its fi rst 
president. In England, the fi rst examination for the 
Diploma in Anaesthetics took place in 1935, and the 
fi rst Chair in Anaesthetics was awarded to Sir Rob-
ert Macintosh in 1937 at Oxford University. Anes-
thesia became an offi  cially recognized specialty in 
England only in 1947, when the Royal College of 
Surgeons established its Faculty of Anaesthetists. In 
1992 an independent Royal College of Anaesthetists 
was granted its charter. 
 
CHAPTER 1 The Practice of Anesthesiology 
7 
 Bacon DR: Th e promise of one great anesthesia society. 
Th e 1939–1940 proposed merger of the American 
Society of Anesthetists and the International 
Anesthesia Research Society. Anesthesiology 
1994;80:929. 
 Bergman N:  Th e Genesis of Surgical Anesthesia . Wood 
Library Museum of Anesthesiology, 1998. 
 Keys TE:  Th e History of Surgical Anesthesia . Schuman’s, 
1945. 
 Sykes K, Bunker J:  Anaesthesia and the Practice of 
Medicine: Historical Perspectives . Royal Society of 
Medicine Press, 2007. 
departments. Th ey have also assumed administra-
tive and leadership positions on the medical staff s of 
many hospitals and ambulatory care facilities. Th ey 
serve as deans of medical schools and chief execu-
tives of health systems. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Th e American Board of Anesthesiology Booklet of 
Information February 2012. Available at: http://www.
theaba.org/Home/12s (accessed August 9, 
2012). 
This page intentionally left blank 
 9
 The Operating 
Room Environment 
 Charles E. Cowles, MD 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R2
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
A pressure of 1000 psig indicates an 
E-cylinder that is approximately half 
full and represents 330 L of oxygen. 
 The only reliable way to determine residual 
volume of nitrous oxide is to weigh the 
cylinder. 
To discourage incorrect cylinder attachments, 
cylinder manufacturers have adopted a pin 
index safety system. 
 A basic principle of radiation safety is to keep 
exposure “as low as reasonably practical” 
(ALARP). The principles of ALARP are 
protection from radiation exposure by the 
use of time, distance, and shielding. 
 The magnitude of a leakage current is normally 
imperceptible to touch (<1 mA, and well below 
the ﬁ brillation threshold of 100 mA). If the 
current bypasses the high resistance oﬀ ered 
by skin, however, and is applied directly to the 
heart (microshock), current as low as 100 µA 
may be fatal. The maximum leakage allowed in 
operating room equipment is 10 µA. 
 To reduce the chance of two coexisting faults, 
a line isolation monitor measures the potential 
for current ﬂ ow from the isolated power supply 
to the ground. Basically, the line isolation 
monitor determines the degree of isolation 
between the two power wires and the ground 
1
2
3
4
5
6
and predicts the amount of current that  could 
ﬂ ow if a second short circuit were to develop. 
 Almost all surgical ﬁ res can be prevented. 
Unlike medical complications, ﬁ res are a 
product of simple physical and chemistry 
properties. Occurrence is guaranteed given 
the proper combination of factors but can be 
eliminated almost entirely by understanding 
the basic principles of ﬁ re risk. 
 Likely the most common risk factor for surgical 
ﬁ re relates to the open delivery of oxygen. 
 Administration of oxygen to concentrations 
of greater than 30% should be guided by 
clinical presentation of the patient and not 
solely by protocols or habits. 
 The sequence of stopping gas ﬂ ow and 
removal of the endotracheal tube when ﬁ re 
occurs in the airway is not as important as 
ensuring that both actions are performed 
quickly. 
 Before beginning laser surgery, the laser 
device should be in the operating room, 
warning signs should be posted on the doors, 
and protective eyewear should be issued. 
The anesthesia provider should ensure that 
the warning signs and eyewear match the 
labeling on the laser device as laser protection 
is speciﬁ c to the type of laser. 
7
8
9
10
11
 S E C T I O N I 
Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
10 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
followed by “Does everyone agree we are performing 
a removal of the left  kidney?”, and so forth. Optimal 
checklists do not attempt to cover every possibility but 
rather address only key components, allowing them to 
be completed in less than 90 seconds. 
 Some practitioners argue that checklists waste 
too much time; they fail to realize that cutting 
corners to save time oft en leads to problems later, 
resulting in a net loss of time. If safety checklists 
were followed in every case, signifi cant reductions 
could be seen in the incidence of surgical complica-
tions such as wrong-site surgery, procedures on the 
wrong patient, retained foreign objects, and other 
easily prevented mistakes. Anesthesia providers are 
leaders in patient safety initiatives and should take a 
proactive role to utilize checklists and other activi-
ties that foster the safety culture. 
 Medical Gas Systems 
 Th e medical gases commonly used in operating 
rooms are oxygen, nitrous oxide, air, and nitrogen. 
Although technically not a gas, vacuum exhaust for 
waste anesthetic gas disposal (WAGD or scavenging) 
and surgical suction must also be provided and is 
considered an integral part of the medical gas system. 
Patients are endangered if medical gas systems, par-
ticularly oxygen, are misconfi gured or malfunction. 
Th e main features of such systems are the sources 
of the gases and the means of their delivery to the 
operating room. Th e anesthesiologist must under-
stand both these elements to prevent and detect 
medical gas depletion or supply line misconnection. 
Estimates of a particular hospital’s peak demand 
determine the type of medical gas supply system 
required. Design and standards follow National Fire 
Protection Association (NFPA) 99 in the United 
States and HTM 2022 in the United Kingdom. 
 SOURCES OF MEDICAL GASES 
 Oxygen 
 A reliable supply of oxygen is a critical requirement 
in any surgical area. Medical grade oxygen (99% or 
99.5% pure) is manufactured by fractional distilla-
tion of liquefi ed air. Oxygen is stored as a compressed 
 Anesthesiologists, who spend more time in operat-
ing rooms than any other group of physicians, are 
responsible for protecting patients and operating 
room personnel from a multitude of dangers dur-
ing surgery. Some of these threats are unique to the 
operating room. As a result, the anesthesiologist 
may be responsible for ensuring proper functioning 
of the operating room’s medical gases, fi re preven-
tion and management, environmental factors (eg, 
temperature, humidity, ventilation, and noise), and 
electrical safety. Th e role of the anesthesiologist also 
may include coordination of or assistance with lay-
out and design of surgical suites, including workfl ow 
enhancements. Th is chapter describes the major 
operating room features that are of special interest 
to anesthesiologists and the potential hazards asso-
ciated with these systems. 
 Safety Culture 
 Patients oft en think of the operating room as a 
safe place where the care given is centered around 
protecting the patient. Medical providers such as 
anesthesia personnel, surgeons, and nurses are 
responsible for carrying out several critical tasks at 
a fast pace. Unless members of the operating room 
team look out for one another, errors can occur. Th e 
best way of preventing serious harm to a patient is by 
creating a culture of safety. When the safety culture 
is eff ectively applied in the operating room, unsafe 
acts are stopped before harm occurs. 
 One tool that fosters the safety culture is the 
use of a surgical safety checklist. Such checklists are 
used prior to incision on every case and can include 
components agreed upon by the facility as crucial. 
Many surgical checklists are derived from the surgical 
safety checklist published by the World Health Orga-
nization (WHO). For checklists to be eff ective, they 
must fi rst be used; secondly, all members of the surgi-
cal team should be engaged when the checklist is being 
used. Checklists are most eff ective when performed in 
an interactive fashion. An example of a suboptimally 
executed checklist is one that is read in entirety, aft er 
which the surgeon asks whether everyone agrees. Th is 
format makes it diffi  cult to identify possible problems. 
A better method is one that elicits a response aft er each 
point; eg, “Does everyone agree this is John Doe?”, 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment
11
 Most 
anesthesia 
machines 
accommodate 
 E-cylinders of oxygen ( Table 2–1 ). As oxygen is 
expended, the cylinder’s pressure falls in proportion 
to its content.  A pressure of 1000 psig indi-
cates an E-cylinder that is approximately half 
full and represents 330 L of oxygen at atmospheric 
pressure and a temperature of 20°C. If the oxygen 
is exhausted at a rate of 3 L/min, a cylinder that is 
half full will be empty in 110 min. Oxygen cylinder 
pressure should be monitored before use and peri-
odically during use. Anesthesia machines usually 
also accommodate E-cylinders for medical air 
and  nitrous oxide, and may accept cylinders of 
helium. Compressed medical gases utilize a pin 
index safety system for these cylinders to prevent 
inadvertent crossover and connections for diff erent 
gas types. As a safety feature of oxygen E-cylinders, 
the yoke has integral components made from 
Wood’s metal. Th is metallurgic alloy has a low 
 melting point, which allows dissipation of pressure 
that might otherwise heat the bottle to the point of 
 ballistic explosion. Th is pressure-relief “valve” is 
1
gas at room temperature or refrigerated as a liquid. 
Most small hospitals store oxygen in two separate 
banks of high-pressure cylinders (H-cylinders) con-
nected by a manifold ( Figure 2–1 ). Only one bank 
is utilized at a time. Th e number of cylinders in each 
bank depends on anticipated daily demand. Th e 
manifold contains valves that reduce the cylinder 
pressure (approximately 2000 pounds per square 
inch [psig]) to line pressure (55 ± 5 psig) and auto-
matically switch banks when one group of cylinders 
is exhausted. 
 A liquid oxygen storage system ( Figure 2–2 ) is 
more economical for large hospitals. Liquid oxygen 
must be stored well below its critical temperature of 
–119°C because gases can be liquefi ed by pressure 
 only if stored below their critical temperature. A large 
hospital may have a smaller liquid oxygen supply or 
a bank of compressed gas cylinders that can provide 
one day’s oxygen requirements as a reserve. To guard 
against a hospital gas-system failure, the anesthesiolo-
gist must always have an emergency (E-cylinder) sup-
ply of oxygen available during anesthesia. 
 FIGURE 21  A bank of oxygen H-cylinders connected by a manifold. 
OXYGEN
USP
12 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Because the critical temperature of nitrous 
oxide (36.5°C) is above room temperature, it can 
be kept liquefi ed without an elaborate refrig-
eration system . If the liquefi ed nitrous oxide rises 
above its critical temperature, it will revert to its 
gaseous phase. Because nitrous oxide is not an 
ideal gas and is easily compressible, this transfor-
mation into a gaseous phase is not accompanied by 
a great rise in tank pressure. Nonetheless, as with 
oxygen cylinders, all nitrous oxide E-cylinders 
are equipped with a Wood’s metal yoke to prevent 
designed to rupture at 3300 psig, well below the 
pressure E-cylinder walls should be able to with-
stand (more than 5000 psig). 
 Nitrous Oxide 
 Nitrous oxide is manufactured by heating ammo-
nium nitrate (thermal decomposition). It is almost 
always stored by hospitals in large H-cylinders con-
nected by a manifold with an automatic crossover 
feature. Bulk liquid storage of nitrous oxide is eco-
nomical only in very large institutions. 
 FIGURE 22  A liquid storage tank with reserve oxygen tanks in the background. 
OXYGEN
LIQUID
OXYGEN
HIGHLY
FLAMMABLE
AREA
HAZARDOUS
AREA
No Smoking
within 25 ft.
NITROUS
OXIDE
 TABLE 21 Characteristics of medical gas cylinders. 
Gas
E-Cylinder 
Capacity 1 (L)
H-Cylinder 
Capacity 1 (L)
Pressure 1 
(psig at 20°C)
Color (USA)
Color 
(International)
Form
O 2 
625–700
6000–8000
1800–2200
Green
White
Gas
Air
625–700
6000–8000
1800–2200
Yellow
White and black
Gas
N 2 O
1590
15,900
745
Blue
Blue
Liquid
N 2 
625–700
6000–8000
1800–2200
Black
Black
Gas
 1 Depending on the manufacturer.
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment
13
 Nitrogen 
 Although compressed nitrogen is not administered 
to patients, it may be used to drive some operating 
room equipment, such as saws, drills, and surgical 
handpieces. Nitrogen supply systems either incorpo-
rate the use of H-cylinders connected by a manifold 
or a wall system supplied by a compressor driven 
central supply. 
 Vacuum 
 A central hospital vacuum system usually consists 
of independent suction pumps, each capable of han-
dling peak requirements. Traps at every user location 
prevent contamination of the system with foreign 
matter. Th e medical-surgical vacuum may be used 
for waste anesthetic gas disposal (WAGD) provid-
ing it does not aff ect the performance of the system. 
Medical vacuum receptacles are usually black in color 
with white lettering. A dedicated WAGD vacuum 
system is generally required with modern anesthesia 
machines. Th e WAGD outlet may incorporate the 
use of a suction regulator with a fl oat indicator. Th e 
fl oat should be maintained between the designated 
markings. Excess suction may result in inadequate 
patient ventilation, and insuffi  cient suction levels 
may result in the failure to evaluate WAGD. WAGD 
receptacles and tubing are usually lavender in color. 
 Carbon Dioxide 
 Many surgical procedures are performed using lapa-
roscopic or robotic-assisted techniques requiring 
insuffl  ation of body cavities with carbon dioxide, an 
odorless, colorless, nonfl ammable and slightly acidic 
gas. Large cylinders containing carbon dioxide, 
such as M-cylinders or LK-cylinders, are frequently 
found in the operating room; these cylinders share a 
common size orifi ce and thread with oxygen cylin-
ders and can be inadvertently interchanged. 
 DELIVERY OF MEDICAL GASES 
 Medical gases are delivered from their central sup-
ply source to the operating room through a piping 
network. Pipes are sized such that the pressure drop 
across the whole system never exceeds 5 psig. Gas 
pipes are usually constructed of seamless copper 
tubing using a special welding technique. Internal 
explosion under conditions of unexpectedly high 
gas pressure (eg, unintentional overfi lling), particu-
larly during fi res. 
 Although a disruption in supply is usually not 
catastrophic, most anesthesia machines have reserve 
nitrous oxide E-cylinders. Because these smaller cyl-
inders also contain nitrous oxide in its liquid state, 
the volume remaining in a cylinder is  not propor-
tional to cylinder pressure. By the time the liquid 
nitrous oxide is expended and the tank pressure 
begins to fall, only about 400 L of nitrous oxide 
remains.  If liquid nitrous oxide is kept at a con-
stant temperature (20°C), it will vaporize at the 
same rate at which it is consumed and will main-
tain a constant pressure (745 psig) until the liquid 
is exhausted . 
 Th e only reliable way to determine residual 
volume of nitrous oxide is to weigh the cylin-
der. For this reason, the tare weight (TW), or empty 
weight, of cylinders containing a liquefi ed com-
pressed gas (eg, nitrous oxide) is oft en stamped on 
the shoulder of the cylinder. Th e pressure gauge of a 
nitrous oxide cylinder should not exceed 745 psig at 
20°C. A higher reading implies gauge malfunction, 
tank overfi ll (liquid fi ll), or a cylinder containing a 
gas other than nitrous oxide. 
 Because energy is consumed in the conversion 
of a liquid to a gas (the latent heat of vaporization), 
the liquid nitrous oxide cools. Th e drop in tempera-
ture results in a lower vapor pressure and lower cyl-
inder pressure. Th e cooling is so pronounced at high 
fl ow rates that there is oft en frost on the tank, and 
pressure regulators may freeze. 
 Medical Air 
 Th e use of air is becoming more frequent in anesthe-
siology as the popularity of nitrous oxide and unnec-
essarily high concentrations of oxygen has declined. 
Cylinder air is medical grade and is obtained by 
blending oxygen and nitrogen. Dehumidifi ed but 
unsterile air is provided to the hospital pipeline 
system by compression pumps. Th e inlets of these 
pumps must be distant from vacuum exhaust vents 
and machinery to minimize contamination. Because 
the critical temperature of air is –140.6°C, it exists as 
a gas in cylinders whose pressures fall in proportion 
to their content. 
2
14 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
pins in the yoke of the anesthesia machine 
( Figure 2–4 ). Th e relative positioning of the pins and 
holes is unique for each gas. Multiple washers placed 
between the cylinder and yoke, which prevent proper 
engagement of the pins and holes, have unintention-
ally defeated this system. Th e pin index safety system 
is also ineff ective if yoke pins are damaged or the cyl-
inder is fi lled with the wrong gas. 
 Th e functioning of medical gas supply sources 
and pipeline systems is constantly monitored by 
central and area alarm systems. Indicator lights and 
audible signals warn of changeover to secondary gas 
sources and abnormally high (eg, pressure regulator 
malfunction) or low (eg, supply depletion) pipeline 
pressures ( Figure 2–5 ). 
 Modern anesthesia machines and anesthetic 
gas analyzers continuously measure the fraction of 
inspired oxygen (Fi O 2 ). Analyzers have a variable 
threshold setting for the minimal Fi O 2 but should 
contamination of the pipelines with dust, grease, 
or water must be avoided. Th e hospital’s gas deliv-
ery system appears in the operating room as hose 
drops, gas columns, or elaborate articulating arms 
( Figure 2–3 ). Operating room equipment, including 
the anesthesia machine, interfaces with these pipe-
line system outlets by color-coded hoses. Quick-
coupler mechanisms, which vary in design with 
diff erent manufacturers, connect one end of the 
hose to the appropriate gas outlet. Th e other end 
connects to the anesthesia machine through a non-
interchangeable diameter index safety system fi tting 
that prevents incorrect hose attachment. 
 E-cylinders of oxygen, nitrous oxide, and air 
attach directly to the anesthesia machine.  To 
discourage incorrect cylinder attachments, cyl-
inder manufacturers have adopted a pin index safety 
system. Each gas cylinder (sizes A–E) has two holes 
in its cylinder valve that mate with corresponding 
3
 FIGURE 23  Typical examples of  (A) gas columns, 
 (B) ceiling hose drops, and  (C) articulating arms. One end 
of a color-coded hose connects to the hospital medical 
gas supply system by way of a quick-coupler mechanism. 
The other end connects to the anesthesia machine 
through the diameter index safety system.  
A
B
C
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment 
15 
within devices such as endotracheal tubes or at the 
distal tip of the tube. Due to gas exchange, fl ow rates, 
and shunting a marked diff erence can exist between 
the monitored Fi O 2 and oxygen concentration at the 
tissue level. 
 Environmental Factors 
in the Operating Room 
 TEMPERATURE 
 Th e temperature in most operating rooms seems 
uncomfortably cold to many conscious patients and, 
at times, to anesthesiologists. However, scrub nurses 
and surgeons stand in surgical garb for hours under 
hot operating room lights. As a general principle, 
the comfort of operating room personnel must be 
reconciled with patient care. Hypothermia has been 
associated with an increased incidence of wound 
infection, greater intraoperative blood loss (impaired 
coagulation assessed by thromboelastography), and 
prolonged hospitalization (see Chapter 52). 
be confi gured to prevent disabling this alarm. Th e 
monitoring of Fi O 2 does not refl ect the oxygen con-
centration distal to the monitoring port and should 
not be used to reference the oxygen concentration 
 FIGURE 24  Pin index safety system interlink between 
the anesthesia machine and gas cylinder.  
Washer
Gas cylinder
Cylinder
valve
Pin index
safety system
Anesthesia 
machine
hanger-yoke 
assembly
 FIGURE 25  An example of a master alarm panel that monitors gasline pressure.  
OXYGEN
Power
High
kPa
pSI
Normal
Low
High
kPa
pSI
Normal
Low
kPa
Hg
Normal
Low
High
kPa
pSI
Normal
Low
Alert
Medical Gas Alarm
Test
Alarm
Mute
MEDICAL AIR
MED VAC
NITROUS OXIDE
16 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
Operating room noise has been measured at 70–80 
decibels (dB) with frequent sound peaks exceeding 
80 dB. As a reference, if your speaking voice has to 
be raised above conversational level, then ambient 
noise is approximated at 80 dB. Noise levels in the 
operating room approach the time-weighted aver-
age (TWA) for which the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA) requires hearing 
protection. Orthopedic air chisels and neurosurgical 
drills can approach the noise levels of 125 dB, the 
level at which most human subjects begin to experi-
ence pain. 
 IONIZING RADIATION 
 Radiation is an energy form that is found in spe-
cifi c beams. For the anesthesia provider radiation is 
usually a component of either diagnostic imaging 
or radiation therapy. Examples include fl uoroscopy, 
linear accelerators, computed tomography, directed 
beam therapy, proton therapy, and diagnostic 
radiographs. Human eff ects of radiation are mea-
sured by units of absorbed doses such as the gray 
(Gy) and rads or equivalent dose units such as the 
Sievert (Sv) and Roentgen equivalent in man 
(REM). Radiation-sensitive organs such as eyes, 
thyroid, and gonads must be protected, as well as 
blood, bone marrow, and fetus. Radiation levels 
must be monitored if individuals are exposed to 
greater than 40 REM. Th e most common method 
of measurement is by fi lm badge. Lifetime exposure 
can be tabulated by a required database of fi lm 
badge wearers. 
 A basic principle of radiation safety is to keep 
exposure “as low as reasonably practical” 
(ALARP). Th e principles of ALARP are protection 
from radiation exposure by the use of time, dis-
tance, and shielding. Th e length of time of exposure 
is usually not an issue for simple radiographs such 
as chest fi lms but can be signifi cant in fl uoroscopic 
procedures such as those commonly performed 
during interventional radiology, c-arm use, and in 
the diagnostic gastroenterology lab. Exposure can 
be reduced to the provider by increasing the dis-
tance between the beam and the provider. Radiation 
exposure over distance follows the inverse square 
law. To  illustrate, intensity is represented as 1/ d 2
4
 HUMIDITY 
 In past decades, static discharges were a feared 
source of ignition in an operating room fi lled with 
fl ammable anesthetic vapors. Now humidity con-
trol is more relevant to infection control practices. 
Optimally humidity levels in the operating room 
should be maintained between 50% and 55%. Below 
this range the dry air facilitates airborne motil-
ity of particulate matter, which can be a vector for 
infection. At high humidity, dampness can aff ect 
the integrity of barrier devices such as sterile cloth 
drapes and pan liners. 
 VENTILATION 
 A high rate of operating room airfl ow decreases 
contamination of the surgical site. Th ese fl ow rates, 
usually achieved by blending up to 80% recircu-
lated air with fresh air, are engineered in a manner 
to decrease turbulent fl ow and be unidirectional. 
Although recirculation conserves energy costs 
associated with heating and air conditioning, it is 
unsuitable for WAGD. Th erefore, a separate anes-
thetic gas scavenging system must always supple-
ment operating room ventilation. Th e operating 
room should maintain a slightly positive pressure to 
drive away gases that escape scavenging and should 
be designed so fresh air is introduced through or 
near the ceiling and air return is handled at or near 
fl oor level. Ventilation considerations must address 
air quality and volume changes. Th e National Fire 
Protection Agency (NFPA) recommends 25 air vol-
ume exchanges per hour to decrease risk of stag-
nation and bacterial growth. Air quality should 
be maintained by adequate air fi ltration using a 
90% fi lter, defi ned simply as one that fi lters out 
90% of particles presented. High-effi  ciency par-
ticulate fi lters (HEPA) are frequently used but are 
not required by engineering or infection control 
standards. 
 NOISE 
 Multiple studies have demonstrated that expo-
sure to noise can have a detrimental eff ect on mul-
tiple human cognitive functions and may result 
in hearing impairment with prolonged exposure. 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment
17
transformer) through the victim and back to the 
ground ( Figure 2–6 ). Th e physiological eff ect of 
electrical current depends on the location, dura-
tion, frequency, and magnitude (more accurately, 
current density) of the shock. 
Leakage current is present in all electrical 
equipment as a result of capacitive coupling, induc-
tion between internal electrical components, or 
defective insulation. Current can fl ow as a result of 
capacitive coupling between two conductive bod-
ies (eg, a circuit board and its casing) even though 
they are not physically connected. Some monitors 
are doubly insulated to decrease the eff ect of capac-
itive coupling. Other monitors are designed to be 
connected to a low-impedance ground (the safety 
ground wire) that should divert the current away 
from a person touching the instrument’s case. 
 Th e  magnitude of such leaks is normally 
imperceptible to touch (<1 mA, and well 
below the fi brillation threshold of 100 mA). If the 
current bypasses the high resistance off ered by 
skin, however, and is applied directly to the heart 
( microshock ), current as low as 100 µA may be 
fatal. Th e maximum leakage allowed in operating 
room equipment is 10 µA. 
 Cardiac pacing wires and invasive monitor-
ing catheters provide a conductive pathway to the 
myocardium. In fact, blood and normal saline can 
serve as electrical conductors. Th e exact amount 
of current required to produce fi brillation depends 
on the timing of the shock relative to the vulner-
able period of heart repolarization (the T wave on 
the electrocardiogram). Even small diff erences in 
potential between the earth connections of two 
electrical outlets in the same operating room might 
place a patient at risk for microelectrocution. 
 PROTECTION FROM 
ELECTRICAL SHOCK 
 Most patient electrocutions are caused by cur-
rent fl ow from the live conductor of a grounded 
circuit through the body and back to a ground 
(Figure 2–6). Th is would be prevented if everything 
in the operating room were grounded except the 
patient. Although direct patient grounds should be 
avoided, complete patient isolation is not feasible 
5
(where  d = distance) so that 100 mRADs at 1 inch 
will be 0.01 mRADs at 100 inches. Shielding is the 
most reliable form of radiation protection; typical 
personal shielding is in the form of leaded apron and 
glasses. Physical shields are usually incorporated 
into radiological suites and can be as simple as a wall 
to stand behind or a rolling leaded shield to place 
between the beam and the provider. Although most 
modern facilities are designed in a very safe manner, 
providers can still be exposed to scattered radiation 
as atomic particles are bounced off  shielding. For 
this reason radiation protection should be donned 
whenever ionizing radiation is used. 
 As use of reliable shielding has increased, the 
incidence of radiation-associated diseases of sen-
sitive organs has decreased, with the exception 
of radiation-induced cataracts. Because protec-
tive eyewear has not been consistently used to the 
same degree as other types of personal protection, 
radiation-induced cataracts are increasing among 
employees working in interventional radiology 
suites. Anesthesia providers who work in these 
environments should consider the use of leaded 
goggles or glasses to decrease the risk of such 
problems. 
 Electrical Safety 
 THE RISK OF ELECTROCUTION 
 Th e use of electronic medical equipment subjects 
patients and hospital personnel to the risk of elec-
trocution. Anesthesiologists must have at least a 
basic understanding of electrical hazards and their 
prevention. 
 Body contact with two conductive materials 
at diff erent voltage potentials may complete a cir-
cuit and result in an electrical shock. Usually, one 
point of exposure is a live 110-V or 240-V conduc-
tor, with the circuit completed through a ground 
contact. For example, a grounded person need con-
tact only one live conductor to complete a circuit 
and receive a shock. Th e live conductor could be 
the frame of a patient monitor that has developed 
a fault to the hot side of the power line. A circuit 
is now complete between the power line (which is 
earth grounded at the utility company’s pole-top 
18 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
with a ground through a fault, contact with the 
other power line will complete a circuit through a 
grounded patient.  To reduce the chance of 
two coexisting faults, a  line isolation moni-
tor  measures the potential for current fl ow from 
the isolated power supply to the ground 
( Figure 2–9 ). Basically, the line isolation monitor 
determines the degree of isolation between the two 
power wires and the ground and predicts the 
amount of current that  could fl ow if a second short 
circuit were to develop. An alarm is activated if an 
unacceptably high current fl ow to the ground 
becomes possible (usually 2 mA or 5 mA), but 
power is not interrupted unless a ground-fault cir-
cuit interrupter is also activated. Th e latter, a fea-
ture of household bathrooms, is usually not 
installed in locations such as operating rooms, 
6
during surgery. Instead, the operating room power 
supply can be isolated from grounds by an  isolation 
transformer ( Figure 2–7 ). 
 Unlike the utility company’s pole-top trans-
former, the secondary wiring of an isolation trans-
former is not grounded and provides two live 
ungrounded voltage lines for operating room equip-
ment. Equipment casing—but not the electrical 
 circuits—is grounded through the longest blade of a 
three-pronged plug (the safety ground). If a live wire 
is then unintentionally contacted by a grounded 
patient, current will not fl ow through the patient 
since no circuit back to the secondary coil has been 
completed ( Figure 2–8 ). 
 Of course, if both power lines are contacted, a 
circuit is completed and a shock is possible. In 
addition, if either power line comes into contact 
Hot wire (black insulation)
117 volts
Ground wire (white insulation)
Conductivity of earth
Contact
with ground
Pole
transformer
 FIGURE 26  The setting for the great majority 
of electric shocks. An accidentally grounded person 
simultaneously contacts the hot wire of the electric 
service, usually via defective equipment that provides a 
pathway linking the hot wire to an exposed conductive 
surface. The complete electrical loop originates with the 
secondary of the pole transformer (the voltage source) 
and extends through the hot wire, the victim and the 
victim’s contact with a ground, the earth itself, the 
neutral ground rod at the service entrance, and back to 
the transformer via the neutral (or ground) wire. (Modiﬁ ed 
and reproduced, with permission, from Bruner J, Leonard PF: 
Electricity, Safety, and the Patient . Mosby Year Book, 1989.) 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment 
19 
protection from electroshock injury than circuits of 
a household bathroom. 
 Th ere are, however, modern equipment designs 
that decrease the possibility of microelectrocu-
tion. Th ese include double insulation of the chas-
sis and casing, ungrounded battery power supplies, 
and patient isolation from equipment-connected 
grounds by using optical coupling or transformers. 
 SURGICAL DIATHERMY 
 Electrosurgical units (ESUs) generate an ultra-
high-frequency electrical current that passes from 
a small active electrode (the cautery tip) through 
the patient and exits by way of a large plate elec-
trode (the dispersal pad, or return electrode). Th e 
high current density at the cautery tip is capable 
of tissue coagulation or cutting, depending on the 
electrical waveform. Ventricular fi brillation is pre-
vented by the use of ultrahigh electrical frequencies 
(0.1–3 MHz) compared with line power (50–60 
Hz). Th e large surface area of the low-impedance 
return electrode avoids burns at the current’s point 
of exit by providing a low current density (the con-
cept of  exit is technically incorrect, as the current 
where discontinuation of life support systems (eg, 
cardiopulmonary bypass machine) is more hazard-
ous than the risk of electrical shock. Th e alarm of 
the line isolation monitor merely indicates that the 
power supply has partially reverted to a grounded 
system. In other words, while the line isolation 
monitor warns of the existence of a single fault 
(between a power line and a ground), two faults are 
required for a shock to occur. Since the line isola-
tion monitor alarms when the sum of leakage cur-
rent exceeds the set threshold, the last piece of 
equipment is usually the defective one; however, if 
this item is life-sustaining, other equipment can be 
removed from the circuit to evaluate whether the 
life safety item is truly at fault. 
 Even isolated power circuits do not provide 
complete protection from the small currents capable 
of causing microshock fi brillation. Furthermore, 
the line isolation monitor cannot detect all faults, 
such as a broken safety ground wire within a piece 
of equipment. Despite the overall utility of isolated 
power systems, they add to construction costs. Th eir 
requirement in operating rooms was deleted from 
the National Electrical Code in 1984, and circuits of 
newer or remodeled operating rooms may off er less 
 FIGURE 27  A circuit diagram of an isolation transformer and monitor. 
To AC main
supply
Grounded casing
surrounding a piece
of medical equipment
Secondary
2° wiring
(an ungrounded circuit)
Safety ground wire
(green insulation)
Circuitry
Line isolation
monitor
Primary
1° wiring
(a grounded circuit)
Ground
20 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
an implanted cardiac rhythm management device 
(CRMD). Th is can be minimized by placing the 
return electrode as close to the surgical fi eld and as 
far from the CRMD as practical. 
 Newer ESUs are isolated from grounds using 
the same principles as the isolated power supply 
(isolated output versus ground-referenced units). 
Because this second layer of protection provides 
ESUs with their own isolated power supply, the oper-
ating room’s line isolation monitor may not detect 
an electrical fault. Although some ESUs are capable 
of detecting poor contact between the return elec-
trode and the patient by monitoring impedance, 
many older units trigger the alarm only if the return 
electrode is unplugged from the machine. Bipolar 
is alternating rather than direct). Th e high power 
levels of ESUs (up to 400 W) can cause inductive 
coupling with monitor cables, leading to electrical 
interference. 
 Malfunction of the dispersal pad may result 
from disconnection from the ESU, inadequate 
patient contact, or insuffi  cient conductive gel. In 
these situations, the current will fi nd another place 
to exit (eg, electrocardiogram pads or metal parts 
of the operating table), which may result in a burn 
( Figure 2–10 ). Precautions to prevent diathermy 
burns include proper return electrode placement, 
avoiding prostheses and bony protuberances, and 
elimination of patient-to-ground contacts. Current 
fl ow through the heart may lead to dysfunction of 
 FIGURE 28  Even though a person is grounded, no 
shock results from contact with one wire of an isolated 
circuit. The individual is in simultaneous contact with 
two separate voltage sources but does not close a loop 
including either source. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with 
permission, from Bruner J, Leonard PF:  Electricity, Safety, and the 
Patient . Mosby Year Book, 1989.) 
Hot wire
Contact with
single wire
Ground rod at
electric service
entrance
117 volts
Ground
wire
Pole
transformer
Isolation
transformer
No current flow
through body
117 volts with
neither wire
grounded
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment 
21 
 FIGURE 210  Electrosurgical burn. If the intended path 
is compromised, the circuit may be completed through 
other routes. Because the current is of high frequency, 
recognized conductors are not essential; capacitances can 
complete gaps in the circuit. Current passing through the 
patient to a contact of small area may produce a burn. 
(A leg drape would not oﬀ er protection in the situation 
depicted.) The isolated output electrosurgical unit (ESU) 
is much less likely than the ground-referenced ESU to 
provoke burns at ectopic sites.  Ground-referenced in this 
context applies to the ESU output and has nothing to do 
with isolated versus grounded power systems. (Modiﬁ ed and 
reproduced, with permission, from Bruner J, Leonard PF:  Electricity, 
Safety, and the Patient . Mosby Year Book, 1989.)  
SAFE
TEST
MUTE
2
1
1
2
3
3
4
6
7
8
5
> 80%
TRANSFORMER
TOTAL
HAZARD
CURRENT
LOAD
%
HAZARD
mA
mA
mA
 FIGURE 29  A line isolation monitor.  
Electrosurgical
unit
1 million Hz
200 watts
15,000 volts
Burn
Capacitance of
large objects, earth
22 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
provides fi re safety education from the perspective 
of the anesthesia provider. 
 Operating room fi re drills increase awareness of 
the fi re hazards associated with surgical procedures. 
In contrast to the typical institutional fi re drill, these 
drills should be specifi c to the operating room and 
should place a greater emphasis on the particular 
risks associated with that setting. For example, con-
sideration should be given to both vertical and hori-
zontal evacuation of surgical patients, movement of 
patients requiring ventilatory assistance, and unique 
situations such as prone or lateral positioning and 
movement of patients who may be fi xed in neuro-
surgical pins. 
 Preparation for surgical fi res can be incorpo-
rated into the time-out process of the universal 
protocol. Team members should be introduced and 
specifi c roles agreed upon should a fi re erupt. Items 
needed to properly manage a fi re can be assembled 
electrodes confi ne current propagation to a few mil-
limeters, eliminating the need for a return electrode. 
Because pacemaker and electrocardiogram inter-
ference is possible, pulse or heart sounds should be 
closely monitored when any ESU is used. Automatic 
implanted cardioversion and defi brillator devices 
may need to be suspended if monopolar ESU is used 
and any implanted CRMD should be interrogated 
aft er use of a monopolar ESU. 
 Surgical Fires & 
Thermal Injury 
 FIRE PREVENTION 
& PREPARATION 
 Surgical fi res are relatively rare, with an incidence 
of about 1:87,000 cases, which is close to the inci-
dence rate of other events such as retained for-
eign objects aft er surgery and wrong-site surgery. 
 Almost all surgical fi res can be prevented. 
Unlike medical complications, fi res are a 
product of simple physical and chemical proper-
ties. Occurrence is guaranteed given the proper 
combination of factors but can be eliminated 
almost entirely by understanding the basic princi-
ples of fi re risk.  Likely the most common risk 
factor for surgical fi re relates to the open 
delivery of oxygen. 
 Situations classifi ed as carrying a high risk for a 
surgical fi re are those that involve an ignition source 
used in close proximity to an oxidizer. Th e simple 
chemical combination required for any fi re is com-
monly referred to as the fi re triad or fi re triangle. Th e 
triad is composed of fuel, oxidizer, and ignition source 
(heat).  Table 2–2 lists potential contributors to fi res 
and explosions in the operating room. Surgical fi res 
can be managed and possibly avoided completely 
by incorporating education, fi re drills, preparation, 
prevention, and response into educational programs 
provided to operating room personnel. 
 For anesthesia providers, fi re prevention edu-
cation should place a heavy emphasis on the risk 
relating to the open delivery of oxygen. Th e Anes-
thesia Patient Safety Foundation has developed an 
educational video and online teaching module that 
7
8
 TABLE 22 Potential contributors to 
operating room ﬁ res and explosions. 
 Flammable agents (fuels) 
 Solutions, aerosols, and ointments 
   Alcohol 
   Chlorhexidine 
   Benzoin 
   Mastisol 
   Acetone 
   Petroleum products 
  Surgical drapes (paper and cloth) 
  Surgical gowns 
  Surgical sponges and packs 
  Surgical sutures and mesh 
  Plastic/polyvinyl chloride/latex products 
   Endotracheal tubes 
   Masks 
   Cannulas 
   Tubing 
  Intestinal gases 
  Hair 
 Gases supporting combustion (oxidizers) 
  Oxygen 
  Nitrous oxide 
 Ignition sources (heat) 
  Lasers 
  Electrosurgical units 
  Fiberoptic light sources (distal tip) 
  Drills and burrs 
  External deﬁ brillators 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment
23
Pooling of solutions must be avoided. Large pre-
fi lled swabs of alcohol-based solution should be 
used with caution on the head or neck to avoid both 
oversaturation of the product and excess fl ammable 
waste. Product inserts are a good source of infor-
mation about these preparations. Surgical gauze 
and sponges should be moistened with sterile water 
or saline if used in close proximity to an ignition 
source. 
 Should a fi re occur in the operating room it is 
important to determine whether the fi re is located 
on the patient, in the airway, or  elsewhere in the 
operating room . For fi res occurring in the airway, 
the delivery of fresh gases to the patient must be 
stopped. Eff ective means of stopping fresh gases to 
the patient can be accomplished by turning off 
fl owmeters, disconnecting the circuit from the 
machine, or disconnecting the circuit from the 
endotracheal tube. Th e endotracheal tube should 
be removed and either sterile water or saline should 
be poured into the airway to extinguish any burn-
ing embers.  Th e sequence of stopping gas fl ow 
and removal of the endotracheal tube when 
fi re occurs in the airway is not as important as 
ensuring that both actions are performed quickly. 
Oft en the two tasks can be accomplished at the 
same time and even by the same individual. If car-
ried out by diff erent team members, the personnel 
should act without waiting for a predetermined 
sequence of events. Aft er these actions are carried 
out, ventilation may be resumed, preferably using 
room air and avoiding oxygen or nitrous oxide–
enriched gases. Th e tube should be examined for 
missing pieces. Th e airway should be reestablished 
and, if indicated, examined with a bronchoscope. 
Treatment for smoke inhalation and possible trans-
fer to a burn center should also be considered. 
 For fi res on the patient, the fl ow of oxidizing 
gases should be stopped, the surgical drapes removed, 
and the fi re extinguished by water or smothering. 
Th e patient should be assessed for injury. If the fi re 
is not immediately extinguished by fi rst attempts, 
then a carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) fi re extinguisher may 
be used. Further actions may include evacuation of 
the patient and activation of the nearest pull station. 
As noted previously, prior to an actual emergency, 
the location of fi re extinguishers, emergency exits, 
10
or identifi ed beforehand (eg, ensuring the proper 
endotracheal tube for patients undergoing laser 
surgery; having water or saline ready on the surgi-
cal fi eld; identifying the location of fi re extinguish-
ers, gas cutoff  valves, and escape routes). A poster 
or fl owsheet to standardize the preparation may be 
of benefi t. 
 Preventing catastrophic fi res in the operating 
room begins with a strong level of communication 
among all members of the surgical team. Diff erent 
aspects of the fi re triad are typically under the 
domain of particular surgical team members. Fuels 
such as alcohol-based solutions, adhesive removers, 
and surgical drapes and towels are typically con-
trolled by the circulating nurse. Ignition sources 
such as electrocautery, lasers, drills, burrs, and light 
sources for headlamps and laparoscopes are usually 
controlled by the surgeon. Th e anesthesia provider 
maintains control of the oxidizer concentration of 
oxygen and nitrous oxide. Communication between 
personnel is evident when a surgeon enters the air-
way and verifi es the concentration of oxygen before 
using cautery, or when an anesthesiologist asks the 
circulator to confi gure drapes to prevent the accu-
mulation of oxygen in a surgical case that involves 
sedation and use of a nasal cannula. 
 Administration of oxygen in concentrations of 
greater than 30% should be guided by clinical 
presentation of the patient and not solely by proto-
cols or habits. If oxygen is being delivered via nasal 
cannula or face mask, and if increased oxygen lev-
els are needed, then the airway should be secured 
by either endotracheal tube or supraglottic device. 
Th is is of prime importance when the surgical site is 
above the level of the xiphoid. 
 When the surgical site is in or near the airway 
and a fl ammable tube is present, the oxygen concen-
tration should be reduced for a suffi  cient period of 
time before use of an ignition device (eg, laser or 
cautery) to allow reduction of oxygen concentration 
at the site. Laser airway surgery should incorporate 
either jet ventilation without an endotracheal tube 
or the appropriate protective tube specifi c for the 
wavelength of the laser. Precautions for laser cases 
are outlined below. 
 Alcohol-based skin preparations are extremely 
fl ammable and require an adequate drying time. 
9
24 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
“greener” halon-type extinguishers that may have 
fewer eff ects on the ozone layer. 
 LASER SAFETY 
 Lasers are commonly used in operating rooms and 
procedure areas. When lasers are used for airway 
surgeries or for procedures involving the neck and 
face, the case should be considered as high risk for 
surgical fi re and managed as previously discussed. 
Th e type of laser (CO 2 , neodymium yttrium alumi-
num garnet [NG:YAG], or potassium titanyl phos-
phate [KTP]), wavelength, and focal length are all 
important considerations for the safe operation of 
medical lasers. Without this vital information, oper-
ating room personnel cannot adequately protect 
themselves or the patient from harm.  Before 
beginning laser surgery, the laser device should 
be in the operating room, warning signs should be 
posted on the doors, and protective eyewear should 
be issued. Th e anesthesia provider should ensure 
that the warning signs and eyewear match the label-
ing on the device as protection is specifi c to the type 
of laser. Th e American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) standards specify that eyewear and laser 
devices must be labeled for the wavelength emitted 
or protection off ered. Some ophthalmologic lasers 
and vascular mapping lasers have such a short focal 
length that protective eyewear is not needed. For 
other devices, protective goggles should be worn by 
personnel at all times during laser use, and eye pro-
tection in the form of either goggles or protective eye 
patches should be used on the patient. 
 Laser endotracheal tube selection should be 
based on laser type and wavelength. Th e product 
insert and labeling for each type of tube should be 
compared to the type of laser used. Certain tech-
nical limitations are present when selecting laser 
tubes. For instance, tubes less than 4.0 mm in diam-
eter are not compatible with the ND:YAG or argon 
laser nor are ND:YAG-compatible tubes available in 
half sizes. Attempts to wrap conventional endotra-
cheal tubes with foil should be avoided. Th is archaic 
method is not approved by either manufacturers or 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is prone to 
breaking or unraveling, and does not confer pro-
tection against laser penetration. Alternatively, jet 
11
and fresh gas cutoff  valves should be established by 
the anesthesia provider. 
 Fires that result in injuries requiring medi-
cal treatment or death must be reported to the fi re 
marshal, who retains jurisdiction over the facility. 
Providers should gain basic familiarity with local 
reporting standards, which can vary according to 
location. 
 Cases in which supplemental delivery of oxy-
gen is used and the surgical site is above the xiphoid 
constitute the most commonly reported scenario 
for surgical fi res. Frequently the face or airway is 
involved, resulting in life-threatening injuries and 
the potential for severe facial disfi gurement. For the 
most part, these fi res can be avoided by the elimi-
nation of the open delivery of oxygen, by use of an 
oxygen blender, or by securing the airway. 
 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
 For fi res not suppressed by initial attempts or 
those in which evacuation may be hindered by the 
location or intensity of the fi re, the use of a por-
table fi re extinguisher is warranted. A CO 2 extin-
guisher should be safe during external and internal 
exposure for fi res on the patient in the operating 
room. CO 2 readily dissipates, is not toxic, and 
as used in an actual fi re is not likely to result in 
thermal injury. FE-36, manufactured by DuPont, 
also can be used to extinguish fi res but is expen-
sive. Both choices are equally eff ective and accept-
able agents as refl ected by manufacturers’ product 
information. 
 “A”-rated extinguishers contain water, which 
makes their use in the operating room problem-
atic because of the presence of so much electrical 
equipment. A water mist “AC”-rated extinguisher is 
excellent but requires time and an adequate volume 
of mist over multiple attempts to extinguish the 
fi re. Furthermore, these devices are large and dif-
fi cult to maneuver. Both can be made cheaply in a 
nonferromagnetic extinguisher, making them the 
best choice for fi res involving magnetic resonance 
imagers. Halon extinguishers, although very eff ec-
tive, are being phased out because of concerns about 
depletion of the ozone layer, as well as the hypoxic 
atmosphere that results for rescuers. Halotrons are 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment 
25 
 Communication is defi ned simply as the clear 
and accurate sending and receiving of information, 
instructions, or commands, and providing useful 
feedback. Communication is a two-way process and 
should continue in a loop fashion. 
 Decision making is the ability to use logical and 
sound judgment to make decisions based on avail-
able information. Decision-making processes are 
involved when a less experienced clinician seeks out 
the advice of a more experienced clinician or when 
a person defers important clinical decisions because 
of fatigue. Good decision making is based on real-
ization of personal limitations. 
 Leadership is the ability to direct and coordinate 
the activities of other crew members and to encour-
age the crew to work together as a team.  Analysis 
refers to the ability to develop short-term, long-
term, and contingency plans, as well as to coordi-
nate, allocate, and monitor crew and operating room 
resources. 
 Th e last and most important principle is  situ-
ational awareness ; that is, the accuracy with which a 
person’s perception of the current environment mir-
rors reality. In the operating room, lack of situational 
awareness can cost precious minutes, as when read-
ings from a monitor (eg, capnograph or arterial line) 
suddenly change and the operator focuses on the 
monitor rather than on the patient, who may have had 
an embolism. One must decide whether the monitor is 
correct and the patient is critically ill or the monitor is 
incorrect and the patient is fi ne. Th e problem-solving 
method utilized should consider both possibilities but 
quickly eliminate one. In this scenario, tunnel vision 
can result in catastrophic mistakes. Furthermore, if 
the sampling line has come loose and the capnograph 
indicates low end-tidal CO 2 , this fi nding does not 
exclude the possibility that at the same time or even a 
bit later, the patient could have a pulmonary embolus 
resulting in decreased end-tidal CO 2 . 
 If all members of the operating room team 
apply these seven principles, problems arising from 
human factors can almost entirely be eliminated. 
A culture of safety must also exist if the operating 
room is to be made a safer place. Th ese seven prin-
ciples serve no purpose when applied in a suppres-
sive surgical environment. Anyone with a concern 
must be able speak up without fear of repercussion. 
ventilation without an endotracheal tube can off er a 
reduced risk of airway fi re. 
 CREW RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT: CREATING 
A CULTURE OF SAFETY 
IN THE OPERATING ROOM 
 Crew resource management (CRM) was developed 
in the aviation industry to allow personnel to inter-
vene or call for investigation of any situation thought 
to be unsafe. Comprising seven principles, its goal is 
to avoid errors caused by human actions. In the air-
line model CRM gives any crew member the author-
ity to question situations that fall outside the range of 
normal practice. Before the implementation of CRM, 
crew members other that the captain had little or no 
input on aircraft  operations. Aft er CRM was instituted, 
anyone identifying a safety issue could take steps to 
ensure adequate resolution of the situation. Th e ben-
efi t of this method in the operating room is clear, given 
the potential for a deadly mistake to be made. 
 Th e seven principles of CRM are (1) adaptabil-
ity/fl exibility, (2) assertiveness, (3) communication, 
(4) decision making, (5) leadership, (6) analysis, and 
(7) situational awareness.  Adaptability/fl exibility 
refers to the ability to alter a course of action when 
new information becomes available. For example, 
if a major blood vessel is unintentionally cut in a 
routine procedure, the anesthesiologist must recog-
nize that the anesthetic plan has changed and vol-
ume resuscitation must be made even in presence 
of medical conditions that typically contraindicate 
large-volume fl uid administration. 
 Assertiveness is the willingness and readiness to 
actively participate, state, and maintain a position 
until convinced by the facts that other options are 
better; this requires the initiative and the courage to 
act. For instance, if a senior and well-respected sur-
geon tells the anesthesiologist that the patient’s aor-
tic stenosis is not a problem because it is a chronic 
condition and the procedure will be relatively quick, 
the anesthesiologist should respond by voicing con-
cerns about the management of the patient and 
should not proceed until a safe anesthetic and surgi-
cal plan have been agreed upon. 
26 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
staffi  ng prompted the development of soft ware sys-
tems that anticipate and record the timing of surgical 
events; these systems are constantly being refi ned. 
 Surgical suites are also being designed to aug-
ment workfl ow by incorporating separate induction 
areas to decrease nonsurgical time spent in operat-
ing rooms. Several models exist for induction room 
design and staffi  ng. Although uncommon in  the 
United States, induction rooms have long been 
employed in the United Kingdom. 
 One induction room model uses rotating anes-
thesia teams. One team is assigned to the fi rst patient 
of the day; a second team induces anesthesia for the 
next patient in an adjacent area while the operating 
room is being turned over. Th e second team contin-
ues caring for that patient aft er transfer to the oper-
ating room, leaving the fi rst team available to induce 
anesthesia in the third patient as the operating room 
is being turned over. Th e advantage of this model is 
continuity of care; the disadvantage is the need for 
two anesthesia teams for every operating room. 
 Another model uses separate induction and 
anesthesia teams. Th e induction team induces anes-
thesia for all patients on a given day and then trans-
fers care to the anesthesia team, which is assigned 
to an individual operating room. Th e advantage of 
this model is the reduction in anesthesia personnel 
to staff  induction rooms; disadvantages include fail-
ure to maintain continuity of care and staffi  ng prob-
lems that occur when several patients must undergo 
induction concurrently. Th is model can utilize either 
a separate induction room adjacent to each operat-
ing room or one common induction room that ser-
vices several operating rooms. 
 Th e fi nal model uses several staff ed operating 
rooms, one of which is kept open. Aft er the fi rst 
patient of the day is transferred to the initial room, 
subsequent patients always proceed to the open 
room, thus eliminating the wait for room turnover 
and readiness of personnel. All of these models 
assume that the increased overhead cost of main-
taining additional anesthesia personnel can be justi-
fi ed by the increased surgical productivity. 
 Radio Frequency Identiﬁ cation (RFID) 
 Radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) technol-
ogy utilizes a chip with a small transmitter whose 
Chapter 58 provides further discussion of these and 
other issues relating to patient safety. 
 FUTURE DESIGN OF 
OPERATING ROOMS 
 Safety Interlock Technology 
 Despite heightened awareness of safety factors and 
increased educational eff orts among operating room 
personnel, harm to patients still occurs at a rate that 
most industries and the public deem unacceptably 
high. Similarly, despite threats of payment withhold-
ing, public scoring of medical personnel and hospital 
systems, provider rating web sites, and punitive legal 
consequences, the human factors resulting in medi-
cal errors have not been completely eliminated. In 
future, safety-engineered designs may assist in the 
reduction of medical errors. One developing area is 
the use of interlock devices in the operating room. 
An interlock device is simply a device that cannot be 
operated until a defi ned sequence of events occurs. 
Anesthesia personnel use interlock technology with 
anesthesia vaporizers that prevent the use of more 
than one vaporizer at a time. Expansion of this tech-
nology might prevent release of a drug from an auto-
mated dispensing device until a barcode is scanned 
from a patient’s hospital armband or, at a minimum, 
the patient’s drug allergies have been entered into the 
machine’s database. Other applications might include 
an electrosurgical device or laser that could not be 
used when the FiO 2 content was higher than 30%, 
thus eliminating the risk of fi re. Likewise, computers, 
monitors, and other devices could be designed to be 
inoperable until patient identifi cation was confi rmed. 
 Workﬂ ow Design 
 Coordinating the activities of surgical personnel, 
anesthesia providers, and operating room nurses 
is essential to the day-to-day running of a surgical 
suite. Clinical directors in facilities ranging from 
one- or two-room suites to multiroom centers must 
accommodate surgical procedures of varying dura-
tions, requiring varying degrees of surgical skill and 
effi  ciency, while allowing for sudden, unplanned, or 
emergency operations. Th e need to monitor work-
fl ow and analyze data for optimizing scheduling and 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Operating Room Environment 
27 
reserve capacity results in rapid oxygen desatu-
ration. Most anesthesia providers respond by 
increasing the amount of oxygen supplementa-
tion delivered via face mask or nasal cannula. Open 
delivery of oxygen in concentrations greater than 
30% is one of the elements of the ﬁ re triad. Another 
consideration is the anatomical location of the pro-
cedure. A location above the xiphoid process in this 
patient would place an ignition source (if used) in 
close proximity to the open delivery of an oxidizer . 
 What is the safest manner in which to proceed? 
 There are three strategies that can be imple-
mented to improve safety in this scenario: avoid 
oxygen supplementation, secure the airway with 
an endotracheal tube or supraglottic device, or 
avoid use of an ignition source . 
 Are there any concerns relating to airway 
management or selection of the delivery device? 
 As previously noted, the patient is likely to 
manifest airway changes associated with obstruc-
tive sleep apnea and obesity. Selection of a deliv-
ery device should take into consideration the need 
to prevent the open delivery of oxygen . 
 How would the length of the procedure aﬀ ect the 
management of anesthesia? 
 Practically speaking, if the patient requires a 
lengthy procedure, local anesthetics may wear oﬀ ; 
the cumulative dose of narcotics provided may 
exacerbate the patient’s obstructive sleep apnea 
and increase recovery time. Additionally, more 
complex surgical excision may result in bleeding 
requiring the use of cautery . 
 Does the patient’s expectation of discharge 
soon after the procedure aﬀ ect your 
anesthesia plans? 
 The expectation of an accelerated recov-
ery period may not be feasible if the patient 
requires general anesthesia or signiﬁ cant amounts 
of opioid narcotics. The American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) has published a practice 
advisory providing direction for the safe postop-
erative assessment and discharge of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea . See www.asahq.org. 
signal is read by a reader; each chip yields a unique 
signal. Th e technology has many potential applica-
tions in the modern operating room. Using RFID 
in employee identifi cation (ID) badges could enable 
surgical control rooms to keep track of nursing, sur-
gical faculty, and anesthesia personnel, obviating 
the need for paging systems and telephony to estab-
lish the location of key personnel. Incorporating 
the technology in patient ID bands and hospital 
gurneys could allow a patient’s fl ow to be tracked 
through an entire facility. Th e ability to project an 
identifying signal to hospital systems would off er 
an additional degree of safety for patients unable to 
communicate with hospital personnel. Finally, RFID 
could be incorporated into surgical instruments and 
sponges, allowing surgical counts to be performed 
by identifi cation of the objects as they are passed on 
and off  the surgical fi eld. In the event that counts are 
mismatched, a wand could then be placed over the 
patient to screen for retained objects. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Monitored Anesthesia Care 
with Oxygen Supplementation 
 You are asked to provide monitored anesthesia 
care for a patient undergoing simple removal of a 
lesion on the cheek. The patient is morbidly obese 
and has a history of sleep apnea. He states, “It both-
ers me when people are working on my face,” and 
indicates that he does not want to remember any-
thing about the surgery. The surgeon assures you 
the procedure will not last more than 5  minutes. 
The patient’s wife mentions that they are from out 
of town and have made ﬂ ight arrangements to 
return home soon after the procedure . 
 What features of this case indicate a high risk for 
surgical ﬁ re? 
 Patients with a clinical history of obstructive 
sleep apnea usually have a sensitivity to sedating 
medications, especially opioid narcotics. Typically 
administration of even small doses of narcotics 
obstructs the upper airways, resulting in hypoven-
tilation and hypercapnia. In the obese patient, this 
response combined with decreased functional 
28 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
a link to view or request the video  Prevention and 
Management of Operating Room Fires , which is an 
excellent resource to gain information concerning 
the risks and prevention of surgical fi res. 
 http://www.asahq.org 
 Th e American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
web site contains the ASA practice parameters and 
advisories. Many are oriented around patient safety 
issues and all can be printed for review. 
 http://www.cganet.com 
 Th e Compressed Gas Association and its web site are 
dedicated to the development and promotion of safety 
standards and safe practices in the industrial gas 
industry. 
 http://www.ecri.org 
 Th e ECRI (formerly the Emergency Care Research 
Institute) is an independent nonprofi t health 
services research agency that focuses on health care 
technology, health care risk and quality management, 
and health care environmental management. 
 http://www.fda.org 
 Th e U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has an 
extensive web site covering many broad categories. 
Two major divisions address patient safety: the Center 
for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), which 
regulates and evaluates medical devices, and the 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), 
which regulates and evaluates drugs. 
 http://www.nfpa.org 
 Th e National Fire Protection Association (NPFA) has 
a web site with a catalog of 12s on fi re, 
electrical, and building safety issues. Some areas 
require a subscription to access. 
 http://patientsafetyauthority.org 
 Th e Patient Safety Authority maintains data collected 
from the mandatory reporting of incidents of 
harm or near harm in the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania. Some data such as surgical fi res data 
can be extrapolated to determine the likely incidence 
for the entire United States. 
 http://vam.anest.ufl .edu/ 
 Th e Virtual Anesthesia Machine web site has extensive 
interactive modules to facilitate understanding of 
many processes and equipment. Th e site, which 
contains high-quality graphic illustrations and 
animation, requires free registration. 
 What if the surgeon thinks your plans are 
“overkill”? 
 The ﬁ rst and most eﬀ ective means for conﬂ ict 
resolution is to communicate your speciﬁ c con-
cerns to the surgeon. If this fails, the procedure 
must not be allowed to proceed as long as any 
team member has a legitimate safety concern. 
Many ASA safety-related guidelines and advisories 
are also endorsed by professional societies such as 
the American College of Surgeons (ACS) and other 
organizations. The anesthesiologist should also 
gain familiarity with a facility’s methods of dispute 
resolution before an event occurs . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE:  Understanding Anesthesia 
Equipment , 5th ed. Williams & Wilkins, 2008. A 
detailed discussion of compressed gases and medical 
gas delivery systems. 
 Macdonald MR, Wong A, Walker P, Crysdale WS: 
Electrocautery-induced ignition of tonsillar packing. 
J Otolaryngol 1994;23:426. An examination of factors 
that can decrease the risk of airway fi re including 
lower oxygen concentration (using a cuff ed tracheal 
tube), completely soaked tonsil packs, and avoidance 
of contact between electrocautery and bismuth 
subgallate. 
 National Fire Protection Association (NFPA):  Standard 
for Health Care Facilities . NFPA, 2002. An updated 
version of NFPA 99 standards. 
 WEB SITES 
 http://www.ansi.org 
 Th e American National Standards Institute is the 
reference source for laser standards and many other 
protective engineering standards. 
 http://www.apsf.org 
 Th e Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation provides 
resources and a newsletter that discusses important 
safety issues in anesthesia. Th e web site also contains 
 29 
 Breathing Systems 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Because insuﬄ  ation avoids any direct 
patient contact, there is no rebreathing of 
exhaled gases if the ﬂ ow is high enough. 
Ventilation cannot be controlled with 
this technique, however, and the inspired 
gas contains unpredictable amounts of 
entrained atmospheric air . 
 Long breathing tubes with high compliance 
increase the diﬀ erence between the volume 
of gas delivered to a circuit by a reservoir 
bag or ventilator and the volume actually 
delivered to the patient . 
 The adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve 
should be fully open during spontaneous 
ventilation so that circuit pressure remains 
negligible throughout inspiration and 
expiration . 
 Because a fresh gas ﬂ ow equal to minute 
ventilation is suﬃ  cient to prevent 
rebreathing, the Mapleson A design is 
the most eﬃ  cient Mapleson circuit for 
spontaneous ventilation . 
 The Mapleson D circuit is eﬃ  cient during 
controlled ventilation, because fresh gas 
ﬂ ow forces alveolar air away from the 
patient and toward the APL valve . 
1
2
3
4
5
 The drier the soda lime, the more likely it will 
absorb and degrade volatile anesthetics . 
 Malfunction of either unidirectional valve 
in a circle system may allow rebreathing of 
carbon dioxide, resulting in hypercapnia . 
 With an absorber, the circle system prevents 
rebreathing of carbon dioxide at fresh gas 
ﬂ ows that are considered low (fresh gas 
ﬂ ow ≤ 1 L) or even fresh gas ﬂ ows equal to 
the uptake of anesthetic gases and oxygen 
by the patient and the circuit itself (closed-
system anesthesia) . 
 Because of the unidirectional valves, 
apparatus dead space in a circle system 
is limited to the area distal to the point of 
inspiratory and expiratory gas mixing at the 
Y-piece. Unlike Mapleson circuits, the circle 
system tube length does not directly aﬀ ect 
dead space . 
 The fraction of inspired oxygen (F IO 2 )  delivered 
by a resuscitator breathing system to the 
patient is directly proportional to the oxygen 
concentration and ﬂ ow rate of the gas mixture 
supplied to the resuscitator (usually 100% 
oxygen) and inversely proportional to the 
minute ventilation delivered to the patient . 
6
7
8
9
10
 Breathing  systems provide the fi nal conduit for 
the delivery of anesthetic gases to the patient. 
Breathing  circuits link a patient to an anesthe-
sia machine ( Figure 3–1 ). Many diff erent circuit 
designs have been developed, each with varying 
degrees of effi  ciency, convenience, and complexity. 
Th is chapter reviews the most important breath-
ing systems: insuffl  ation, draw-over, Mapleson 
circuits, the circle system, and resuscitation 
systems. 
3
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
30 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
( Figure 3–3 ).  Because insuffl  ation avoids any 
direct patient contact, there is no rebreathing 
of exhaled gases if the fl ow is high enough. 
Ventilation cannot be controlled with this technique, 
however, and the inspired gas contains unpredict-
able amounts of entrained atmospheric air. 
 Most classifi cations of breathing systems artifi -
cially consolidate functional characteristics (eg, the 
extent of rebreathing) with physical characteristics 
(eg, the presence of unidirectional valves). Because 
these seemingly contradictory classifi cations (eg, 
open, closed, semiopen, semiclosed) oft en tend to 
confuse rather than aid understanding, they are 
avoided in this discussion. 
 INSUFFLATION 
 Th e term insuffl  ation usually denotes the blowing of 
anesthetic gases across a patient’s face. Although 
insuffl  ation is categorized as a breathing system, it is 
perhaps better considered a technique that avoids 
direct connection between a breathing circuit and a 
patient’s airway. Because children oft en resist the 
placement of a face mask (or an intravenous line), 
insuffl  ation is particularly valuable during induc-
tions with inhalation anesthetics in children 
( Figure 3–2 ). It is useful in other situations as well. 
Carbon dioxide accumulation under head and neck 
draping is a hazard of ophthalmic surgery per-
formed with local anesthesia. Insuffl  ation of air 
across the patient’s face at a high fl ow rate 
(>10 L/min) avoids this problem, while not increas-
ing the risk of fi re from accumulation of oxygen 
1
 FIGURE 31  The relationship between the patient, the breathing system, and the anesthesia machine. 
 FIGURE 32  Insuﬄ  ation of an anesthetic agent across 
a child’s face during induction. 
 
CHAPTER 3 Breathing Systems 
31 
and a drop in anesthetic vapor pressure (vapor pres-
sure is proportional to temperature). 
 A modern derivative of open-drop anesthe-
sia utilizes draw-over vaporizers that depend on 
the patient’s inspiratory eff orts to draw ambient 
air through a vaporization chamber. Th is tech-
nique may be used in locations or situations in 
which compressed medical gases are unavailable 
(eg, battlefi elds). 
 DRAWOVER ANESTHESIA 
 Draw-over devices have nonrebreathing circuits 
that use ambient air as the carrier gas, although 
supplemental oxygen can be used, if available. Th e 
devices can be fi tted with connections and equip-
ment that allow intermittent positive-pressure ven-
tilation (IPPV) and passive scavenging, as well as 
 Insuffl  ation can also be used to maintain arterial 
oxygenation during brief periods of apnea (eg, dur-
ing bronchoscopy). Instead of blowing gases across 
the face, oxygen is directed into the lungs through a 
device placed in the trachea. 
 OPENDROP ANESTHESIA 
 Although open-drop anesthesia is not used in mod-
ern medicine, its historic signifi cance warrants a 
brief description here. A highly volatile anesthetic—
historically, ether or chloroform—was dripped 
onto a gauze-covered mask (Schimmelbusch mask) 
applied to the patient’s face. As the patient inhales, 
air passes through the gauze, vaporizing the liquid 
agent, and carrying high concentrations of anes-
thetic to the patient. Th e vaporization lowers mask 
temperature, resulting in moisture condensation 
 FIGURE 33  Insuﬄ  ation of oxygen and air under a head drape. 
32 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
in locations where compressed gases or ventilators 
are not available. Th e presence of the nonrebreathing 
valve, PEEP valve, and circuit fi lter close to the patient’s 
head makes the technique awkward for head and neck 
surgery and pediatric cases. If the head is draped, the 
nonrebreathing valve is oft en covered as well. 
 Th e original design of a draw-over system has 
recently been modifi ed to include a self-infl ating 
bag, a ventilator, and/or a heat and moisture 
exchanger. Th e Ohmeda Universal Portable Anes-
thesia Complete (U-PAC) is one example of a draw-
over anesthesia system. 
 MAPLESON CIRCUITS 
 Th e insuffl  ation and draw-over systems have several 
disadvantages: poor control of inspired gas con-
centration (and, therefore, poor control of depth of 
anesthesia), mechanical drawbacks during head and 
neck surgery, and pollution of the operating room 
with large volumes of waste gas. Th e  Mapleson sys-
tems solve some of these problems by incorporat-
ing additional components (breathing tubes, fresh 
gas inlets, adjustable pressure-limiting [APL] valves, 
and reservoir bags) into the breathing circuit. Th e 
relative location of these components determines 
circuit performance and is the basis of the Mapleson 
classifi cation ( Table 3–2 ). 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and 
positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). 
 In its most basic application ( Figure 3–4 ), air 
is drawn through a low-resistance vaporizer as the 
patient inspires. Patients spontaneously breathing 
room air and a potent halogenated agent oft en man-
ifest an oxygen saturation (Sp O 2 ) <90%, a situation 
treated with IPPV, supplemental oxygen, or both. 
Th e fraction of inspired oxygen (F io 2 ) can be sup-
plemented using an open-ended reservoir tube of 
about 400 mL, attached to a t-piece at the upstream 
side of the vaporizer. Across the clinical range of 
tidal volume and respiratory rate, an oxygen fl ow 
rate of 1 L/min gives an F io 2 of 30% to 40%, or with 
4 L/min, an F io 2 of 60% to 80%. Th ere are several 
commercial draw-over systems available that share 
common properties ( Table 3–1 ). 
 Th e greatest advantage of draw-over systems is 
their simplicity and portability, making them useful 
 
Nonrebreathing valve
(eg, Laerdal or AMBU)
Patient
Self-inflating bag
Low-resistance vaporizer
Open
to air 
O2 supply
if available
Valve to prevent retrograde
gas flow from self-inflating
bag (valve must be between
the vaporizing chamber and
the self-inflating bag)
Hose    400 mL volume
~_   
 
 FIGURE 34  Schematic diagram of a draw-over anesthesia device/circuit. 
 TABLE 31 Properties of draw-over devices. 
Portable
Low resistance to gas ﬂ ow
Usable with any agent  1  
Controllable vapor output
 1 Halothane cannot be used with the Epstein Mackintosh Oxford device.
 
CHAPTER 3 Breathing Systems 
33 
 TABLE 32 Classiﬁ cation and characteristics of Mapleson circuits. 
Mapleson 
Class
Required Fresh Gas Flows
Other Names
Conﬁ guration  1  
Spontaneous
Controlled
Comments
A
Magill attachment
 
Breathing tube
Mask
Breathing bag
FGI
APL 
valve
Equal to minute 
ventilation 
(≈80 mL/kg/min)
Very high 
and diﬃ  cult 
to predict
Poor choice during cotrolled ventilaton. 
Enclosed Magill system is a modiﬁ cation 
that improves eﬃ  ciency. Coaxial 
Mapleson A (Lack breathing system) 
provides waste gas scavenging.
B
 
FGI
APL
valve
2 × minute 
ventilation
2–2½ × minute 
ventilation
C
Waters’ to-and-fro
 
FGI
APL
valve
2 × minute 
ventilation
2–2½ × minute 
ventilation
D
Bain circuit
 
APL
valve
FGI
2–3 × minute 
ventilation
1–2 × minute 
ventilation
Bain coaxial modiﬁ cation: fresh gas tube 
inside breathing tube (see  Figure 3–7 ).
E
Ayre’s T-piece
 
FGI
2–3 × minute 
ventilation
3 × minute 
ventilation
(I:E-1:2)
Exhalation tubing should provide a larger 
volume than tidal volume to prevent 
rebreathing. Scavenging is diﬃ  cult.
F
Jackson-Rees’ 
modiﬁ cation
 
APL
valve
FGI
2–3 × minute 
ventilation
2 × minute 
ventilation
A Mapleson E with a breathing bag 
connected to the end of the breathing 
tube to allow controlled ventilation and 
scavenging.
  1  FGI, fresh gas inlet; APL, adjustable pressure-limiting (value).
34 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
gas compression and breathing-tube expansion. Th is 
is an important consideration in any circuit deliver-
ing positive-pressure ventilation through breathing 
tubes (eg, circle systems). 
 B. Fresh Gas Inlet 
 Gases (anesthetics mixed with oxygen or air) from 
the anesthesia machine continuously enter the 
circuit through the fresh gas inlet. As discussed 
below, the relative position of the fresh gas inlet 
is a key diff erentiating factor in Mapleson circuit 
performance. 
 C. Adjustable Pressure-Limiting Valve 
(Pressure-Relief Valve, Pop-Oﬀ  Valve) 
 As anesthetic gases enter the breathing circuit, pres-
sure will rise if the gas infl ow is greater than the 
combined uptake of the patient and the circuit. 
Gases may exit the circuit through an APL valve, 
controlling this pressure buildup. Exiting gases enter 
the operating room atmosphere or, preferably, a 
waste-gas scavenging system. All APL valves allow a 
variable pressure threshold for venting.  Th e 
APL valve should be fully open during 
3
 Components of Mapleson Circuits 
 A. Breathing Tubes 
 Corrugated tubes—made of rubber (reusable) or 
plastic (disposable)—connect the components of 
the Mapleson circuit to the patient ( Figure 3–5 ). 
Th e large diameter of the tubes (22 mm) creates a 
low-resistance pathway and a potential reservoir for 
anesthetic gases. To minimize fresh gas fl ow require-
ments, the volume of gas within the breathing tubes 
in most Mapleson circuits should be at least as great 
as the patient’s tidal volume. 
 Th e compliance of the breathing tubes largely 
determines the compliance of the circuit. (Compli-
ance is defi ned as the change of volume produced by 
a change in pressure.)  Long breathing tubes 
with high compliance increase the diff erence 
between the volume of gas delivered to a circuit by a 
reservoir bag or ventilator and the volume actually 
delivered to the patient. For example, if a breathing 
circuit with a compliance of 8 mL gas/cm H 2 O is 
pressurized during delivery of a tidal volume to 
20 cm H 2 O, 160 mL of the tidal volume will be lost to 
the circuit. Th e 160 mL represent a combination of 
2
 
APL
valve
Volume ≥ tidal volume
Breathing tube
Mask
Reservoir
Fresh gas inlet
 
 FIGURE 35  Components of a Mapleson circuit. APL, adjustable pressure-limiting (valve). 
 
CHAPTER 3 Breathing Systems
35
 Performance Characteristics of 
Mapleson Circuits 
Mapleson circuits are lightweight, inexpensive, and 
simple. Breathing-circuit effi  ciency is measured by 
the fresh gas fl ow required to reduce CO 2 rebreathing 
to a negligible value. Because there are no unidirec-
tional valves or CO 2 absorption in Mapleson circuits, 
rebreathing is prevented by adequate fresh gas fl ow 
into the circuit and venting exhaled gas through 
the APL valve before inspiration. Th ere is usually 
some rebreathing in any Mapleson circuit. Th e total 
fresh gas fl ow into the circuit controls the amount. 
To attenuate rebreathing, high fresh gas fl ows are 
required. Th e APL valve in Mapleson A, B, and C cir-
cuits is located near the face mask, and the reservoir 
bag is located at the opposite end of the circuit. 
 Reexamine the drawing of a Mapleson A circuit 
in  Figure 3–5 . During spontaneous ventilation, alveo-
lar gas containing CO 2 will be exhaled into the breath-
ing tube or directly vented through an open APL 
valve. Before inhalation occurs, if the fresh gas fl ow 
exceeds alveolar minute ventilation, the infl ow of fresh 
gas will force the alveolar gas remaining in the breath-
ing tube to exit from the APL valve. If the breathing-
tube volume is equal to or greater than the patient’s 
tidal volume, the next inspiration will contain only 
fresh gas.  Because a fresh gas fl ow equal to min-
ute ventilation is suffi  cient to prevent rebreath-
ing, the Mapleson A design is the most effi  cient 
Mapleson circuit for  spontaneous ventilation. 
 Positive pressure during  controlled ventila-
tion, however, requires a partially closed APL valve. 
Although some alveolar and fresh gas exits through 
the valve during inspiration, no gas is vented during 
expiration, since the exhaled gas stagnates during the 
expiratory phase of positive pressure ventilation. As 
a result, very high fresh gas fl ows (greater than three 
times minute ventilation) are required to prevent 
rebreathing with a Mapleson A circuit during con-
trolled ventilation. Fresh gas fl ows are conveniently 
available because the fresh gas inlet is in close prox-
imity to the APL valve in a Mapleson B circuit. 
 Interchanging the position of the APL valve and 
the fresh gas inlet transforms a Mapleson A into a 
 Mapleson D circuit ( Table 3–2 ).  Th e Mapleson 
D circuit is effi  cient during controlled ventila-
tion, since fresh gas fl ow forces alveolar air  away 
4
5
spontaneous ventilation so that circuit pressure 
remains negligible throughout inspiration and expi-
ration. Assisted and controlled ventilation require 
positive pressure during inspiration to expand the 
lungs. Partial closure of the APL valve limits gas exit, 
permitting positive circuit pressures during reser-
voir bag compressions. 
 D. Reservoir Bag (Breathing Bag) 
 Reservoir bags function as a reservoir of anesthetic 
gas and a method of generating positive-pressure 
ventilation. Th ey are designed to increase in compli-
ance as their volume increases. Th ree distinct phases 
of reservoir bag fi lling are recognizable ( Figure 3–6 ). 
Aft er the nominal 3-L capacity of an adult reservoir 
bag is achieved (phase I), pressure rises rapidly to a 
peak (phase II). Further increases in volume result 
in a plateau or even a slight decrease in pressure 
(phase III). Th is ceiling eff ect provides some mini-
mal protection of the patient’s lungs against high 
airway pressures, if the APL valve is unintentionally 
left  in the closed position while fresh gas continues 
to fl ow into the circuit. 
Pressure
Volume
II
III
I
 FIGURE 36  The increasing compliance and elasticity 
of breathing bags as demonstrated by three phases of 
ﬁ lling (see text). (Reproduced, with permission, from Johnstone 
RE, Smith TC: Rebreathing bags as pressure limiting devices. 
Anesthesiology 1973;38:192.) 
36 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
inspiratory breathing tube; (4) a Y-connector; (5) 
an expiratory unidirectional valve and expiratory 
breathing tube; (6) an APL valve; and (7) a reservoir 
( Figure 3–8 ). 
 Components of the Circle System 
 A. Carbon Dioxide Absorber 
and the Absorbent 
 Rebreathing alveolar gas conserves heat and humid-
ity. However, the CO 2 in exhaled gas must be elimi-
nated to prevent hypercapnia. CO 2 chemically 
from the patient and  toward the APL valve. Th us, 
simply moving components completely alters the 
fresh gas requirements of the Mapleson circuits. 
 Th e  Bain circuit is a coaxial version of the 
Mapleson D system that incorporates the fresh gas 
inlet tubing inside the breathing tube ( Figure 3–7 ). 
Th is modifi cation decreases the circuit’s bulk and 
retains heat and humidity better than a conventional 
Mapleson D circuit as a result of partial warming of 
the inspiratory gas by countercurrent exchange with 
the warmer expired gases. A disadvantage of this 
coaxial circuit is the possibility of kinking or discon-
nection of the fresh gas inlet tubing. Periodic inspec-
tion of the inner tubing is mandatory to prevent this 
complication; if unrecognized, either of these mishaps 
could result in signifi cant rebreathing of exhaled gas. 
 THE CIRCLE SYSTEM 
 Although Mapleson circuits overcome some of the 
disadvantages of the insuffl  ation and draw-over sys-
tems, the high fresh gas fl ows required to prevent 
rebreathing of CO 2 result in waste of anesthetic agent, 
pollution of the operating room environment, and 
loss of patient heat and humidity ( Table 3–3 ). In an 
attempt to avoid these problems, the  circle  system 
adds more components to the breathing system. 
 Th e components of a circle system include: (1) a 
CO 2 absorber containing CO 2 absorbent; (2) a fresh 
gas inlet; (3) an inspiratory unidirectional valve and 
 TABLE 33 Characteristics of breathing 
circuits. 
Insuﬄ  ation 
and Open Drop
Mapleson
Circle
Complexity
Very simple
Simple
Complex
Control of 
anesthetic depth
Poor
Variable
Good
Ability to 
scavenge
Very poor
Variable
Good
Conservation 
of heat and 
humidity
No
No
Yes  1  
Rebreathing of 
exhaled gases
No
No  1  
Yes  1  
 1 These properties depend on the rate of fresh gas ﬂ ow.
 FIGURE 37  A Bain circuit is a Mapleson D circuit 
design with the fresh gas tubing inside the corrugated 
breathing tube. APL, adjustable pressure-limiting (valve). 
 (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Bain JA, Spoerel WE: 
Flow requirements for a modiﬁ ed Mapleson D system during con-
trolled ventilation. Can Anaesth Soc J 1973;20:629.) 
APL valve
Breathing bag
Breathing tube
Mask
Fresh gas
tubing
 
CHAPTER 3 Breathing Systems 
37 
combines with water to form carbonic acid. CO 2 
absorbents (eg, soda lime or calcium hydroxide 
lime) contain hydroxide salts that are capable of 
neutralizing carbonic acid ( Table 3–4 ). Reaction 
end products include heat (the heat of neutraliza-
tion), water, and calcium carbonate.  Soda lime is the 
more common absorbent and is capable of absorb-
ing up to 23 L of CO 2 per 100 g of absorbent. It con-
sists primarily of calcium hydroxide (80%), along 
with sodium hydroxide, water, and a small amount 
of potassium hydroxide. Its reactions are as follows: 
CO2 + H2O → H2CO3
H2CO3 + 2NaOH → Na2CO3 + 2H2O + Heat
(a fast reaction)
Na2CO3 + Ca(OH)2 → CaCO3 + 2NaOH
(a slow reaction)
 Note that the water and sodium hydroxide ini-
tially required are regenerated. Another absorbent, 
barium hydroxide lime, is no longer used due to the 
 
Expiratory
unidirectional
valve
Inspiratory
unidirectional
valve
APL valve
Right-angle
connector
Y-connector
Flexible 
breathing tube
Mask
Fresh gas inlet
Absorber
Reservoir
 FIGURE 38  A circle system. APL, adjustable pressure-limiting (valve). 
 TABLE 34 Comparison of soda lime and 
barium hydroxide lime. 
Soda Lime
Barium 
Hydroxide 
Lime
Mesh size  1  
  4–8
  4–8
Method of 
hardness
Silica added
Water of 
crystallization
Content
 Calcium hydroxide 
 Sodium hydroxide 
 Potassium hydroxide 
 Barium hydroxide 
 Calcium hydroxide 
Usual 
indicator dye
Ethyl violet
Ethyl violet
Absorptive 
capacity 
(liters of 
CO 2 /100 g 
granules)
  14–23
  9–18
  1  The number of openings per linear inch in a wire screen used to grade 
particle size.
38 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
monoxide is highest with desfl urane; with sevofl u-
rane, it occurs at a higher temperature. 
 Amsorb is a CO 2 absorbent consisting of cal-
cium hydroxide and calcium chloride (with calcium 
sulfate and polyvinylpyrrolidone added to increase 
hardness). It possesses greater inertness than soda 
lime, resulting in less degradation of volatile anes-
thetics (eg, sevofl urane into compound A or desfl u-
rane into carbon monoxide). 
 Compound A is one of the by-products of deg-
radation of sevofl urane by absorbent. Higher con-
centrations of sevofl urane, prolonged exposure, and 
low-fl ow anesthetic technique seem to increase the 
formation of Compound A. Compound A has been 
shown to produce nephrotoxicity in animals, 
 Th e granules of absorbent are contained 
within one or two canisters that fi t snugly between 
a head and base plate. Together, this unit is called 
an absorber ( Figure 3–9 ). Although bulky, double 
possible increased hazard of fi re in the breathing 
system. 
 A pH indicator dye (eg, ethyl violet) changes color 
from white to purple as a consequence of increasing 
hydrogen ion concentration and absorbent exhaus-
tion ( Table 3–5 ). Absorbent should be replaced 
when 50% to 70% has changed color. Although 
exhausted granules may revert to their original color 
if rested, no signifi cant recovery of absorptive capac-
ity occurs. Granule size is a compromise between the 
higher absorptive surface area of small granules and 
the lower resistance to gas fl ow of larger granules. 
Th e granules commonly used as CO 2 absorbent are 
between 4 and 8 mesh; the number of mesh corre-
sponds to the number of holes per square inch of a 
screen. Th e hydroxide salts are irritating to the skin 
and mucous membranes. Increasing the hardness of 
soda lime by adding silica minimizes the risk of inha-
lation of sodium hydroxide dust and also decreases 
resistance of gas fl ow. Additional water is added to 
absorbent during packaging to provide optimal con-
ditions for carbonic acid formation. Commercial 
soda lime has a water content of 14% to 19%. 
 Absorbent granules can absorb and later release 
medically important amounts of volatile anesthetic. 
Th is property can be responsible for modest delays 
of induction or emergence.  Th e drier the soda 
lime, the more likely it will absorb and degrade 
volatile anesthetics. Volatile anesthetics can be bro-
ken down to carbon monoxide by dry absorbent (eg, 
sodium or potassium hydroxide) to such a degree 
that it is capable of causing clinically signifi cant car-
bon monoxide poisoning. Th e formation of carbon 
6
 TABLE 35 Indicator dye changes signaling 
absorbent exhaustion. 
Indicator
Color when 
Fresh
Color when 
Exhausted
Ethyl violet
White
Purple
Phenolphthalein
White
Pink
Clayton yellow
Red
Yellow
Ethyl orange
Orange
Yellow
Mimosa 2
Red
White
 
Head plate
Base plate
Dust trap
Lever
release
Granules of
absorbent
Double
canisters
 
 FIGURE 39  A carbon dioxide absorber. 
 
CHAPTER 3 Breathing Systems
39
displacement of the disks, resulting in incomplete 
escape of expired gases and rebreathing. 
 Inhalation opens the inspiratory valve, allowing 
the patient to breathe a mixture of fresh and exhaled 
gas that has passed through the CO 2 absorber. 
Simultaneously, the expiratory valve closes to pre-
vent rebreathing of exhaled gas that still contains 
CO 2 . Th e subsequent fl ow of gas away from the 
patient during exhalation opens the expiratory 
valve. Th is gas is vented through the APL valve or 
rebreathed by the patient aft er passing through the 
absorber. Closure of the inspiratory valve during 
exhalation prevents expiratory gas from mixing with 
fresh gas in the inspiratory limb.  Malfunction 
of either unidirectional valve may allow 
rebreathing of CO 2 , resulting in hypercapnia. 
 Optimization of Circle System Design 
 Although the major components of the circle system 
(unidirectional valves, fresh gas inlet, APL valve, 
CO 2 absorber, and a reservoir bag) can be placed in 
several confi gurations, the following arrangement is 
preferred ( Figure 3–8 ): 
•  Unidirectional valves are relatively close 
to the patient to prevent backfl ow into the 
inspiratory limb if a circuit leak develops. 
However, unidirectional valves are not placed 
in the Y-piece, as that makes it diffi  cult to 
confi rm proper orientation and intraoperative 
function. 
•  Th e fresh gas inlet is placed between the 
absorber and the inspiratory valve. Positioning 
it downstream from the inspiratory valve 
would allow fresh gas to bypass the patient 
during exhalation and be wasted. Fresh gas 
introduced between the expiratory valve and 
the absorber would be diluted by recirculating 
gas. Furthermore, inhalation anesthetics may 
be absorbed or released by soda lime granules, 
thus slowing induction and emergence. 
•  Th e APL valve is usually placed between the 
absorber and the expiratory valve and close to 
the reservoir bag. Positioning of the APL valve 
in this location (ie, before the absorber) helps 
to conserve absorption capacity and minimizes 
the venting of fresh gas. 
7
canisters permit more complete CO 2 absorption, 
less frequent absorbent changes, and lower gas 
fl ow resistance. To ensure complete absorption, 
a patient’s tidal volume should not exceed the air 
space between absorbent granules, which is roughly 
equal to 50% of the absorber’s capacity. Indicator 
dye color is monitored through the absorber’s trans-
parent walls. Absorbent exhaustion typically occurs 
fi rst where exhaled gas enters the absorber and 
along the canister’s smooth inner walls. Channeling 
through areas of loosely packed granules is mini-
mized by a baffl  e system, which directs gas fl ow 
through the center, thereby allowing greater utili-
zation of the absorbent. A trap at the base of the 
absorber collects dust and moisture. Newer absorb-
ers are used until CO 2 is found in the inhaled gas 
on the anesthetic-gas monitor, at which time the 
canister(s) are replaced. 
 B. Unidirectional Valves 
 Unidirectional valves, which function as check 
valves, contain a ceramic or mica disk resting hori-
zontally on an annular valve seat ( Figure 3–10 ). 
Forward fl ow displaces the disk upward, permitting 
the gas to proceed through the circuit. Reverse fl ow 
pushes the disk against its seat, preventing refl ux. 
Valve incompetence is usually due to a warped disk 
or seat irregularities. Th e expiratory valve is exposed 
to the humidity of alveolar gas. Condensation and 
resultant moisture formation may prevent upward 
 
Transparent
dome
Disk
Valve seat
 
 FIGURE 310  A unidirectional valve. 
40 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
breathing tubes to further reduce dead space, and 
are lighter in weight. 
 C. Resistance 
 Th e unidirectional valves and absorber increase cir-
cle system resistance, especially at high respiratory 
rates and large tidal volumes. Nonetheless, even pre-
mature neonates can be successfully ventilated using 
a circle system. 
 D. Humidity and Heat Conservation 
 Medical gas delivery systems supply dehumidifi ed 
gases to the anesthesia circuit at room temperature. 
Exhaled gas, on the other hand, is saturated with 
water at body temperature. Th erefore, the heat and 
humidity of inspired gas depend on the relative pro-
portion of rebreathed gas to fresh gas. High fl ows 
are accompanied by low relative humidity, whereas 
low fl ows allow greater water saturation. Absorbent 
granules provide a signifi cant source of heat and 
moisture in the circle system. 
 E. Bacterial Contamination 
 Th e minimal risk of microorganism retention in 
circle system components could theoretically lead 
to respiratory infections in subsequent patients. For 
this reason, bacterial fi lters are sometimes incorpo-
rated into the inspiratory or expiratory breathing 
tubes or at the Y-piece. 
 Disadvantages of the Circle System 
 Although most of the problems of Mapleson cir-
cuits are solved by the circle system, the improve-
ments have led to other disadvantages: greater size 
and less portability; increased complexity, resulting 
in a higher risk of disconnection or malfunction; 
complications related to use of absorbent; and the 
diffi  culty of predicting inspired gas concentrations 
during low fresh gas fl ows. 
 RESUSCITATION 
BREATHING SYSTEMS 
 Resuscitation bags (AMBU bags or bag-mask units) 
are commonly used for emergency ventilation 
because of their simplicity, portability, and ability 
to deliver almost 100% oxygen ( Figure 3–11 ). A 
•  Resistance to exhalation is decreased by 
locating the reservoir bag in the expiratory 
limb. Bag compression during controlled 
ventilation will vent expired gas through the 
APL valve, conserving absorbent. 
 Performance Characteristics 
of the Circle System 
 A. Fresh Gas Requirement 
 With an absorber, the circle system prevents 
rebreathing of CO 2 at reduced fresh gas fl ows 
(≤1 L) or even fresh gas fl ows equal to the uptake of 
anesthetic gases and oxygen by the patient and the 
circuit itself (closed-system anesthesia). At fresh gas 
fl ows greater than 5 L/min, rebreathing is so mini-
mal that a CO 2 absorber is usually unnecessary. 
 With low fresh gas fl ows, concentrations of 
oxygen and inhalation anesthetics can vary mark-
edly between fresh gas (ie, gas in the fresh gas inlet) 
and inspired gas (ie, gas in the inspiratory limb of 
the breathing tubes). Th e latter is a mixture of fresh 
gas and exhaled gas that has passed through the 
absorber. Th e greater the fresh gas fl ow rate, the less 
time it will take for a change in fresh gas anesthetic 
concentration to be refl ected in a change in inspired 
gas anesthetic concentration. Higher fl ows speed 
induction and recovery, compensate for leaks in the 
circuit, and decrease the risks of unanticipated gas 
mixtures. 
 B. Dead Space 
 Th at part of a tidal volume that does not undergo 
alveolar ventilation is referred to as dead space. 
Th us, any increase in dead space must be accompa-
nied by a corresponding increase in tidal volume, 
if alveolar ventilation is to remain unchanged. 
 Because of the unidirectional valves, appara-
tus dead space in a circle system is limited to 
the area distal to the point of inspiratory and expira-
tory gas mixing at the Y-piece. Unlike Mapleson 
circuits, the circle system tube length does not aff ect 
dead space. Like Mapleson circuits, length does 
aff ect circuit compliance and thus the amount of 
tidal volume lost to the circuit during positive-
pressure ventilation. Pediatric circle systems may 
have both a septum dividing the inspiratory and 
expiratory gas in the Y-piece and low-compliance 
8
9
 
CHAPTER 3 Breathing Systems
41
resuscitator is unlike a Mapleson circuit or a circle 
system because it contains a  nonrebreathing valve . 
(Remember that a Mapleson system is considered 
valveless even though it contains an APL valve, 
whereas a circle system contains unidirectional 
valves that direct fl ow through an absorber but allow 
rebreathing of exhaled gases.) 
 High concentrations of oxygen can be delivered 
to a mask or tracheal tube during spontaneous or 
controlled ventilation if a source of high fresh gas 
fl ow is connected to the inlet nipple. Th e patient 
valve opens during controlled or spontaneous inspi-
ration to allow gas fl ow from the ventilation bag 
to the patient. Rebreathing is prevented by venting 
exhaled gas to the atmosphere through exhalation 
ports in this valve. Th e compressible, self-refi lling 
ventilation bag also contains an intake valve. Th is 
valve closes during bag compression, permitting 
positive-pressure ventilation. Th e bag is refi lled 
by fl ow through the fresh gas inlet and across the 
intake valve. Connecting a reservoir to the intake 
valve helps prevent the entrainment of room air. Th e 
reservoir valve assembly is really two unidirectional 
valves: the inlet valve and the outlet valve. Th e inlet 
valve allows ambient air to enter the ventilation bag 
if fresh gas fl ow is inadequate to maintain reservoir 
fi lling. Positive pressure in the reservoir bag opens 
the outlet valve, which vents oxygen if fresh gas fl ow 
is excessive. 
 Th ere are several disadvantages to resuscitator 
breathing systems. First, they require high fresh gas 
fl ows to achieve a high F io 2 .  F io 2 is directly pro-
portional to the oxygen concentration and fl ow 
rate of the gas mixture supplied to the resuscitator 
10
 
Patient valve
Intake valve
Nipple for
fresh gas flow
Ventilation bag
Reservoir bag
Reservoir valve assembly
(inlet and outlet valves)
 
 FIGURE 311  The Laerdal resuscitator.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Laerdal Medical Corp.) 
(usually 100% oxygen) and inversely proportional to 
the minute ventilation delivered to the patient. For 
example, a Laerdal resuscitator equipped with a res-
ervoir requires a fl ow of 10 L/min to achieve an 
inspired oxygen concentration approaching 100% if a 
patient with a tidal volume of 750 mL is ventilated at 
a rate of 12 breaths/min. Th e maximum achievable 
tidal volumes are less than those that can be achieved 
with a system that uses a 3-L breathing bag. In fact, 
most adult resuscitators have a maximum tidal vol-
ume of 1000 mL, which is suffi  cient for the lower tidal 
volumes generally employed in patient management. 
Finally, although a normally functioning patient 
valve has low resistance to inspiration and expiration, 
exhaled moisture can cause valve sticking. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Unexplained Light Anesthesia 
 An extremely obese but otherwise healthy 
5-year-old girl presents for inguinal hernia repair. 
After uneventful induction of general anesthe-
sia and tracheal intubation, the patient is placed 
on a ventilator set to deliver a tidal volume of 
7 mL/kg at a rate of 16 breaths/min. Despite deliv-
ery of high concentrations of sevoﬂ urane in 50% 
 nitrous oxide, tachycardia (145 beats/min) and 
mild hypertension (144/94 mm Hg) are noted. To 
increase anesthetic depth, fentanyl (3 mcg/kg) is 
administered. Heart rate and blood pressure con-
tinue to rise and are accompanied by frequent 
premature ventricular contractions . 
42 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
appears to be due to an equipment malfunction, 
the patient should be disconnected from the anes-
thesia machine and ventilated with a resuscitation 
bag until repairs are possible . 
 What are some other consequences of 
hypercapnia? 
 Hypercapnia has a multitude of eﬀ ects, most 
of them masked by general anesthesia. Cerebral 
blood ﬂ ow increases proportionately with arte-
rial CO  2  .  This eﬀ ect is dangerous in patients with 
increased intracranial pressure (eg, from brain 
tumor). Extremely high levels of CO  2   (>80 mm Hg) 
can cause unconsciousness related to a fall in cere-
brospinal ﬂ uid pH. CO  2   depresses the myocardium, 
but this direct eﬀ ect is usually overshadowed by 
activation of the sympathetic nervous system. 
 During general anesthesia, hypercapnia usually 
results in an increased cardiac output, an elevation 
in arterial blood pressure, and a propensity toward 
arrhythmias . 
 Elevated serum CO  2   concentrations can over-
whelm the blood’s buﬀ ering capacity, leading to 
respiratory acidosis. This causes other cations such 
as Ca  2 +  and K +  to shift extracellularly. Acidosis also 
shifts the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve to 
the right . 
 Carbon dioxide is a powerful respiratory stimu-
lant. In fact, for each mm Hg rise of Pa CO  2   above 
baseline, normal awake subjects increase their 
minute ventilation by about 2–3 L/min. General 
anesthesia markedly decreases this response, and 
paralysis eliminates it. Finally, severe hypercapnia 
can produce hypoxia by displacement of oxygen 
from alveoli . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Dobson MB: Anaesthesia for diffi  cult locations—
developing countries and military confl icts. In: 
 International Practice of Anaesthesia . Prys-Roberts C, 
Brown BR (editors). Butterworth Heinemann, 1996. 
 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE:  Understanding Anesthesia 
Equipment , 5th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 
2008. 
 What should be considered in the diﬀ erential 
diagnosis of this patient’s cardiovascular 
changes? 
 The combination of tachycardia and hyper-
tension during general anesthesia should always 
alert the anesthesiologist to the possibility of 
hypercapnia or hypoxia, both of which produce 
signs of increased sympathetic activity. These 
life- threatening conditions should be quickly and 
immediately ruled out by end-tidal CO  2   monitor-
ing, pulse oximetry, or arterial blood gas analysis . 
 A common cause of intraoperative tachycardia 
and hypertension is an inadequate level of anesthe-
sia. Normally, this is conﬁ rmed by movement. If the 
patient is paralyzed, however, there are few reliable 
indicators of light anesthesia. The lack of a response 
to a dose of an opioid should alert the anesthesiolo-
gist to the possibility of other, perhaps more seri-
ous, causes . 
 Malignant hyperthermia is rare but must be 
considered in cases of unexplained tachycardia, 
especially if accompanied by premature contrac-
tions. Certain drugs used in anesthesia (eg, pan-
curonium, ketamine, ephedrine) stimulate the 
sympathetic nervous system and can produce or 
exacerbate tachycardia and hypertension. Diabetic 
patients who become hypoglycemic from adminis-
tration of insulin or long-acting oral hypoglycemic 
agents can have similar cardiovascular changes. 
Other endocrine abnormalities (eg, pheochromo-
cytoma, thyroid storm, carcinoid) should also be 
considered . 
 Could any of these problems be related to an 
equipment malfunction? 
 Gas analysis can conﬁ rm the delivery of anes-
thetic gases to the patient . 
 A misconnection of the ventilator could result 
in hypoxia or hypercapnia. In addition, a mal-
functioning unidirectional valve will increase cir-
cuit dead space and allow rebreathing of expired 
CO  2  .  Soda lime exhaustion could also lead to 
rebreathing in the presence of a low fresh gas ﬂ ow. 
Rebreathing of CO  2   can be detected during the 
inspiratory phase on a capnograph. If rebreathing 
 43 
4
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 The Anesthesia Machine 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
Misuse of anesthesia gas delivery systems 
is three times more likely than failure of the 
device to cause equipment-related adverse 
outcomes. An operator’s lack of familiarity 
with the equipment or a failure to check 
machine function, or both, are the most 
frequent causes. These mishaps account for 
only about 2% of cases in the ASA Closed 
Claims Project database. The breathing 
circuit was the most common single source 
of injury (39%); nearly all damaging events 
were related to misconnects or disconnects. 
The anesthesia machine receives medical 
gases from a gas supply, controls the ﬂ ow 
and reduces the pressure of desired gases 
to a safe level, vaporizes volatile anesthetics 
into the ﬁ nal gas mixture, and delivers the 
gases to a breathing circuit that is connected 
to the patient’s airway. A mechanical 
ventilator attaches to the breathing circuit 
but can be excluded with a switch during 
spontaneous or manual (bag) ventilation. 
 Whereas the oxygen supply can pass 
directly to its ﬂ ow control valve, nitrous 
oxide, air, and other gases must ﬁ rst pass 
through safety devices before reaching their 
respective ﬂ ow control valves. These devices 
permit the ﬂ ow of other gases only if there 
is suﬃ  cient oxygen pressure in the safety 
device and help prevent accidental delivery 
of a hypoxic mixture in the event of oxygen 
supply failure. 
1
2
3
 Another safety feature of anesthesia 
machines is a linkage of the nitrous oxide 
gas ﬂ ow to the oxygen gas ﬂ ow; this 
arrangement helps ensure a minimum 
oxygen concentration of 25%. 
 All modern vaporizers are agent speciﬁ c 
and temperature corrected, capable of 
delivering a constant concentration of agent 
regardless of temperature changes or ﬂ ow 
through the vaporizer. 
 A rise in airway pressure may signal 
worsening pulmonary compliance, an 
increase in tidal volume, or an obstruction 
in the breathing circuit, tracheal tube, or 
the patient’s airway. A drop in pressure may 
indicate an improvement in compliance, 
a decrease in tidal volume, or a leak in 
the circuit. 
 Traditionally ventilators on anesthesia 
machines have a double-circuit system 
design and are pneumatically powered 
and electronically controlled. Newer 
machines also incorporate microprocessor 
control that relies on sophisticated 
pressure and ﬂ ow sensors. Some anesthesia 
machines have ventilators that use a 
single-circuit piston design. 
 The major advantage of a piston ventilator 
is its ability to deliver accurate tidal volumes 
to patients with very poor lung compliance 
and to very small patients. 
4
5
6
7
8
—Continued next page
44 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 No piece of equipment is more intimately associated 
with the practice of anesthesiology than the anesthe-
sia machine ( Figure 4–1 ). On the most basic level, the 
anesthesiologist uses the anesthesia machine to con-
trol the patient’s ventilation and oxygen delivery and 
to administer inhalation anesthetics. Proper func-
tioning of the machine is crucial for patient safety. 
Modern anesthesia machines have become very 
sophisticated, incorporating many built-in safety 
features and devices, monitors, and multiple micro-
processors that can integrate and monitor all compo-
nents. Additional monitors can be added externally 
and oft en still be fully integrated. Moreover, modu-
lar machine designs allow a wide variety of confi gu-
rations and features within the same product line. 
Th e term  anesthesia workstation is therefore oft en 
used for modern anesthesia machines. Th ere are two 
major manufacturers of anesthesia machines in the 
United States, Datex-Ohmeda (GE Healthcare) and 
Dräger Medical. Other manufacturers (eg, Mindray) 
produce anesthesia delivery systems. Anesthesia 
providers should carefully review the operations 
manuals of the machines present in their clinical 
practice. 
 Much progress has been made in reducing the 
number of adverse outcomes arising from anesthetic 
gas delivery equipment, through redesign of equip-
ment and education. Misuse of anesthesia gas 
delivery systems is three times more likely 
than failure of the device to cause equipment-related 
adverse outcomes. Equipment misuse is character-
ized as errors in preparation, maintenance, or 
deployment of a device. Preventable anesthetic mis-
haps are frequently traced to an operator’s lack 
of  familiarity with the equipment or a failure to 
check machine function, or both. Th ese mishaps 
account for only about 2% of cases in the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists’ (ASA) Closed Claims 
Project database. Th e breathing circuit was the most 
common single source of injury (39%); nearly 
all damaging events were related to misconnects 
or  disconnects. A misconnect was defi ned as a 
1
in the operating room during volume-
controlled ventilation. Causes include 
breathing circuit compliance, gas 
compression, ventilator–fresh gas ﬂ ow 
coupling, and leaks in the anesthesia 
machine, the breathing circuit, or the 
patient’s airway. 
 Waste-gas scavengers dispose of gases 
that have been vented from the breathing 
circuit by the APL valve and ventilator spill 
valve. Pollution of the operating room 
environment with anesthetic gases may 
pose a health hazard to surgical personnel. 
 A routine inspection of anesthesia 
equipment before each use increases 
operator familiarity and conﬁ rms proper 
functioning. The U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration has made available a generic 
checkout procedure for anesthesia gas 
machines and breathing systems. 
13
14
 Whenever a ventilator is used “disconnect 
alarms” must be passively activated. 
Anesthesia workstations should have at 
least three disconnect alarms: low pressure, 
low exhaled tidal volume, and low exhaled 
carbon dioxide. 
 Because the ventilator’s spill valve is closed 
during inspiration, fresh gas ﬂ ow from the 
machine’s common gas outlet normally 
contributes to the tidal volume delivered to 
the patient. 
 Use of the oxygen ﬂ ush valve during the 
inspiratory cycle of a ventilator must be 
avoided because the ventilator spill valve 
will be closed and the adjustable pressure-
limiting (APL) valve is excluded; the surge of 
oxygen (600–1200 mL/s) and circuit pressure 
will be transferred to the patient’s lungs. 
 Large discrepancies between the set and 
actual tidal volume are often observed 
9
10
11
12
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
45 
 FIGURE 41  Modern anesthesia machine (Datex-Ohmeda Aestiva).  A: Front.  B: Back. 
A
B
Flowmeters
Vaporizers
System switch
Secondary gas
supply pressure gauges
(cylinder gauges)
Primary gas
supply gauges
(usually pipeline)
Brake
Main circuit breaker
Oxygen power
outlet
Waste gas
receiver
Back cover
Scavenging
connector
Electrical
outlets with
circuit breakers
Pipeline inlets
Display
Cylinder yokes
Cylinders
Auxiliary O2 flowmeter
Suction regulator
Bellows assembly
Flow controls
Rebreathing
bag
Breathing
system
Carbon dioxide
(CO2) absorber
Oxygen (O2)
flush button
46 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 TABLE 41 Essential safety features on a modern anesthesia workstation. 
Essential Features
Purpose
Noninterchangeable gas-specific connections to pipeline 
inlets (DISS) 1 with pressure gauges, filter, and check valve
Prevent incorrect pipeline attachments; detect failure, 
depletion, or fluctuation
Pin index safety system for cylinders with pressure 
gauges, and at least one oxygen cylinder
Prevent incorrect cylinder attachments; provide backup 
gas supply; detect depletion
Low oxygen pressure alarm
Detect oxygen supply failure at the common gas inlet
Minimum oxygen/nitrous oxide ratio controller device 
(hypoxic guard)
Prevent delivery of less than 21% oxygen
Oxygen failure safety device (shut-off or 
proportioning device)
Prevent administration of nitrous oxide or other gases 
when the oxygen supply fails
Oxygen must enter the common manifold 
downstream to other gases
Prevent hypoxia in event of proximal gas leak
Oxygen concentration monitor and alarm
Prevent administration of hypoxic gas mixtures in event 
of a low-pressure system leak; precisely regulate oxygen 
concentration
Automatically enabled essential alarms and monitors 
(eg, oxygen concentration)
Prevent use of the machine without essential monitors
Vaporizer interlock device
Prevent simultaneous administration of more than one 
volatile agent
Capnography and anesthetic gas measurement
Guide ventilation; prevent anesthetic overdose; help 
reduce awareness
Oxygen flush mechanism that does not pass through vaporizers
Rapidly refill or flush the breathing circuit
Breathing circuit pressure monitor and alarm
Prevent pulmonary barotrauma and detect sustained 
positive, high peak, and negative airway pressures
Exhaled volume monitor
Assess ventilation and prevent hypo- or hyperventilation
Pulse oximetry, blood pressure, and ECG monitoring
Provide minimal standard monitoring
Mechanical ventilator
Control alveolar ventilation more accurately and during 
muscle paralysis for prolonged periods
Backup battery
Provide temporary electrical power (>30 min) to monitors 
and alarms in event of power failure
Scavenger system
Prevent contamination of the operating room with waste 
anesthetic gases
 1 DISS, diameter-index safety system.
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
47
nonfunctional and unconventional confi guration of 
breathing circuit components or attachments. In 
decreasing frequency, other causes involved vapor-
izers (21%), ventilators (17%), and oxygen supply 
(11%). Other more basic components of the anes-
thesia machine (eg, valves) were responsible in only 
7% of cases. All malpractice claims in the database 
that involved the anesthesia machine, oxygen supply 
tanks or lines, or ventilators occurred before 1990; 
since then claims involving breathing circuits and 
vaporizers have continued to occur. 
 Th e American National Standards Institute and 
subsequently the ASTM International (formerly the 
American Society for Testing and Materials, F1850–
00) published standard specifi cations for anesthesia 
machines and their components.  Table  4–1 lists 
essential features of a modern anesthesia work-
station. Changes in equipment design have been 
directed at minimizing the probability of breath-
ing circuit misconnects and disconnects and auto-
mating machine checks. Because of the durability 
and functional longevity of anesthesia machines, 
the ASA has developed guidelines for determining 
anesthesia machine obsolescence ( Table 4–2 ). Th is 
 TABLE 42 Unacceptable/undesirable 
features of older anesthesia machines. 1 
 Unacceptable features 
1.  Flowmeter-controlled vaporizer (eg, copper kettle, 
Vernitrol) 
2.  More than one flow control valve for a single gas 
3.  Vaporizer with a rotary dial that increases concentration 
with clockwise rotation 
4.  Connections in the scavenging system that are the same 
size as breathing circuit connections 
 Undesirable features 
1.  Adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve that is not 
isolated during mechanical ventilation 
2.  Oxygen flow control knob that is not fluted or larger 
than other flow control knobs 
3.  Oxygen flush control that is unprotected from 
accidental activation 
4.  Lack of main On/Off switch for electrical power to 
integral monitors and alarms 
5.  Lack of antidisconnect device on the fresh gas hose 
(common gas outlet) 
6.  Lack of airway pressure alarms 
1 Data from ASA Guidelines for determining Anesthesia Machine 
Obsolescence.
chapter is an introduction to anesthesia machine 
design, function, and use. 
 OVERVIEW 
 In its most basic form, the anesthesia machine 
receives medical gases from a gas supply, con-
trols the fl ow and reduces the pressure of desired 
gases to a safe level, vaporizes volatile anesthetics 
into the fi nal gas mixture, and delivers the gases to 
a breathing circuit connected to the patient’s airway 
( Figures 4–2 and  4–3 ). A mechanical ventilator 
attaches to the breathing circuit but can be excluded 
with a switch during spontaneous or manual (bag) 
ventilation. An auxiliary oxygen supply and suction 
regulator are also usually built into the workstation. 
In addition to standard safety features ( Table 4–1 ) 
top-of-the-line anesthesia machines have additional 
safety features, enhancements, and built-in com-
puter processors that integrate and monitor all com-
ponents, perform automated machine checkouts, 
2
 FIGURE 42  Functional schematic of an anesthesia 
machine/workstation. 
Pipeline gas supply
Cylinder gas supply
Gas inlets
Pressure reduction
Flowmeters
Vaporizers
Common gas outlet
Breathing circuit
Airway
Patient
Remote monitor
Safety
devices
Monitors
Hospital information 
management system
Ventilator
Scavenger
system
48 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 FIGURE 43  Simpliﬁ ed internal schematic of an anesthesia machine.  A : Datex-Ohmeda Aestiva. (continued)
A
Vaporizers
Pipeline
inlets
Main
output
manifold
System
switch
Cylinder
supply
Vaporizer
manifold
Flow
control
assembly
Breathing
system
Common
gas
manifold
Oxygen
power outlet
Pressure
gauges
Drive gas to
ventilator
O2 flush
button
O2+
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
49 
and provide options such as automated record-
keeping and networking external monitors and 
hospital information systems ( Figure 4–4 ). Some 
machines are designed specifi cally for mobility, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) compatibility 
or compactness. 
 GAS SUPPLY 
 Most machines have gas inlets for oxygen, nitrous 
oxide, and air. Compact models oft en lack air inlets, 
whereas other machines may have a fourth inlet 
for helium, heliox, carbon dioxide, or nitric oxide. 
Separate inlets are provided for the primary pipeline 
gas supply that passes through the walls of health 
care facilities and the secondary cylinder gas sup-
ply. Machines therefore have two gas inlet pressure 
gauges for each gas: one for pipeline pressure and 
another for cylinder pressure. 
 Pipeline Inlets 
 Oxygen and nitrous oxide (and oft en air) are deliv-
ered from their central supply source to the operating 
room through a piping network. Th e tubing is color 
coded and connects to the anesthesia machine 
through a noninterchangeable  diameter-index 
FIGURE 43 (continued)  B : Dräger Narkomed. ORC, oxygen ratio controller. 
B
Flowmeter bank
Vaporizers
ORC
R3
R2
R1
To
ventilator
Fresh gas
outlet
System
power
switch (on)
Oxygen
flush button
(closed)
Aux. O2
flowmeter
(closed)
O2 supply pressure
alarm switch (open)
Control
valves
(open)
OFPD
(open)
Test
port
Test
port
Test
port
Cylinder
gauge
Cylinder
gauge
Cylinder
gauge
High
pressure
regulator
High
pressure
regulator
Pipeline
check
valve
Pipeline
gauge
Pipeline
gauge
AIR
N2O
O2
Pipeline
gauge
Pipeline
check
valve
Pipeline
check
valve
High
pressure
regulator
Yoke
check
valve
Yoke
check
valve
Yoke
check
valve
Yoke
inlet
Yoke
inlet
DISS
inlet
DISS
inlet
DISS
inlet
Yoke
inlet
OFPD
(open)
50 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 FIGURE 44  Highly sophisticated anesthesia machines with full integration options.  A: Datex-Ohmeda S/5 ADU. 
(continued)
A
Setup keys
ComWheel
Integrated patient
monitor
Aladdin vaporizer cassette
(electronic vaporizer)
Agent wheel
Switch: ON/Standby
Anesthesia monitor central
unit and modules (option)
Vaporizer cassette
storage slots (optional)
Drawers (optional)
Ventilator “quick”
function keys
Integrated machine
monitor
Fresh gas
flow controls
Ventilator
bellows block
Compact
patient circuit
Fresh gas outlet
(optional flow
indicator)
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
51 
safety system (DISS) fi tting that prevents incor-
rect hose attachment. Th e noninterchangeability is 
achieved by making the bore diameter of the body 
and that of the connection nipple specifi c for each 
supplied gas. A fi lter helps trap debris from the wall 
supply and a one-way check valve prevents ret-
rograde fl ow of gases into the pipeline supplies. It 
should be noted that most modern machines have 
an oxygen (pneumatic) power outlet that may be 
used to drive the ventilator or provide an auxiliary 
oxygen fl owmeter. Th e DISS fi ttings for the oxygen 
inlet and the oxygen power outlet are identical and 
should not be mistakenly interchanged. Th e approx-
imate pipeline pressure of gases delivered to the 
anesthesia machine is 50 psig. 
 Cylinder Inlets 
 Cylinders attach to the machine via hanger-yoke 
assemblies that utilize a  pin index safety system 
 to prevent accidental connection of a wrong gas 
cylinder. Th e yoke assembly includes index pins, a 
washer, a gas fi lter, and a check valve that prevents 
retrograde gas fl ow. Th e gas cylinders are also color-
coded for specifi c gases to allow for easy identifi ca-
tion. In North America the following color-coding 
scheme is used: oxygen = green, nitrous oxide = blue, 
carbon dioxide = gray, air = yellow, helium = brown, 
nitrogen = black. In the United Kingdom, white is 
used for oxygen and black and white for air. Th e 
E-cylinders attached to the anesthesia machine are 
B
System display
monitor
Pressure
gauges
Divan
ventilator
Absorbent
canister
Storage
drawer
Brake
Flowmeters
Vaporizer
mount
Auxiliary O2
flowmeter
Ultrasonic
flow sensor
FIGURE 44 (continued)  B: Dräger 6400. 
52 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
a high-pressure source of medical gases and are 
generally used only as a back-up supply in case of 
pipeline failure. Pressure of gas supplied from the 
cylinder to the anesthesia machine is 45 psig. Some 
machines have two oxygen cylinders so that one 
cylinder can be used while the other is changed. At 
20°C, a full cylinder contains 600 L of oxygen at a 
pressure of 1900 psig, and 1590 L of nitrous oxide at 
745 psig. Cylinder pressure is usually measured by 
a Bourdon pressure gauge ( Figure 4–5 ). A fl exible 
tube within this gauge straightens when exposed to 
gas pressure, causing a gear mechanism to move a 
needle pointer. 
 FLOW CONTROL CIRCUITS 
 Pressure Regulators 
 Unlike the relatively constant pressure of the pipe-
line gas supply, the high and variable gas pres-
sure in cylinders makes fl ow control diffi  cult and 
potentially dangerous. To enhance safety and 
ensure optimal use of cylinder gases, machines uti-
lize a pressure regulator to reduce the cylinder gas 
pressure to 45–47 psig  1  before it enters the fl ow valve 
( Figure 4–6 ). Th is pressure, which is slightly lower 
than the pipeline supply, allows preferential use of 
the pipeline supply if a cylinder is left  open (unless 
pipeline pressure drops below 45 psig). Aft er pass-
ing through Bourdon pressure gauges and check 
valves, the pipeline gases share a common pathway 
with the cylinder gases. A high-pressure relief valve 
provided for each gas is set to open when the sup-
ply pressure exceeds the machine’s maximum safety 
limit (95–110 psig), as might happen with a regula-
tor failure on a cylinder. Some machines also use a 
second regulator to drop both pipeline and cylinder 
pressure further (two-stage pressure regulation). A 
second-stage pressure reduction may also be needed 
for an auxiliary oxygen fl owmeter, the oxygen fl ush 
mechanism, or the drive gas to power a pneumatic 
ventilator. 
 Oxygen Supply 
Failure Protection Devices 
 Whereas the oxygen supply can pass directly to 
its fl ow control valve, nitrous oxide, air (in some 
machines), and other gases must fi rst pass through 
safety devices before reaching their respective fl ow 
control valves. In other machines, air passes directly 
to its fl ow control valve; this allows administration of 
air even in the absence of oxygen. Th ese devices per-
mit the fl ow of other gases only if there is suffi  cient 
oxygen pressure in the safety device and help prevent 
accidental delivery of a hypoxic mixture in the event 
of oxygen supply failure. Th us in addition to supply-
ing the oxygen fl ow control valve, oxygen from the 
common inlet pathway is used to pressurize safety 
devices, oxygen fl ush valves, and ventilator power 
outlets (in some models). Safety devices sense oxygen 
pressure via a small “piloting pressure” line that may 
be derived from the gas inlet or secondary regula-
tor. In some anesthesia machine designs (eg, Datex-
Ohmeda Excel), if the piloting pressure line falls 
below a threshold (eg, 20 psig), the shut-off  valves 
close, preventing the administration of any other 
gases. Th e terms  fail-safe and  nitrous cut-off  were pre-
viously used for the nitrous oxide shut-off  valve. 
3
3
4
χ 1000
psi
5
6
0
1
2
 FIGURE 45  Bourdon pressure gauge. 
  1  Pressure unit conversions: 1 kiloPascal (kP) = kg/m · s 2 = 1000 
N/m 2 = 0.01 bar = 0.1013 atmospheres = 0.145 psig = 10.2 cm 
H 2 O = 7.5 mm Hg.
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
53 
 FIGURE 46  Cylinder inlet regulator. 
Spring applies
counter pressure
Diaphragm
Adjustment screw
Regulator
shell
High
pressure gas
going in
Diaphragm
Valve stem
Valve seat
Low pressure
gas going out
Full cylinder pressure
Partially full cylinder pressure
54 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Most modern (particularly Datex-Ohmeda) 
machines use a proportioning safety device instead 
of a threshold shut-off  valve. Th ese devices, called 
either an oxygen failure protection device (Dräger) 
or a balance regulator (Datex-Ohmeda), propor-
tionately reduce the pressure of nitrous oxide and 
other gases except for air ( Figures 4–7 and  4–8 ). 
Th ey completely shut off  nitrous oxide and other 
gas fl ow only below a set minimum oxygen pressure 
(eg, 0.5 psig for nitrous oxide and 10 psig for other 
gases). 
 All machines also have an oxygen supply low-
pressure sensor that activates alarm sounds when 
inlet gas pressure drops below a threshold value (usu-
ally 20–30 psig). It must be emphasized that these 
safety devices do  not protect against other possible 
causes of hypoxic accidents (eg, gas line misconnec-
tions), in which threshold pressure may be main-
tained by gases containing inadequate or no oxygen. 
 Flow Valves & Meters 
 Once the pressure has been reduced to a safe level, 
each gas must pass through fl ow control valves and 
is measured by fl owmeters before mixing with other 
gases, entering the active vaporizer, and exiting the 
machine’s common gas outlet.  Gas lines proximal 
to fl ow valves are considered to be in the high- 
pressure circuit whereas those between the fl ow 
valves and the common gas outlet are considered 
part of the low-pressure circuit of the machine. 
When the knob of the fl ow control valve is turned 
counterclockwise, a needle valve is disengaged 
from its seat, allowing gas to fl ow through the valve 
( Figure 4–9 ). Stops in the full-off  and full-on posi-
tions prevent valve damage. Touch- and color-coded 
control knobs make it more diffi  cult to turn the wrong 
gas off  or on. As a safety feature the oxygen knob is 
usually fl uted, larger, and protrudes farther than the 
other knobs. Th e oxygen fl owmeter is positioned 
furthest to the right, downstream to the other gases; 
this arrangement helps to prevent hypoxia if there is 
leakage from a fl owmeter positioned upstream. 
 Flow control knobs control gas entry into 
the fl owmeters by adjustment via a needle valve. 
Flowmeters on anesthesia machines are classifi ed as 
either constant-pressure variable-orifi ce (rotameter) 
or electronic. In constant-pressure variable-orifi ce 
fl owmeters, an indicator ball, bobbin, or fl oat is sup-
ported by the fl ow of gas through a tube (Th orpe 
 FIGURE 47  Dräger oxygen failure protection device (OFPD).  A: Open.  B: Closed. 
A
B
Oxygen
(pressurized)
Inlet from
pipline
Inlet from
pipline
Inlet
from
cylinder
Outlet to
flowmeter
bank
Outlet to
flowmeter
bank
Inlet
from
cylinder
Valve open
Oxygen
(depressurized)
Valve closed
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
55 
Nitrous oxide
from main
output
manifold
Nitrous oxide of
balance regulator
Balance regulator
Diaphragm
Pilot oxygen into
balance regulator
 FIGURE 48  Datex-Ohmeda balance regulator. 
tube) whose bore (orifi ce) is tapered. Near the bot-
tom of the tube, where the diameter is small, a low 
fl ow of gas will create suffi  cient pressure under the 
fl oat to raise it in the tube. As the fl oat rises, the 
(variable) orifi ce of the tube widens, allowing more 
gas to pass around the fl oat. Th e fl oat will stop rising 
when its weight is just supported by the diff erence in 
pressure above and below it. If fl ow is increased, the 
pressure under the fl oat increases, raising it higher 
in the tube until the pressure drop again just sup-
ports the fl oat’s weight. Th is pressure drop is con-
stant regardless of the fl ow rate or the position in 
the tube and depends on the fl oat weight and tube 
cross-sectional area. 
 Flowmeters are calibrated for specifi c gases, as 
the fl ow rate across a constriction depends on the 
gas’s viscosity at low laminar fl ows (Poiseuille’s law) 
and its density at high turbulent fl ows. To minimize 
the eff ect of friction between them and the tube’s 
wall, fl oats are designed to rotate constantly, which 
keeps them centered in the tube. Coating the tube’s 
interior with a conductive substance grounds the 
system and reduces the eff ect of static electricity. 
Some fl owmeters have two glass tubes, one for low 
fl ows and another for high fl ows ( Figure 4–10A ); 
the two tubes are in series and are still controlled 
by one valve. A dual taper design can allow a sin-
gle fl owmeter to read both high and low fl ows 
( Figure 4–10B ).  Causes of fl owmeter malfunction 
include debris in the fl ow tube, vertical tube mis-
alignment, and sticking or concealment of a fl oat 
at the top of a tube. 
56 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 FIGURE 49  Gas ﬂ ow-control needle valve (Datex-Ohmeda).  A: Oxygen.  B: Nitrous oxide. Note the secondary pressure 
regulator in the oxygen circuit and the balance regulator in the nitrous oxide circuit. 
A
B
Flowmeter
modules
Flowmeter
modules
System switch
Piloting pressure to
balance regulators
Nitrous oxygen
knob
Needle
valve
Needle valve
Flow
tube
Flow
tube
Float
Float
Float
Flow
tube
Flow
tube
Float
Main
output
manifold
Secondary regulator
Balance regulator
Oxygen
knob
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
57 
 FIGURE 410  Constant-pressure variable oriﬁ ce ﬂ owmeters (Thorpe type).  A: Two tube design.  B: Dual taper design. 
A
B
Coarse
flowtube
Fine
flowtube
Millimeters/minute
Liters/minute
Liters/minute
1
1
2
3
4
3
2
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.4
0.6
0.8
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
 Should a leak develop within or downstream 
from an oxygen fl owmeter, a hypoxic gas mixture 
can be delivered to the patient ( Figure 4–11 ). To 
reduce this risk, oxygen fl owmeters are  always posi-
tioned downstream to all other fl owmeters (nearest 
to the vaporizer). 
 Some anesthesia machines have electronic fl ow 
control and measurement ( Figure 4–12 ). In such 
instances, a back-up conventional (Th orpe) auxil-
iary oxygen fl owmeter is provided. Other models 
have conventional fl owmeters but electronic mea-
surement of gas fl ow along with Th orpe tubes and 
 FIGURE 411  Sequence of ﬂ owmeters in a three-gas machine.  A: An unsafe sequence.  B: Typical Datex Ohmeda 
sequence.  C: Typical Dräger sequence. Note that regardless of sequence a leak in the oxygen tube or further downstream 
can result in delivery of a hypoxic mixture. 
Oxygen
Incorrect sequence
Air
Nitrous oxide
Datex-Ohmeda sequence
Oxygen
Air
Nitrous oxide
Dräger sequence
Oxygen
Air
Nitrous oxide
A
B
C
58 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
digital or digital/graphic displays ( Figure 4–13 ). Th e 
amount of pressure drop caused by a fl ow restrictor 
is the basis for measurement of gas fl ow rate in these 
systems. In these machines oxygen, nitrous oxide, 
and air each have a separate electronic fl ow mea-
surement device in the fl ow control section before 
they are mixed together. Electronic fl owmeters are 
essential components in workstations if gas fl ow rate 
data will be acquired automatically by computerized 
anesthesia recording systems. 
 A. Minimum Oxygen Flow 
 Th e oxygen fl ow valves are usually designed to deliver 
a minimum fl ow of 150 mL/min when the anesthe-
sia machine is turned on. One method involves the 
use of a minimum fl ow resistor ( Figure 4–14 ). Th is 
safety feature helps ensure that some oxygen enters 
the breathing circuit even if the operator forgets 
to turn on the oxygen fl ow. Some machines are 
designed to deliver minimum fl ow or low-fl ow anes-
thesia (<1 L/min) and have minimum oxygen fl ows 
as low as 50 mL/min. 
 B. Oxygen/Nitrous Oxide Ratio Controller 
 Another safety feature of anesthesia machines 
is a linkage of the nitrous oxide gas fl ow to the 
oxygen gas fl ow; this arrangement helps ensure a 
minimum oxygen concentration of 25%. Th e oxy-
gen/nitrous oxide ratio controller links the two 
fl ow valves either pneumatically or mechanically. 
To maintain the minimum oxygen concentration, 
the system (Link-25) in Datex-Ohmeda machines 
increases the fl ow of oxygen, whereas the oxy-
gen ratio monitor controller (ORMC) in Dräger 
machines reduces the concentration of nitrous 
oxide. It should be noted that this safety device does 
4
 FIGURE 412  Datex-Ohmeda S/5 Avance with electronic ﬂ ow control and measurement. Note the presence of only a 
single alternate ﬂ owmeter for oxygen to be used in a power failure. 
Vaporizer
Alternate O2
control
System
switch
Integrated 
suction
Anesthesia
system display
Auxiliary O2
flow control
Breathing
system
O2 flush
button
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
59 
 FIGURE 413  Graphic and digital 
ﬂ owmeter display of Datex-Ohmeda 
S/5 ADU. 
0.50
0.95   
0.77   
10:02  
35
25
35
Fl
ET
exp
Pplat
exp
insp
sec
I-E  4.2
3.0
2.0
1.0
5
5
15
30
0
0
3.0
2.0
1.0
5
MV I/min
I/min
Ttl. flow
I/min
I/min
/min
ml
I/min
Insp. Pause
Resp. Rate
I:E Times
I:E Ratio
Set PEEP
cmH2O 
Minute Volume
Tidal Volume
Inerfaced:
Pcirc
CO2
H
L
cmH2O
Ppeak
Peep
ET
FI
TV ml
AA%
!
N2O%
Calc. N2O
O2%
5%
0%
%
%
%
% in fresh gas
%
32
420
Volume
Control
OFF
500
5.0
0.0
8
Isoflurane
N2O
O2
Calc. O2
5.0
13
64
64
61
1.4
1:2.0
2.0
4.0
10
1.5
1.2
3.4
V
 
0
 
I
E
T
G
a
s
C
 
O
 
2
P
c
i
r
c
F
I
G
a
s
 FIGURE 414  A bypass tube with 
minimum ﬂ ow resistor upstream before 
the oxygen ﬂ ow control valve ensures 
minimum oxygen ﬂ ow even when the 
needle valve is turned oﬀ . A, B, resistors. 
Oxygen flow
control knob
50 psi
A
A
B
Minimum
oxygen flow
resistor
ORM
ORMC
60 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
not aff ect the fl ow of a third gas (eg, air, helium, or 
carbon dioxide). 
 Vaporizers 
 Volatile anesthetics (eg, halothane, isofl urane, des-
fl urane, sevofl urane) must be vaporized before being 
delivered to the patient. Vaporizers have concen-
tration-calibrated dials that precisely add volatile 
anesthetic agents to the combined gas fl ow from all 
fl owmeters. Th ey must be located between the fl ow-
meters and the common gas outlet. Moreover, unless 
the machine accepts only one vaporizer at a time, all 
anesthesia machines should have an interlocking or 
exclusion device that prevents the concurrent use of 
more than one vaporizer. 
 A. Physics of Vaporization 
 At temperatures encountered in the operating room, 
the molecules of a volatile anesthetic in a closed con-
tainer are distributed between the liquid and gaseous 
phases. Th e gas molecules bombard the walls of the 
container, creating the saturated vapor pressure of 
that agent. Vapor pressure depends on the character-
istics of the volatile agent and the temperature. Th e 
greater the temperature, the greater the tendency for 
Temperature °C
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Vapor pressure mm Hg
Desflura
ne
Isoflur
an
e
Sevo
flur
a
n
e
Enf
lu
ra
n
e
Halot
ha
n
e
 FIGURE 415  The vapor pressure of anesthetic gases. 
the liquid molecules to escape into the gaseous phase 
and the greater the vapor pressure ( Figure 4–15 ). 
Vaporization requires energy (the latent heat of 
vaporization), which results in a loss of heat from the 
liquid. As vaporization proceeds, temperature of the 
remaining liquid anesthetic drops and vapor pres-
sure decreases unless heat is readily available to enter 
the system. Vaporizers contain a chamber in which a 
carrier gas becomes saturated with the volatile agent. 
 A liquid’s boiling point is the temperature at 
which its vapor pressure is equal to the atmospheric 
pressure. As the atmospheric pressure decreases (as 
in higher altitudes), the boiling point also decreases. 
Anesthetic agents with low boiling points are more 
susceptible to variations in barometric pressure than 
agents with higher boiling points. Among the com-
monly used agents, desfl urane has the lowest boiling 
point (22.8°C at 760 mm Hg). 
 B. Copper Kettle 
 Th e copper kettle vaporizer is no longer used in clini-
cal anesthesia; however, understanding how it works 
provides invaluable insight into the delivery of vola-
tile anesthetics ( Figure 4–16 ). It is classifi ed as a 
measured-fl ow vaporizer (or fl owmeter- controlled 
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
61
 FIGURE 416  Schematic of a copper kettle vaporizer. 
Note that 50 mL/min of halothane vapor is added for each 
100 mL/min oxygen ﬂ ow that passes through the vaporizer. 
Oxygen
and
nitrous
oxide
Oxygen
Halothane
150
100 mL
5000 mL
1%
halothane
to patient
4850 mL
increase in concentration if total gas fl ow into the 
breathing circuit is 5 L/min. Th erefore when total 
fl ow is fi xed, fl ow through the vaporizer determines 
the ultimate concentration of anesthetic. Isofl urane 
has an almost identical vapor pressure, so the same 
relationship between copper kettle fl ow, total gas 
fl ow, and anesthetic concentration exists. However, 
if total gas fl ow changes without an adjustment in 
copper kettle fl ow (eg, exhaustion of a nitrous oxide 
cylinder), the delivered volatile anesthetic concen-
tration rises rapidly to potentially dangerous levels. 
 C. Modern Conventional Vaporizers 
 All modern vaporizers are agent specifi c and 
temperature corrected, capable of deliver-
ing a constant concentration of agent regardless of 
temperature changes or fl ow through the vaporizer. 
Turning a single calibrated control knob counter-
clockwise to the desired percentage diverts an 
appropriate small fraction of the total gas fl ow into 
the carrier gas, which fl ows over the liquid anes-
thetic in a vaporizing chamber, leaving the balance 
to exit the vaporizer unchanged ( Figure 4–17 ). 
Because some of the entering gas is never exposed to 
anesthetic liquid, this type of agent-specifi c vapor-
izer is also known as a variable-bypass vaporizer. 
 Temperature compensation is achieved by 
a strip composed of two diff erent metals welded 
together. Th e metal strips expand and contract dif-
ferently in response to temperature changes. When 
the temperature decreases, diff erential contraction 
causes the strip to bend allowing more gas to pass 
through the vaporizer. Such bimetallic strips are 
also used in home thermostats. As the temperature 
rises diff erential expansion causes the strip to bend 
the other way restricting gas fl ow into the vaporizer. 
Altering total fresh gas fl ow rates within a wide range 
does not signifi cantly aff ect anesthetic concentration 
because the same proportion of gas is exposed to the 
liquid. However, the real output of an agent would 
be lower than the dial setting at extremely high fl ow 
(>15 L/min); the converse is true when the fl ow rate 
is less than 250 mL/min. Changing the gas composi-
tion from 100% oxygen to 70% nitrous oxide may 
transiently decrease volatile anesthetic concentra-
tion due to the greater solubility of nitrous oxide in 
volatile agents. 
5
vaporizer). In a copper kettle, the amount of carrier 
gas bubbled through the volatile anesthetic is con-
trolled by a dedicated fl owmeter. Th is valve is turned 
off  when the vaporizer circuit is not in use. Copper is 
used as the construction metal because its relatively 
high specifi c heat (the quantity of heat required to 
raise the temperature of 1 g of substance by 1°C) and 
high thermal conductivity (the speed of heat con-
ductance through a substance) enhance the vapor-
izer’s ability to maintain a constant temperature. All 
the gas entering the vaporizer passes through the 
anesthetic liquid and becomes saturated with vapor. 
One milliliter of liquid anesthetic is the equivalent of 
approximately 200 mL of anesthetic vapor. Because 
the vapor pressure of volatile anesthetics is greater 
than the partial pressure required for anesthesia, 
the saturated gas leaving a copper kettle has to be 
diluted before it reaches the patient. 
 For example, the vapor pressure of halothane is 
243 mm Hg at 20°C, so the concentration of halo-
thane exiting a copper kettle at 1 atmosphere would 
be 243/760, or 32%. If 100 mL of oxygen enters 
the kettle, roughly 150 mL of gas exits (the initial 
100 mL of oxygen plus 50 mL of saturated halo-
thane vapor), one-third of which would be saturated 
halothane vapor. To deliver a 1% concentration of 
halothane (MAC 0.75%), the 50  mL of halothane 
vapor and 100 mL of carrier gas that left  the copper 
kettle have to be diluted within a total of 5000 mL of 
fresh gas fl ow. Th us, every 100 mL of oxygen passing 
through a halothane vaporizer translates into a 1% 
62 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
B
Concentration
dial
Bypass path
Carrier gas
Vaporizer
manifold
Wick
Vaporizer
chamber
Bi-metallic strip
Sump
Mixed gas to
common gas
manifold
Warmer temperatures
Cooler temperatures
 FIGURE 417  Schematic of agent-speciﬁ c variable-bypass vaporizers.  A: Dräger Vapor 19.n. B: Datex-Ohmeda Tec 7. 
A
Concentration
dial
Inlet port
Wick
Pressure
compensator
Vaporizing
chamber
Internal
on/off switch
Temperature-
compensating
bypass
Concentrating
cone
Anesthetic
agent
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
63 
 Given that these vaporizers are agent specifi c, 
fi lling them with the incorrect anesthetic should 
be avoided. For example, unintentionally fi lling a 
sevofl urane-specifi c vaporizer with halothane could 
lead to an anesthetic overdose. First, halothane’s 
higher vapor pressure (243 mm Hg versus 157 mm 
Hg) will cause a 40% greater amount of anesthetic 
vapor to be released. Second, halothane is more than 
twice as potent as sevofl urane (MAC 0.75 versus. 
2.0). Conversely, fi lling a halothane vaporizer with 
sevofl urane will cause an anesthetic underdosage. 
Modern vaporizers off er agent-specifi c keyed fi lling 
ports to prevent fi lling with an incorrect agent. 
 Excessive tilting of older vaporizers (Tec 4, Tec 
5, and Vapor 19.n) during transport may fl ood the 
bypass area and lead to dangerously high anesthetic 
concentrations. In the event of tilting and spill-
age, high fl ow of oxygen with the vaporizer turned 
off  should be used to vaporize and fl ush the liquid 
anesthetic from the bypass area. Fluctuations in 
pressure from positive-pressure ventilation in older 
anesthesia machines may cause a transient reversal 
of fl ow through the vaporizer, unpredictably chang-
ing agent delivery. Th is “pumping eff ect” is more 
pronounced with low gas fl ows. A one-way check 
valve between the vaporizers and the oxygen fl ush 
valve (Datex-Ohmeda) together with some design 
modifi cations in newer units limit the occurrence 
of some of these problems.  Variable bypass vapor-
izers compensate for changes in ambient pressures 
(ie, altitude changes maintaining relative anesthetic 
gas partial pressure). 
 D. Electronic Vaporizers 
 Electronically controlled vaporizers must be utilized 
for desfl urane and are used for all volatile anesthet-
ics in some sophisticated anesthesia machines. 
 1. Desfl urane vaporizer —Desfl urane’s vapor pres-
sure is so high that at sea level it almost boils at 
room temperature ( Figure 4–15 ).  Th is high vola-
tility, coupled with a potency only one-fi ft h that 
of other volatile agents, presents unique delivery 
problems. First, the vaporization required for gen-
eral anesthesia produces a cooling eff ect that would 
overwhelm the ability of conventional vaporizers to 
maintain a constant temperature. Second, because it 
vaporizes so extensively, a tremendously high fresh 
gas fl ow would be necessary to dilute the carrier gas 
to clinically relevant concentrations. Th ese problems 
have been addressed by the development of special 
desfl urane vaporizers. A reservoir containing desfl u-
rane (desfl urane sump) is electrically heated to 39°C 
(signifi cantly higher than its boiling point) creating 
a vapor pressure of 2 atmospheres. Unlike a variable-
bypass vaporizer, no fresh gas fl ows through the des-
fl urane sump. Rather, pure desfl urane vapor joins the 
fresh gas mixture before exiting the vaporizer. Th e 
amount of desfl urane vapor released from the sump 
depends on the concentration selected by turning 
the control dial and the fresh gas fl ow rate. Although 
the Tec 6 Plus maintains a constant desfl urane con-
centration over a wide range of fresh gas fl ow rates, 
it cannot automatically compensate for changes in 
elevation. Decreased ambient pressure (eg, high 
 elevation) does not aff ect the concentration of agent 
delivered, but decreases the partial pressure of the 
agent. Th us, at high elevations, the anesthesiologist 
must manually increase the concentration control. 
 2. Aladin cassette vaporizer —Th is vaporizer is 
designed for use with the Datex-Ohmeda S/5 ADU 
and Aisys machines. Gas fl ow from the fl ow con-
trol is divided into bypass fl ow and liquid chamber 
fl ow ( Figure 4–18 ). Th e latter is conducted into an 
agent-specifi c, color-coded, cassette (Aladin cassette) 
in which the volatile anesthetic is vaporized. Th e 
machine accepts only one cassette at a time and rec-
ognizes the cassette through magnetic labeling. Th e 
cassette does not contain any bypass fl ow channels; 
therefore, unlike traditional vaporizers, liquid anes-
thetic cannot escape during handling and the cassette 
can be carried in any position. Aft er leaving the cas-
sette, the now anesthetic-saturated liquid chamber 
fl ow reunites with the bypass fl ow before exiting 
the fresh gas outlet. A fl ow restrictor valve near the 
bypass fl ow helps to adjust the amount of fresh gas 
that fl ows to the cassette. Adjusting the ratio between 
the bypass fl ow and liquid chamber fl ow changes the 
concentration of volatile anesthetic agent delivered to 
the patient. In practice, the clinician changes the con-
centration by turning the agent wheel, which oper-
ates a digital potentiometer. Soft ware sets the desired 
fresh gas agent concentration according to the num-
ber of output pulses from the agent wheel. Sensors 
in the cassette measure pressure and temperature, 
thus determining agent concentration in the gas 
leaving the cassette. Correct liquid chamber fl ow is 
64 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 FIGURE 418  Schematic of the electronic Datex-Ohmeda Aladin vaporizer. 
1
O2
O2
AA
N2O
N2O
2
6
3
4
5
CPU
(1) Bypass flow
(2) Flow through the cassette
(3) Cassette pressure
(4) Cassette temperature
(5) Agent setting
(6) Control valve
Measurement part
Agent control
P
P
P
T
calculated based on desired fresh gas concentration 
and determined cassette gas concentration. 
 Common (Fresh) Gas Outlet 
 In contrast to the multiple gas inlets, the anesthesia 
machine has only one common gas outlet that sup-
plies gas to the breathing circuit. Th e term  fresh gas 
outlet is also oft en used because of its critical role 
in adding new gas of fi xed and known composi-
tion to the circle system. Unlike older models, some 
newer anesthesia machines measure and report 
common outlet gas fl ows (Datex-Ohmeda S/5 ADU 
and Narkomed 6400). An antidisconnect retaining 
device is used to prevent accidental detachment of 
the gas outlet hose that connects the machine to the 
breathing circuit. 
 Th e oxygen fl ush valve provides a high fl ow 
(35–75 L/min) of oxygen directly to the common gas 
outlet, bypassing the fl owmeters and vaporizers. It is 
used to rapidly refi ll or fl ush the breathing circuit, but 
because the oxygen may be supplied at a line pres-
sure of 45–55 psig, there is a real potential of lung 
barotrauma. For this reason, the fl ush valve must be 
used cautiously whenever a patient is connected to 
the breathing circuit. Moreover, inappropriate use 
of the fl ush valve (or a situation of stuck valve) may 
result in backfl ow of gases into the low-pressure cir-
cuit, causing dilution of inhaled anesthetic concen-
tration. Some machines use a second-stage regulator 
to drop the oxygen fl ush pressure to a lower level. 
A protective rim around the fl ush button limits the 
possibility of unintentional activation. Anesthesia 
machines (eg, Datex-Ohmeda Aestiva/5) may have 
an optional auxiliary common gas outlet that is acti-
vated with a dedicated switch. It is primarily used 
for performing the low-pressure circuit leak test (see 
Anesthesia Machine Checkout List). 
 THE BREATHING CIRCUIT 
 Th e breathing system most commonly used 
with anesthesia machines is the circle system 
( Figure 4–19 ); a Bain circuit is occasionally used. 
Th e components and use of the circle system were 
previously discussed. It is important to note that 
gas composition at the common gas outlet can be 
controlled precisely and rapidly by adjustments in 
fl owmeters and vaporizers. In contrast, gas com-
position, especially volatile anesthetic concentra-
tion, in the breathing circuit is signifi cantly aff ected 
by other factors, including anesthetic uptake in the 
patient’s lungs, minute ventilation, total fresh gas 
fl ow, volume of the breathing circuit, and the pres-
ence of gas leaks. Use of high gas fl ow rates during 
induction and emergence decreases the eff ects of 
such  variables and can diminish the magnitude of 
discrepancies between fresh gas outlet and circle 
system anesthetic concentrations. Measurement of 
inspired and expired anesthetic gas concentration 
also greatly facilitates anesthetic management. 
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
65 
 FIGURE 419  Diagram of a typical breathing circuit (Dräger Narkomed). Note gas ﬂ ow during ( A ) spontaneous 
inspiration, ( B ) manual inspiration (“bagging”), and ( C ) exhalation (spontaneous or bag ventilation). 
A
B
C
Patient
Patient
Patient
To ventilation
bellow
Inhalation
Bag
Bag
To
scavenger
To
scavenger
Fresh gas
Fresh gas
Exhalation
Inhalation
Bag
Fresh gas
66 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
A
To oxygen sensor
interface
Expiratory valve
with 22-mm
breathing hose
terminal
22-mm breathing
hose
Inspiratory valve
with 22-mm
breathing hose
terminal
Absorber
Absorber
mounting stud
O-ring
Swivel bag mount
with 22-mm
breathing bag
terminal
Y-piece
CO2 monitor
airway adapter
To volume sensor
19-mm scavenger
hose
APL valve with
19-mm scavenger
hose terminal
Manual/automatic
selector valve
with 22-mm hose
terminal (optional)
Fresh gas locking
device with 15-mm
female fitting
Fresh gas hose
Breathing bag
Absorber pole with
19-mm scavender
hose terminal
19-mm scavenger
hose
 FIGURE 420  Breathing circuit design.  A: Conventional external components. (continued)
 In most machines the common gas outlet is 
attached to the breathing circuit just past the exhala-
tion valve to prevent artifi cially high exhaled tidal 
volume measurements. When spirometry measure-
ments are made at the Y-connector, fresh gas fl ow can 
enter the circuit on the patient side of the inspiratory 
valve. Th e latter enhances CO 2 elimination and may 
help reduce desiccation of the CO 2 absorbent. 
 Newer 
anesthesia 
machines 
have 
inte-
grated internalized breathing circuit components 
( Figure 4–20 ). Th e advantages of these designs 
include reduced probability of breathing circuit mis-
connects, disconnects, kinks, and leaks. Th e smaller 
volume of compact machines can also help conserve 
gas fl ow and volatile anesthetics and allow faster 
changes in breathing circuit gas concentration. 
Internal heating of manifolds can reduce precipita-
tion of moisture. 
 Oxygen Analyzers 
 General anesthesia should not be administered with-
out an oxygen analyzer in the breathing circuit.  Th ree 
types of oxygen analyzers are available: polaro-
graphic (Clark electrode), galvanic (fuel cell), and 
paramagnetic. Th e fi rst two techniques utilize elec-
trochemical sensors that contain cathode and anode 
electrodes embedded in an electrolyte gel separated 
from the sample gas by an oxygen-permeable mem-
brane (usually Tefl on). As oxygen reacts with the 
electrodes, a current is generated that is proportional 
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
67 
B
Inspiratory
valve
Expiratory
valve
PEEP/MAX valve
connection port
Connector for
breathing bag
Inspiratory
port
Expiration
port
Carbon dioxide
absorber
APL bypass valve
connection port
Selection knob for
MAN and SPONT on
pressure-limiting valve
FIGURE 420 (continued)  B: Compact design that reduces external connections and circuit volume (Dräger Fabius GS). 
to the oxygen partial pressure in the sample gas. Th e 
galvanic and polarographic sensors diff er in the com-
position of their electrodes and electrolyte gels. Th e 
components of the galvanic cell are capable of pro-
viding enough chemical energy so that the reaction 
does not require an external power source. 
 Although the initial cost of paramagnetic sen-
sors is greater than that of electrochemical sensors, 
paramagnetic devices are self-calibrating and have 
no consumable parts. In addition, their response 
time is fast enough to diff erentiate between inspired 
and expired oxygen concentrations. 
 All oxygen analyzers should have a low-level 
alarm that is automatically activated by turning on 
the anesthesia machine. Th e sensor should be placed 
into the inspiratory or expiratory limb of the circle 
system’s breathing circuit—but  not into the fresh gas 
line. As a result of the patient’s oxygen consumption, 
the expiratory limb has a slightly lower oxygen par-
tial pressure than the inspiratory limb, particularly 
at low fresh gas fl ows. Th e increased humidity of 
expired gas does not signifi cantly aff ect most mod-
ern sensors. 
 Spirometers 
 Spirometers, also called respirometers, are used to 
measure exhaled tidal volume in the breathing cir-
cuit on all anesthesia machines, typically near the 
exhalation valve. Some anesthesia machines also 
measure the inspiratory tidal volume just past the 
inspiratory valve or the actual delivered and exhaled 
tidal volumes at the Y-connector that attaches to the 
patient’s airway. 
 A common method employs a rotating vane of 
low mass in the expiratory limb in front of the expi-
ratory valve of the circle system (vane anemometer 
or Wright respirometer,  Figure 4–21A ). 
 Th e fl ow of gas across vanes within the respi-
rometer causes their rotation, which is measured 
electronically, photoelectrically, or mechanically. 
In another variation using this turbine principle, 
the volumeter or displacement meter is designed to 
measure the movement of discrete quantities of gas 
over time ( Figure 4–21B ). 
 Changes in exhaled tidal volumes usually rep-
resent changes in ventilator settings, but can also 
be due to circuit leaks, disconnections, or ventilator 
malfunction. Th ese spirometers are prone to errors 
caused by inertia, friction, and water condensa-
tion. For example, Wright respirometers under-
read at low fl ow rates and over-read at high fl ow 
rates. Furthermore, the measurement of exhaled 
tidal volumes at this location in the expiratory limb 
includes gas that had been lost to the circuit (and 
not delivered to the patient; discussed below). Th e 
diff erence between the volume of gas delivered to 
the circuit and the volume of gas actually reach-
ing the patient becomes very signifi cant with long 
68 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
compliant breathing tubes, rapid respiratory rates, 
and high airway pressures. Th ese problems are at 
least partially overcome by measuring the tidal vol-
ume at the Y-connector to the patient’s airway. 
 A hot-wire anemometer utilizes a fi ne platinum 
wire, electrically heated at a constant temperature, 
inside the gas fl ow. Th e cooling eff ect of increasing 
gas fl ow on the wire electrode causes a change in 
 electrical resistance. In a constant-resistance ane-
mometer, gas fl ow is determined from the current 
needed to maintain a constant wire temperature 
(and resistance). Disadvantages include an inability 
to detect reverse fl ow, less accuracy at higher fl ow 
rates, and the possibility that the heated wire may be 
a potential ignition source for fi re in the breathing 
manifold. 
 Ultrasonic fl ow sensors rely on discontinui-
ties in gas fl ow generated by turbulent eddies in 
the fl ow stream. Upstream and downstream ultra-
sonic beams, generated from piezoelectric crystals, 
are transmitted at an angle to the gas stream. Th e 
Doppler frequency shift  in the beams is proportional 
to the fl ow velocities in the breathing circuit. Major 
advantages include the absence of moving parts and 
greater accuracy due to the device’s independence 
from gas density. 
 Machines with variable-orifi ce fl owmeters usu-
ally employ two sensors ( Figure 4–21C ). One mea-
sures fl ow at the inspiratory port of the breathing 
system and the other measures fl ow at the expiratory 
port. Th ese sensors use a change in internal diam-
eter to generate a pressure drop that is proportional 
to the fl ow through the sensor. Clear tubes con-
nect the sensors to diff erential pressure transduc-
ers inside the anesthesia machine (Datex-Ohmeda 
7900 SmartVent). Th e changes in gas fl ows during 
the inspiratory and expiratory phases help the ven-
tilator to adjust and provide a constant tidal volume. 
However, due to excessive condensation sensors can 
fail when used with heated humidifi ed circuits. 
 A pneumotachograph is a fi xed-orifi ce fl ow-
meter that can function as a spirometer. A parallel 
bundle of small-diameter tubes in chamber (Fleisch 
pneumotachograph) or mesh screen provides a slight 
resistance to airfl ow. Th e pressure drop across this 
resistance is sensed by a diff erential pressure trans-
ducer and is proportional to the fl ow rate. Integration 
of fl ow rate over time yields tidal volume. Moreover, 
analysis of pressure, volume, and time relationships 
can yield potentially valuable information about air-
way and lung mechanics. Modifi cations have been 
required to overcome inaccuracies due to water con-
densation and temperature changes. One modifi ca-
tion employs two pressure-sensing lines in a Pitot 
tube at the Y-connection ( Figure 4–21D ). Gas fl ow-
ing through the Pitot tube (fl ow sensor tube) creates 
a pressure diff erence between the fl ow sensor lines. 
Th is pressure diff erential is used to measure fl ow, 
fl ow direction, and airway pressure. Respiratory 
gases are continuously sampled to correct the fl ow 
reading for changes in density and viscosity. 
 Circuit Pressure 
 A pressure gauge or electronic sensor is always used 
to measure breathing-circuit pressure somewhere 
between the expiratory and inspiratory unidirec-
tional valves; the exact location depends on the 
model of anesthesia machine. Breathing-circuit 
pressure usually refl ects airway pressure if it is 
measured as close to the patient’s airway as possible. 
Th e most accurate measurements of both inspira-
tory and expiratory pressures can be obtained from 
the Y-connection (eg, D-lite and Pedi-lite  sensors). 
 A rise in airway pressure may signal worsen-
ing pulmonary compliance, an increase in 
tidal volume, or an obstruction in the breathing cir-
cuit, tracheal tube, or the patient’s airway. A drop in 
pressure may indicate an improvement in compli-
ance, a decrease in tidal volume, or a leak in the cir-
cuit. If circuit pressure is being measured at the CO 2 
 absorber, however, it will not always mirror the 
pressure in the patient’s airway. For example, clamp-
ing the expiratory limb of the breathing tubes dur-
ing exhalation will prevent the patient’s breath from 
exiting the lungs. Despite this buildup in airway 
pressure, a pressure gauge at the absorber will read 
zero because of the intervening one-way valve. 
 Some machines have incorporated auditory 
feedback for pressure changes during ventilator use. 
 Adjustable Pressure-Limiting Valve 
 Th e adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve, some-
times referred to as the pressure relief or pop-off 
valve, is usually fully open during spontaneous 
6
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
69 
B
Absorber
Volume
sensor
Exhaled patient gas
Expiratory valve
Spiromed sensor
Hall effect
transistor (B)
Hall effect
transistor (A)
Rotor
MIN
VOL
TID
VOL
RR
Display
Processor
Armature
Magnet (4x)
Interface panel
10
0.58
5.6
 FIGURE 421  Spirometer designs. 
 A: Vane anemometer (Datex-Ohmeda). 
B: Volumeter (Dräger). 
A
Cartridge with vanes
To absorber
exhalation port
From
breathing
circuit
Forward flow
Sensor clip
Light
emitting
diode A
Light
detector B
Light
emitting
diode B
Light
detector A
70 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
D
FIGURE 421 (continued)  C: Variable-oriﬁ ce 
ﬂ owmeter (Datex-Ohmeda).  D: Fixed oriﬁ ce ﬂ owmeter 
(Pitot tube). 
C
Gas flow
Flow sensor
lines
Flow sensor
tube
Transducer
diaphragm
Differential
pressure
transducer
Flow sensor
flap
Flow sensor
connector
Reverse flow
Higher flow
Lower flow
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
71 
ventilation but must be partially closed during 
manual or assisted bag ventilation. Th e APL valve 
oft en requires fi ne adjustments. If it is not closed suf-
fi ciently excessive loss of circuit volume due to leaks 
prevents manual ventilation. At the same time if it is 
closed too much or is fully closed a progressive rise 
in pressure could result in pulmonary barotrauma 
(eg, pneumothorax) or hemodynamic compromise, 
or both. As an added safety feature, the APL valves 
on modern machines act as true pressure-limiting 
devices that can never be completely closed; the 
upper limit is usually 70–80 cm H 2 O. 
 Humidiﬁ ers 
 Absolute humidity is defi ned as the weight of water 
vapor in 1 L of gas (ie, mg/L). Relative humid-
ity is the ratio of the actual mass of water present 
in a volume of gas to the maximum amount of 
water possible at a particular temperature. At 37°C 
and 100% relative humidity, absolute humidity is 
44 mg/L, whereas at room temperature (21°C and 
100% humidity) it is 18 mg/L. Inhaled gases in the 
operating room are normally administered at room 
temperature with little or no humidifi cation. Gases 
must therefore be warmed to body temperature and 
saturated with water by the upper respiratory tract. 
Tracheal intubation and high fresh gas fl ows bypass 
this normal humidifi cation system and expose the 
lower airways to dry (<10 mg H 2 O/L), room tem-
perature gases. 
 Prolonged humidifi cation of gases by the lower 
respiratory tract leads to dehydration of mucosa, 
altered ciliary function, and, if excessively pro-
longed, could potentially lead to inspissation of 
secretions, atelectasis, and even ventilation/per-
fusion mismatching, particularly in patients with 
underlying lung disease. Body heat is also lost as 
gases are warmed and even more importantly as 
water is vaporized to humidify the dry gases. Th e 
heat of vaporization for water is 560 cal/g of water 
vaporized. Fortunately, this heat loss accounts for 
about only 5–10% of total intraoperative heat loss, 
is not signifi cant for a short procedure (<1 h), and 
usually can easily be compensated for with a forced-
air warming blanket. Humidifi cation and heating of 
inspiratory gases may be most important for small 
pediatric patients and older patients with severe 
underlying lung pathology, eg, cystic fi brosis. 
 A. Passive Humidiﬁ ers 
 Humidifi ers added to the breathing circuit mini-
mize water and heat loss. Th e simplest designs 
are condenser humidifi ers or heat and moisture 
exchanger (HME) units ( Figure 4–22 ). Th ese pas-
sive devices do not add heat or vapor but rather 
contain a hygroscopic material that traps exhaled 
humidifi cation and heat, which is released upon 
subsequent inhalation. Depending on the design, 
they may substantially increase apparatus dead 
space (more than 60 mL 3 ), which can cause sig-
nifi cant rebreathing in pediatric patients. Th ey 
can also increase breathing-circuit resistance and 
the work of breathing during spontaneous respira-
tions. Excessive saturation of an HME with water 
or secretions can obstruct the breathing circuit. 
Some condenser humidifi ers also act as eff ective 
fi lters that may protect the breathing circuit and 
anesthesia machine from bacterial or viral cross-
contamination. Th is may be particularly important 
when ventilating patients with respiratory infec-
tions or compromised immune systems. 
 B. Active Humidiﬁ ers 
 Active humidifi ers are more eff ective than passive 
ones in preserving moisture and heat. Active humid-
ifi ers add water to gas by passing the gas over a water 
chamber (passover humidifi er) or through a satu-
rated wick (wick humidifi er), bubbling it through 
water (bubble-through humidifi er), or mixing it with 
vaporized water (vapor-phase humidifi er). Because 
increasing temperature increases the capacity of a gas 
to hold water vapor, heated humidifi ers with ther-
mostatically controlled elements are most eff ective. 
 Th e hazards of heated humidifi ers include ther-
mal lung injury (inhaled gas temperature should 
be monitored and should not exceed 41°C), noso-
comial infection, increased airway resistance from 
excess water condensation in the breathing cir-
cuit, interference with fl owmeter function, and an 
increased likelihood of circuit disconnection. Th ese 
humidifi ers are particularly valuable with children 
as they help prevent both hypothermia and the plug-
ging of small tracheal tubes by dried secretions. Of 
course, any design that increases airway dead space 
should be avoided in pediatric patients. Unlike pas-
sive humidifi ers, active humidifi ers do not fi lter 
respiratory gases. 
72 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 VENTILATORS 
 Ventilators are used extensively in the operating 
room (OR) and the intensive care unit (ICU). All 
modern anesthesia machines are equipped with a 
ventilator. Historically OR ventilators were simpler 
and more compact than their ICU counterparts. 
Th is distinction has become blurred due to advances 
in technology together with an increasing need for 
“ICU-type” ventilators as more critically ill patients 
come to the OR. Th e ventilators on some modern 
machines are just as sophisticated as those in the 
ICU and have almost the same capabilities. Aft er a 
general discussion of basic ventilator principles, this 
section reviews the use of ventilators in conjunction 
with anesthesia machines. 
 Overview 
 Ventilators generate gas fl ow by creating a pres-
sure gradient between the proximal airway and the 
alveoli. Older units relied on the generation of nega-
tive pressure around (and inside) the chest (eg, iron 
lungs), whereas modern ventilators generate posi-
tive pressure and gas fl ow in the upper airway. 
 Ventilator function is best described in rela-
tion to the four phases of the ventilatory cycle: 
inspiration, the transition from inspiration to 
expiration, expiration, and the transition from 
expiration to inspiration. Although several clas-
sifi cation schemes exist, the most common is 
based on inspiratory phase characteristics and the 
method of cycling from inspiration to expiration. 
 FIGURE 422  Heat and moisture exchanger (HME) functions as an “artiﬁ cial nose” that attaches between the tracheal 
tube and the right-angle connector of the breathing circuit. 
Gas
sample line
Patient circuit
Cool, dry, fresh gases
to and from the machine
HME unit
(heat and moisture exchange)
Warm, moist gases
to and from the patient
Patient
circuit
HME unit
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
73 
 FIGURE 423  Pressure, volume, 
and ﬂ ow proﬁ les of diﬀ erent types 
of ventilators.  A: Constant pressure. 
 B: Constant ﬂ ow.  C: Nonconstant 
generator. 
Time
A
B
C
Gas flow rate
Lung volume
Airway pressure  
Time
Time
Other classifi cation categories may include power 
source (eg, pneumatic-high pressure, pneumatic-
Venturi, or electric), design (single-circuit system, 
double-circuit system, rotary piston, linear piston), 
and control mechanisms (eg, electronic timer or 
microprocessor). 
 A. Inspiratory Phase 
 During inspiration, ventilators generate tidal 
volumes by producing gas fl ow along a pressure 
gradient. Th e machine generates either a con-
stant pressure (constant-pressure generators) or 
constant gas fl ow rate (constant-fl ow generators) 
during inspiration, regardless of changes in lung 
mechanics ( Figure 4–23 ). Nonconstant generators 
produce pressures or gas fl ow rates that vary dur-
ing the cycle but remain consistent from breath to 
breath. For instance, a ventilator that generates a 
fl ow pattern resembling a half cycle of a sine wave 
(eg, rotary piston ventilator) would be classifi ed as a 
nonconstant-fl ow generator. An increase in airway 
resistance or a decrease in lung compliance would 
increase peak inspiratory pressure but would not 
alter the fl ow rate generated by this type of ventila-
tor ( Figure 4–24 ). 
 B. Transition Phase 
from Inspiration to Expiration 
 Termination of the inspiratory phase can be trig-
gered by a preset limit of time (fi xed duration), a 
set inspiratory pressure that must be reached, or 
a predetermined tidal volume that must be deliv-
ered. Time-cycled ventilators allow tidal volume 
and peak inspiratory pressure to vary depend-
ing on lung compliance. Tidal volume is adjusted 
by setting inspiratory duration and inspiratory 
fl ow rate. Pressure-cycled ventilators will not 
cycle from the inspiratory phase to the expiratory 
phase until a preset pressure is reached. If a large 
circuit leak decreases peak pressures signifi cantly, 
74 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
a pressure-cycled ventilator may remain in the 
inspiratory phase indefi nitely. On the other hand, 
a small leak may not markedly decrease tidal vol-
ume, because cycling will be delayed until the 
pressure limit is met. Volume-cycled ventilators 
vary inspiratory duration and pressure to deliver a 
preset volume. In reality, modern ventilators over-
come the many shortcomings of classic ventilator 
designs by incorporating secondary cycling param-
eters or other limiting mechanisms. For example, 
time-cycled and volume-cycled ventilators usu-
ally incorporate a pressure-limiting feature that 
terminates inspiration when a preset, adjustable 
safety pressure limit is reached. Similarly a volume-
preset control that limits the excursion of the bel-
lows allows a time-cycled ventilator to function 
somewhat like a  volume-cycled ventilator, depend-
ing on the selected ventilator rate and inspiratory 
fl ow rate. 
 C. Expiratory Phase 
 Th e expiratory phase of ventilators normally reduces 
airway pressure to atmospheric levels or some preset 
value of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). 
Exhalation is therefore passive. Flow out of the lungs 
is determined primarily by airway resistance and 
lung compliance. Expired gases fi ll up the bellows; 
they are then relieved to the scavenging system. 
PEEP is usually created with an adjustable spring 
valve mechanism or pneumatic pressurization of the 
exhalation (spill) valve. 
 D. Transition Phase 
from Expiration to Inspiration 
 Transition into the next inspiratory phase may 
be based on a preset time interval or a change in 
pressure. Th e behavior of the ventilator during this 
phase together with the type of cycling from inspi-
ration to expiration determines ventilator mode. 
 During controlled ventilation, the most basic 
mode of all ventilators, the next breath always 
occurs aft er a preset time interval. Th us tidal vol-
ume and rate are fi xed in volume-controlled ven-
tilation, whereas peak inspiratory pressure is fi xed 
in pressure-controlled ventilation. Controlled 
ventilation modes are not designed for spontane-
ous breathing. In the volume-control mode, the 
ventilator adjusts gas fl ow rate and inspiratory 
time based on the set ventilatory rate and I:E ratio 
( Figure 4–25 A). In the pressure-control mode, 
inspiratory time is also based on the set ventilator 
rate and inspiratory-to-expiratory (I:E) ratio, but 
gas fl ow is adjusted to maintain a constant inspira-
tory pressure ( Figure 4–25B ). 
 FIGURE 424  Rotary piston ventilator. 
Expiratory phase
Inspiratory phase
Drive mechanism
Drive mechanism
Drive gas
Drive gas
To breathing
circuit
To breathing
circuit
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
75
 FIGURE 425  Ventilator controls 
(Datex-Ohmeda).  A: Volume control 
mode.  B: Pressure control mode. 
A
B
Pinspired
Pinspired
Mechanical ventilation
A
B
D
C
VT
AC power
Rate
10 / min
I:E
1:2
30 cmH2O
20 cmH2O
Vent On
Plimit
PEEP
VE/VT
VE/VT
OFFcmH2O
VT
Rate
10 / min
I:E
1:1
40 cmH2O
500 mL
Vent On
Plimit
PEEP
OFFcmH2O
Vol Alarms On
Sec
VE
VTE
L/min
/min
ml
OFF
OFF
OFF
30
20
10
0
3
6
9
12
15
40
18
OFF
OFF
Pmax
Pmean
ƒ
12
30
10
500
5.0
25
Circle
cmH2O
O2
Mode
Volume
Vol Alarms On
Sec
VE
VTE
L/min
/min
ml
OFF
1.4
OFF
30
20
10
0
3
6
9
12
15
40
18
OFF
OFF
Pmax
Pmean
ƒ
9
30
10
475
5.0
100
Circle
cmH2O
O2
Mode
Pressure
 In contrast, intermittent mandatory ventila-
tion (IMV) allows patients to breathe spontaneously 
between controlled breaths. Synchronized inter-
mittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) is a further 
refi nement that helps prevent “fi ghting the ventila-
tor” and “breath stacking”; whenever possible, the 
ventilator tries to time the mandatory mechanical 
breaths with the drops in airway pressure below the 
end-expiratory pressure that occur as the patient ini-
tiates a spontaneous breath. 
 Ventilator Circuit Design 
 Traditionally 
ventilators 
on 
anesthesia 
ma chines have a double-circuit system design 
and are pneumatically powered and electronically 
controlled ( Figure 4–26 ). Newer machines also 
incorporate microprocessor control that relies on 
sophisticated pressure and fl ow sensors. Th is feature 
allows multiple ventilatory modes, electronic PEEP, 
tidal volume modulation, and enhanced safety 
7
76 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
features. Some anesthesia machines have ventilators 
that use a single-circuit piston design ( Figure 4–24 ). 
 A. Double-Circuit System Ventilators 
 In a double-circuit system design, tidal volume 
is delivered from a bellows assembly that con-
sists of a bellows in a clear rigid plastic enclosure 
( Figure 4–26 ). A standing (ascending) bellows is 
preferred as it readily draws attention to a circuit 
disconnection by collapsing. Hanging (descending) 
bellows are rarely used and must not be weighted; 
older ventilators with weighted hanging bellows 
continue to fi ll by gravity despite a disconnection in 
the breathing circuit. 
 Th e bellows in a double-circuit design ventila-
tor takes the place of the breathing bag in the anes-
thesia circuit. Pressurized oxygen or air from the 
ventilator power outlet (45–50 psig) is routed to the 
space between the inside wall of the plastic enclosure 
and the outside wall of the bellows. Pressurization 
of the plastic enclosure compresses the pleated bel-
lows inside, forcing the gas inside into the breathing 
 FIGURE 426  Double-circuit pneumatic ventilator design.  A: Datex-Ohmeda.  B: Dräger. 
A
B
Inspiration
Spill valve
To EVAC
To patient circuit
Membrane
and metal lid
Ventilator
driving gas
To
scavenger
To
scavenger
Expiration
Spill valve
To EVAC
From patient circuit
Drive gas
Drive gas
Exhalation
From
patient
circuit
To
patient
circuit
Inhalation
Membrane
and metal lid
Ventilator
driving gas
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
77
circuit and patient. In contrast, during exhalation, 
the bellows ascend as pressure inside the plastic 
enclosure drops and the bellows fi ll up with the 
exhaled gas. A ventilator fl ow control valve regu-
lates drive gas fl ow into the pressurizing chamber. 
Th is valve is controlled by ventilator settings in the 
control box ( Figure 4–26 ). Ventilators with micro-
processors also utilize feedback from fl ow and pres-
sure sensors. If oxygen is used for pneumatic power 
it will be consumed at a rate at least equal to minute 
ventilation. Th us, if oxygen fresh gas fl ow is 2 L/min 
and a ventilator is delivering 6 L/min to the circuit, 
a total of at least 8 L/min of oxygen is being con-
sumed. Th is should be kept in mind if the hospi-
tal’s medical gas system fails and cylinder oxygen is 
required. Some anesthesia machines reduce oxygen 
consumption by incorporating a Venturi device that 
draws in room air to provide air/ oxygen pneumatic 
power. Newer machines may off er the option of 
using compressed air for pneumatic power. A leak 
in the ventilator bellows can transmit high gas pres-
sure to the patient’s airway, potentially resulting in 
pulmonary barotrauma.  Th is may be indicated by a 
higher than expected rise in inspired oxygen con-
centration (if oxygen is the sole  pressurizing gas).
Some machine  ventilators have a built-in drive 
gas  regulator that reduces the drive pressure (eg, to 
25 psig) for added safety. 
 Double-circuit design ventilators also incor-
porate a free breathing valve that allows outside air 
to enter the rigid drive chamber and the bellows to 
collapse if the patient generates negative pressure 
by taking spontaneous breaths during mechanical 
ventilation. 
 B. Piston Ventilators 
 In a piston design, the ventilator substitutes an elec-
trically driven piston for the bellows ( Figure 4–24 ); 
the ventilator requires either minimal or no pneu-
matic (oxygen) power.  Th e major advantage of 
a piston ventilator is its ability to deliver accu-
rate tidal volumes to patients with very poor lung 
compliance and to very small patients. During 
 volume-controlled ventilation the piston moves 
at a  constant velocity whereas during pressure- 
controlled ventilation the piston moves with 
8
decreasing velocity. As with the bellows, the piston 
fi lls with gas from the breathing circuit. To prevent 
generation of signifi cant negative pressure during the 
downstroke of the piston the circle system confi gura-
tion has to be modifi ed ( Figure 4–27 ). Th e ventilator 
must also incorporate a negative-pressure relief valve 
or be capable of terminating the piston’s downstroke 
if negative pressure is detected. Introduction of a 
negative-pressure relief valve to the breathing circuit 
may introduce the risk of air entrainment and the 
potential for  dilution of oxygen and volatile anes-
thetic concentrations if the patient breathes during 
mechanical ventilation and low fresh gas fl ows. 
 C. Spill Valve 
 Whenever a ventilator is used on an anesthesia 
machine, the circle system’s APL valve must be 
functionally removed or isolated from the circuit. 
A bag/ventilator switch typically accomplishes this. 
When the switch is turned to “bag” the ventilator 
is excluded and spontaneous/manual (bag) ventila-
tion is possible. When it is turned to “ventilator,” the 
breathing bag and the APL are excluded from the 
breathing circuit. Th e APL valve may be automati-
cally excluded in some newer anesthesia machines 
when the ventilator is turned on. Th e ventilator con-
tains its own pressure-relief (pop-off ) valve, called 
the spill valve, which is pneumatically closed during 
inspiration so that positive pressure can be gener-
ated ( Figure 4–26 ). During exhalation, the pressur-
izing gas is vented out and the ventilator spill valve 
is no longer closed. Th e ventilator bellows or piston 
refi ll during expiration; when the bellows is com-
pletely fi lled, the increase in circle system pressure 
causes the excess gas to be directed to the scavenging 
system through the spill valve. Sticking of this valve 
can result in abnormally elevated airway pressure 
during exhalation. 
 Pressure & Volume Monitoring 
Peak inspiratory pressure is the highest circuit 
pressure generated during an inspiratory cycle, 
and provides an indication of dynamic compli-
ance. Plateau pressure is the pressure measured 
during an inspiratory pause (a time of no gas 
fl ow), and mirrors static compliance. During 
78 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
Ventilator
E
E
*
E
P
O2
Fresh gas
Absorber
APL bypass
Setting
Pmax/PEEP
APL valve
Scavenging
Bag
Fresh gas
decoupling
 FIGURE 427  Modiﬁ ed circle system for a piston ventilator (Dräger Fabius GS). 
normal ventilation of a patient without lung dis-
ease, peak inspiratory pressure is equal to or only 
slightly greater than plateau pressure. An increase in 
both peak inspiratory pressure and plateau pressure 
implies an increase in tidal volume or a decrease in 
pulmonary compliance. An increase in peak inspira-
tory pressure without any change in plateau pressure 
signals an increase in airway resistance or inspira-
tory gas fl ow rate ( Table 4–3 ). Th us, the shape of the 
breathing-circuit pressure waveform can provide 
important airway information. Many anesthesia 
machines graphically display breathing-circuit pres-
sure ( Figure 4–28 ). Airway secretions or kinking of 
the tracheal tube can be easily ruled out with the use 
of a suction catheter. Flexible fi beroptic bronchos-
copy will usually provide a defi nitive diagnosis. 
 Ventilator Alarms 
 Alarms are an integral part of all modern anesthe-
sia ventilators.  Whenever a ventilator is used 
“disconnect alarms” must be passively acti-
vated. Anesthesia workstations should have at least 
9
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
79
 TABLE 43 Causes of increased peak 
inspiratory pressure (PIP), with or without an 
increased plateau pressure (PP). 
 Increased PIP and PP 
 Increased tidal volume 
  Decreased pulmonary compliance
   Pulmonary edema 
   Trendelenburg position 
   Pleural effusion 
   Ascites 
   Abdominal packing 
   Peritoneal gas insufflation 
   Tension pneumothorax 
   Endobronchial intubation 
 Increased PIP and Unchanged PP 
 Increased inspiratory gas flow rate 
  Increased airway resistance
   Kinked endotracheal tube 
   Bronchospasm 
   Secretions 
   Foreign body aspiration 
   Airway compression 
   Endotracheal tube cuff herniation 
three disconnect alarms: low peak inspiratory pres-
sure, low exhaled tidal volume, and low exhaled car-
bon dioxide. Th e fi rst is always built into the 
ventilator whereas the latter two may be in separate 
modules. A small leak or partial breathing-circuit 
disconnection may be detected by subtle decreases 
in peak inspiratory pressure, exhaled volume, or 
end-tidal carbon dioxide before alarm thresholds 
are reached. Other built-in ventilator alarms include 
high peak inspiratory pressure, high PEEP, sustained 
high airway pressure, negative pressure, and low 
oxygen-supply pressure. Most modern anesthesia 
ventilators also have integrated spirometers and 
oxygen analyzers that provide additional alarms. 
 Problems Associated 
with Anesthesia Ventilators 
 A. Ventilator–Fresh Gas Flow Coupling 
 From the previous discussion, it is important 
to appreciate that because the ventilator’s spill 
valve is closed during inspiration, fresh gas fl ow from 
the machine’s common gas outlet normally contrib-
utes to the tidal volume delivered to the patient. For 
example, if the fresh gas fl ow is 6 L/min, the I:E ratio 
10
is 1:2, and the respiratory rate is 10 breaths/min, 
each tidal volume will include an extra 200 mL in 
addition to the ventilator’s output: 
(6000 mL/min) (33%) 
10 breaths/min
≈ 200 mL/breath
 Th us, increasing fresh gas fl ow increases tidal 
volume, minute ventilation, and peak inspiratory 
pressure. To avoid problems with ventilator–fresh 
gas fl ow coupling, airway pressure and exhaled tidal 
volume must be monitored closely and excessive 
fresh gas fl ows must be avoided. 
 B. Excessive Positive Pressure 
 Intermittent or sustained high inspiratory pressures 
(>30 mm Hg) during positive-pressure ventilation 
increase the risk of pulmonary barotrauma (eg, 
pneumothorax) or hemodynamic compromise, or 
both, during anesthesia. Excessively high pressures 
may arise from incorrect settings on the ventilator, 
ventilator malfunction, fresh gas fl ow coupling 
(above), or activation of the oxygen fl ush during the 
inspiratory phase of the ventilator.  Use of the 
oxygen fl ush valve during the inspiratory cycle 
of a ventilator  must be avoided because the ventilator 
spill valve will be closed and the APL valve is 
excluded; the surge of oxygen (600–1200 mL/s) and 
circuit pressure will be transferred to the patient’s 
lungs. 
 In addition to a high-pressure alarm, all venti-
lators have a built-in automatic or APL valve. Th e 
mechanism of pressure limiting may be as simple as 
a threshold valve that opens at a certain pressure or 
electronic sensing that abruptly terminates the ven-
tilator inspiratory phase. 
 C. Tidal Volume Discrepancies 
 Large discrepancies between the set and actual 
tidal volume that the patient receives are oft en 
observed in the operating room during volume con-
trol ventilation. Causes include breathing-circuit 
compliance, gas compression, ventilator–fresh gas 
fl ow coupling (above), and leaks in the anesthe-
sia machine, the breathing circuit, or the patient’s 
airway. 
 Th e compliance for standard adult breath-
ing circuits is about 5 mL/cm H 2 O. Th us, if peak 
11
12
80 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 FIGURE 428  Airway pressures (Paw) can be 
diagrammatically presented as a function of time.  A: In 
normal persons, the peak inspiratory pressure is equal to 
or slightly greater than the plateau pressure.  B: An increase 
in peak inspiratory pressure and plateau pressure (the 
diﬀ erence between the two remains almost constant) 
can be due to an increase in tidal volume or a decrease in 
pulmonary compliance.  C: An increase in peak inspiratory 
pressure with little change in plateau pressure signals an 
increase in inspiratory ﬂ ow rate or an increase in airway 
resistance. 
Expiration
Paw (cm H2O)
Peak inspiratory
pressure
Plateau pressure
Time (secs)
Time (secs)
Time (secs)
B
A
C
Inspiration
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Paw (cm H2O)
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Paw (cm H2O)
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
81
 WASTEGAS SCAVENGERS 
 Waste-gas scavengers dispose of gases that 
have been vented from the breathing cir-
cuit by the APL valve and ventilator spill valve. 
Pollution of the operating room environment with 
anesthetic gases may pose a health hazard to sur-
gical personnel. Although it is diffi  cult to defi ne 
safe levels of exposure, the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recom-
mends limiting the room concentration of nitrous 
oxide to 25 ppm and halogenated agents to 2 ppm 
(0.5 ppm if nitrous oxide is also being used) in 
time-integrated samples. Reduction to these trace 
levels is possible only with properly functioning 
waste-gas scavenging systems. 
 To avoid the buildup of pressure, excess gas 
volume is vented through the APL valve in the 
breathing circuit and the ventilator spill valve. Both 
valves should be connected to hoses (transfer tub-
ing) leading to the scavenging interface, which may 
be inside the machine or an external attachment 
( Figure 4–29 ). Th e pressure immediately down-
stream to the interface should be kept between 0.5 
and +3.5 cm H 2 O during normal operating condi-
tions. Th e scavenging interface may be described as 
either open or closed. 
 An open interface is open to the outside 
atmosphere and usually requires no pressure relief 
valves. In contrast, a closed interface is closed to 
the outside atmosphere and requires negative- 
and positive-pressure relief valves that protect the 
patient from the negative pressure of the vacuum 
system and positive pressure from an obstruction 
in the disposal tubing, respectively. Th e outlet of 
the scavenging system may be a direct line to the 
outside via a ventilation duct beyond any point 
of recirculation (passive scavenging) or a con-
nection to the hospital’s vacuum system (active 
scavenging). A chamber or reservoir bag accepts 
waste-gas overfl ow when the capacity of the vac-
uum is exceeded. Th e vacuum control valve on 
an active system should be adjusted to allow the 
evacuation of 10–15 L of waste gas per minute. 
Th is rate is adequate for periods of high fresh gas 
fl ow (ie, induction and emergence) yet minimizes 
the risk of transmitting negative pressure to the 
breathing circuit during lower fl ow conditions 
13
inspiratory pressure is 20 cm H 2 O, about 100 mL of 
set tidal volume is lost to expanding the circuit. For 
this reason breathing circuits for pediatric patients 
are designed to be much stiff er, with compliances as 
small as 1.5–2.5 mL/cm H 2 O. 
 Compression losses, normally about 3%, are 
due to gas compression within the ventilator bellows 
and may be dependent on breathing-circuit volume. 
Th us if tidal volume is 500 mL another 15 mL of the 
set tidal gas may be lost. Gas sampling for capnog-
raphy and anesthetic gas measurements represent 
additional losses in the form of gas leaks unless the 
sampled gas is returned to the breathing circuit, as 
occurs in some machines. 
 Accurate detection of tidal volume discrepan-
cies is dependent on where the spirometer is placed. 
Sophisticated ventilators measure both inspira-
tory and expiratory tidal volumes. It is important 
to note that unless the spirometer is placed at the 
Y-connector in the breathing circuit, compliance 
and compression losses will not be apparent. 
 Several mechanisms have been built into newer 
anesthesia machines to reduce tidal volume discrep-
ancies. During the initial electronic self-checkout, 
some machines measure total system compliance 
and subsequently use this measurement to adjust the 
excursion of the ventilator bellows or piston; leaks may 
also be measured but are usually not compensated. 
Th e actual method of tidal volume compensation or 
modulation varies according to manufacturer and 
model. In one design a fl ow sensor measures the tidal 
volume delivered at the inspiratory valve for the fi rst 
few breaths and adjusts subsequent metered drive gas 
fl ow volumes to compensate for tidal volume losses 
(feedback adjustment). Another design continually 
measures fresh gas and vaporizer fl ow and subtracts 
this amount from the metered drive gas fl ow (pre-
emptive adjustment). Alternately, machines that use 
electronic control of gas fl ow can decouple fresh gas 
fl ow from the tidal volume by delivery of fresh gas 
fl ow only during exhalation. Lastly, the inspiratory 
phase of the ventilator–fresh gas fl ow may be diverted 
through a decoupling valve into the breathing bag, 
which is excluded from the circle system during venti-
lation. During exhalation the decoupling valve opens, 
allowing the fresh gas that was temporarily stored in 
the bag to enter the breathing circuit. 
82 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
A
B
Threaded
input port
cap
19-mm
scavenger
hose
terminal
Relief
port
Waste gas
input port,
19-mm hose
terminal
Input
port cap
Safety relief
valve, shown
closed
Needle valve
knob
19-mm
scavenger
hose terminal
Flowmeter
Reservoir
canister
Waste gas
input port,
19-mm hose
terminal
Lock nut
Vacuum DISS
hose terminal
Wase gas exhaust port,
19-mm hose terminal
C
Positive-pressure
relief valve
Adjustment knob
Needle valve
Intake port for
waste gases
and the Aestiva
ventilator
To hospital
vacuum system
Reservoir bag
(3 L size)
Cap
Negative-
pressure
relief valve
 FIGURE 429  Waste-gas scavenging systems. 
 A: Closed interface with passive scavenging (Dräger). 
 B: Open interface with active scavenging (Dräger). 
 C: Closed interface with active scavenging (Datex-
Ohmeda). (continued)
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine
83
(maintenance). Unless used correctly the risk of 
occupational exposure for health care providers 
is higher with an open interface. Some machines 
may come with both active and passive scavenger 
systems. 
 ANESTHESIA MACHINE 
CHECKOUT LIST 
 Misuse or malfunction of anesthesia gas delivery 
equipment can cause major morbidity or mortality. 
 A routine inspection of anesthesia equipment 
before each use increases operator familiarity 
and confi rms proper functioning. Th e U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) has made available a 
generic checkout procedure for anesthesia gas 
14
machines and breathing systems ( Table 4–4 ). Th is 
procedure should be modifi ed as necessary, depend-
ing on the specifi c equipment being used and the 
manufacturer’s recommendations. Note that although 
the entire checkout does not need to be repeated 
between cases on the same day, the conscientious use 
of a checkout list is mandatory before each anesthetic 
procedure. A mandatory check-off  procedure 
increases the likelihood of detecting anesthesia 
machine faults. Some anesthesia machines provide 
an automated system check that requires a variable 
amount of human intervention. Th ese system checks 
may include nitrous oxide delivery (hypoxic mixture 
prevention), agent delivery, mechanical and manual 
ventilation, pipeline pressures, scavenging, breathing 
circuit compliance, and gas leakage. 
D
Vent engine
Knob to remove
back cover
Scavenging
reservoir
Back cover
Scavenging connector
FIGURE 429 (continued)  D: Built-
in scavenging system that can be either 
active or passive; the active scavenging 
option has an open interface whereas 
the passive scavenging option has a 
closed interface with positive- and 
negative-pressure relief valves 
( Datex-Ohmeda). 
84 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 TABLE 44 Anesthesia apparatus checkout recommendations. 1 , 2 
This checkout, or a reasonable equivalent, should be conducted before administration of anesthesia. These recommendations 
are valid only for an anesthesia system that conforms to current and relevant standards and includes an ascending bellows 
ventilator and at least the following monitors: capnograph, pulse oximeter, oxygen analyzer, respiratory volume monitor 
(spirometer), and breathing-system pressure monitor with high- and low-pressure alarms. Users are encouraged to modify 
this guideline to accommodate differences in equipment design and variations in local clinical practice. Such local 
modifications should have appropriate peer review. Users should refer to the appropriate operator manuals for specific 
procedures and precautions. 
 Emergency Ventilation Equipment 
 * 1. Verify backup ventilation equipment is available 
and functioning 
 High-Pressure System 
 * 2. Check O 2 cylinder supply
a.  Open O 2 cylinder and verify at least half full 
(about 1000 psig). 
b.  Close cylinder 
 * 3. Check central pipeline supplies; check that hoses are 
connected and pipeline gauges read about 50 psig. 
 Low-Pressure System 
 * 4. Check initial status of low-pressure system
a.  Close flow control valves and turn vaporizers off. 
b.  Check fill level and tighten vaporizers’ filler caps. 
 * 5. Perform leak check of machine low-pressure system
 a.  Verify that the machine master switch and flow 
control valves are off. 
b.  Attach suction bulb to common (fresh) gas outlet. 
c.  Squeeze bulb repeatedly until fully collapsed. 
d.  Verify bulb stays  fully collapsed for at least 
10 seconds. 
e.  Open one vaporizer at a time and repeat steps 
c and d. 
f. 
 Remove suction bulb, and reconnect fresh 
gas hose. 
 * 6. Turn on machine master switch and all other necessary 
electrical equipment. 
 * 7. Test flowmeters 
a.  Adjust flow of all gases through their full range, checking 
for smooth operation of floats and undamaged 
flowtubes. 
b.  Attempt to create a hypoxic O 2 /N 2 O mixture and 
verify correct changes in flow and/or alarm. 
 Scavenging System 
 * 8. Adjust and check scavenging system
 a.  Ensure proper connections between the scavenging 
system and both APL (pop-off) valve and ventilator relief 
valve. 
b.  Adjust waste-gas vacuum (if possible). 
c.  Fully open APL valve and occlude Y-piece. 
d.  With minimum O 2 flow, allow scavenger reservoir 
bag to collapse completely and verify that absorber 
pressure gauge reads about zero. 
e.  With the O 2 flush activated, allow scavenger reservoir 
bag to distend fully, and then verify that absorber 
pressure gauge reads <10 cm H 2 O. 
 Breathing System 
 * 9. Calibrate O 2 monitor
a.  Ensure monitor reads 21% in room air. 
b.  Verify low-O 2 alarm is enabled and functioning. 
c.  Reinstall sensor in circuit and flush breathing 
system with O 2 . 
d.  Verify that monitor now reads greater than 90%. 
 10. Check initial status breathing system
a.  Set selector switch to Bag mode. 
b.  Check that breathing circuit is complete, 
undamaged, and unobstructed. 
c.  Verify that CO 2 absorbent is adequate. 
d.  Install breathing-circuit accessory equipment (eg, 
humidifier, PEEP valve) to be used during the case. 
11. Perform leak check of the breathing system
a.  Set all gas flows to zero (or minimum). 
b.  Close APL (pop-off) valve and occlude Y-piece. 
c.  Pressurize breathing system to about 30 cm H 2 O 
with O 2 flush. 
d.  Ensure that pressure remains fixed for at least 
10 seconds. 
e.  Open APL (pop-off) valve and ensure that 
pressure decreases. 
 Manual and Automatic Ventilation Systems 
12. Test ventilation systems and unidirectional valves
a.  Place a second breathing bag on Y-piece. 
b.  Set appropriate ventilator parameters for next patient. 
c.  Switch to automatic-ventilation (ventilator) mode. 
d.  Turn ventilator on and fill bellows and breathing 
bag with O 2 flush. 
 e.  Set O 2 flow to minimum, other gas flows to zero. 
f. 
 Verify that during inspiration bellows deliver 
appropriate tidal volume and that during 
expiration bellows fill completely. 
g.  Set fresh gas flow to about 5 L min –1 . 
h.  Verify that the ventilator bellows and simulated 
lungs fill and empty appropriately without sustained 
pressure at end expiration. 
i. 
 Check for proper action of unidirectional valves. 
j. 
 Exercise breathing circuit accessories to ensure 
proper function. 
k.  Turn ventilator off and switch to manual ventilation 
(Bag/APL) mode. 
l. 
 Ventilate manually and ensure inflation and deflation 
of artificial lungs and appropriate feel of system 
resistance and compliance. 
m.  Remove second breathing bag from Y-piece. 
(continued)
 
CHAPTER 4 The Anesthesia Machine 
85 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Detection of a Leak 
 After induction of general anesthesia and intuba-
tion of a 70-kg man for elective surgery, a standing 
bellows ventilator is set to deliver a tidal volume 
of 500 mL at a rate of 10 breaths/min. Within a 
few minutes, the anesthesiologist notices that the 
bellows fails to rise to the top of its clear plastic 
enclosure during expiration. Shortly thereafter, 
the disconnect alarm is triggered. 
 Why has the ventilator bellows fallen and the 
disconnect alarm sounded? 
 Fresh gas ﬂ ow into the breathing circuit is inad-
equate to maintain the circuit volume required for 
positive-pressure ventilation. In a situation in which 
there is no fresh gas ﬂ ow, the volume in the breath-
ing circuit will slowly fall because of the constant 
uptake of oxygen by the patient (metabolic oxygen 
consumption) and absorption of expired CO 2 . An 
absence of fresh gas ﬂ ow could be due to exhaus-
tion of the hospital’s oxygen supply (remember the 
function of the fail-safe valve) or failure to turn on 
the anesthesia machine’s ﬂ ow control valves. These 
possibilities can be ruled out by examining the oxy-
gen Bourdon pressure gauge and the ﬂ owmeters. 
A more likely explanation is a gas leak that exceeds 
the rate of fresh gas ﬂ ow. Leaks are particularly 
important in closed-circuit anesthesia. 
 How can the size of the leak be estimated? 
 When the rate of fresh gas inﬂ ow equals the 
rate of gas outﬂ ow, the circuit’s volume will be 
maintained. Therefore, the size of the leak can be 
estimated by increasing fresh gas ﬂ ows until there 
is no change in the height of the bellows from one 
expiration to the next. If the bellows collapse despite 
a high rate of fresh gas inﬂ ow, a complete circuit dis-
connection should be considered. The site of the 
disconnection must be determined immediately 
and repaired to prevent hypoxia and hypercapnia. 
A resuscitation bag can be used to ventilate the 
patient if there is a delay in correcting the situation. 
 Where are the most likely locations of a 
breathing-circuit disconnection or leak? 
 Frank disconnections occur most frequently 
between the right-angle connector and the tra-
cheal tube, whereas leaks are most commonly 
traced to the base plate of the CO 2 absorber. In 
the intubated patient, leaks often occur in the tra-
chea around an uncuﬀ ed tracheal tube or an inad-
equately ﬁ lled cuﬀ . There are numerous potential 
sites of disconnection or leak within the anesthesia 
machine and the breathing circuit, however. Every 
addition to the breathing circuit, such as a humidi-
ﬁ er, increases the likelihood of a leak. 
 How can these leaks be detected? 
 Leaks usually occur before the fresh gas out-
let (ie, within the anesthesia machine) or after the 
fresh gas inlet (ie, within the breathing circuit). 
Large leaks within the anesthesia machine are less 
common and can be ruled out by a simple test. 
Pinching the tubing that connects the machine’s 
fresh gas outlet to the circuit’s fresh gas inlet cre-
ates a back pressure that obstructs the forward 
 Monitors 
 13. Check, calibrate, and/or set alarm limits of all 
monitors: capnograph, pulse oximeter, O 2 analyzer, 
respiratory-volume monitor (spirometer), pressure 
monitor with high and low airway-pressure alarms. 
 Final Position 
 14. Check final status of machine
 a.  Vaporizers off 
b.  APL valve open 
c.  Selector switch to Bag mode 
d.  All flowmeters to zero (or minimum) 
e.  Patient suction level adequate 
f. 
 Breathing system ready to use 
 1 Data from  http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/humfac/anesckot.html .
 2 APL, adjust pressure-limiting; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure.
 * If an anesthesia provider uses the same machine in successive cases, these steps need not be repeated, or they can be abbreviated after the initial 
checkout.
TABLE 44 Anesthesia apparatus checkout recommendations.1,2 (continued)
86 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Baum JA, Nunn G:  Low Flow Anaesthesia: Th e Th eory 
and Practice of Low Flow, Minimal Flow and Closed 
System Anaesthesia , 2nd ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, 
2001. 
 Block FE, Schaff  C: Auditory alarms during anesthesia 
monitoring with an integrated monitoring system. 
Int J Clin Monit Comput 1996;13:81. 
 Caplan RA, Vistica MF, Posner KL, Cheney FW: Adverse 
anesthetic outcomes arising from gas delivery 
 equipment: A closed claims analysis.  Anesthesiology 
1997;87:741. 
 Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE:  Understanding Anesthesia 
Equipment, 5th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 
2008. 
 Eisenkraft  JB, Leibowitz AB: Ventilators in the operating 
room. Int Anesthesiol Clin 1997;35:87. 
 Klopfenstein CE, Van Gessel E, Forster A: Checking the 
anaesthetic machine: Self-reported assessment in a 
university hospital. Eur J Anaesthesiol 1998;15:314. 
Compliance with recommended safety checklists 
is low. 
 Somprakit P, Soontranan P: Low pressure leakage 
in anaesthetic machines: Evaluation by positive 
and negative pressure tests. Anaesthesia 1996;
51:461. 
 WEB SITES 
 http://www.apsf.org/ 
 Th e Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation web site 
provides resources and a newsletter that discusses 
important safety issues in anesthesia. 
 https://www.asahq.org/clinical/fda.aspx 
 Th e web site of the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
includes a link to the 2008 ASA Recommendations for 
Pre-Anesthesia Checkout. 
 http://www.simanest.org/ 
 An extremely useful web site of simulations in 
 anesthesia that includes virtual anesthesia machine 
simulators. 
ﬂ ow of fresh gas from the anesthesia machine. This 
is indicated by a drop in the height of the ﬂ owme-
ter ﬂ oats. When the fresh gas tubing is released, 
the ﬂ oats should briskly rebound and settle at their 
original height. If there is a substantial leak within 
the machine, obstructing the fresh gas tubing 
will not result in any back pressure, and the ﬂ oats 
will not drop. A more sensitive test for detecting 
small leaks that occur before the fresh gas outlet 
involves attaching a suction bulb at the outlet as 
described in step 5 of  Table 4–4 . Correcting a leak 
within the machine usually requires removing it 
from service. 
 Leaks within a breathing circuit not connected 
to a patient are readily detected by closing the APL 
valve, occluding the Y-piece, and activating the 
oxygen ﬂ ush until the circuit reaches a pressure 
of 20–30 cm H 2 O. A gradual decline in circuit pres-
sure indicates a leak within the breathing circuit 
( Table 4–4 , step 11). 
 How are leaks in the breathing circuit located? 
 Any connection within the breathing circuit is a 
potential site of a gas leak. A quick survey of the cir-
cuit may reveal a loosely attached breathing tube 
or a cracked oxygen analyzer adaptor. Less obvious 
causes include detachment of the tubing used by 
the disconnect alarm to monitor circuit pressures, 
an open APL valve, or an improperly adjusted scav-
enging unit. Leaks can usually be identiﬁ ed audibly 
or by applying a soap solution to suspect connec-
tions and looking for bubble formation. 
 Leaks within the anesthesia machine and 
breathing circuit are usually detectable if the 
machine and circuit have undergone an estab-
lished checkout procedure. For example, steps 5 
and 11 of the FDA recommendations ( Table 4–4 ) 
will reveal most signiﬁ cant leaks. 
 87 
5
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
 The central venous pressure catheter’s tip 
should not be allowed to migrate into the 
heart chambers. 
 Although the pulmonary artery catheter 
can be used to guide goal-directed 
hemodynamic therapy to ensure 
organ perfusion in shock states, other 
less invasive methods to determine 
hemodynamic performance are available, 
including transpulmonary thermodilution 
cardiac output measurements and pulse 
contour analyses of the arterial pressure 
waveform. 
 Relative contraindications to pulmonary 
artery catheterization include left bundle-
branch block (because of the concern 
1
2
3
about complete heart block) and conditions 
associated with greatly increased risk of 
arrhythmias, such as Wolﬀ –Parkinson–White 
syndrome. 
 Pulmonary artery pressure should be 
continuously monitored to detect an 
overwedged position indicative of catheter 
migration. 
 Accurate measurements of cardiac output 
depend on rapid and smooth injection, 
precisely known injectant temperature and 
volume, correct entry of the calibration 
factors for the speciﬁ c type of pulmonary 
artery catheter into the cardiac output 
computer, and avoidance of measurements 
during electrocautery. 
4
5
 Vigilant perioperative monitoring of the cardio-
vascular system is one of the primary duties of 
anesthesia providers. Th is chapter focuses on the 
specifi c monitoring devices and techniques used 
by anesthesiologists to monitor cardiac function 
and circulation in healthy and nonhealthy patients 
alike. 
 ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE 
 Th e rhythmic contraction of the left  ventricle, eject-
ing blood into the vascular system, results in pulsa-
tile arterial pressures. Th e peak pressure generated 
during systolic contraction (in the absence of aor-
tic valve stenosis) approximates the systolic arterial 
blood pressure (SBP); the lowest arterial pressure 
during diastolic relaxation is the diastolic blood 
pressure (DBP). Pulse pressure is the diff erence 
between the systolic and diastolic pressures. Th e 
time-weighted average of arterial pressures during 
a pulse cycle is the  mean arterial pressure (MAP).
MAP can be estimated by application of the follow-
ing formula: 
 
MAP
(SBP) + 2(DBP)
3
=
 
 Arterial blood pressure is greatly aff ected by 
where the pressure is measured.  As a pulse moves 
peripherally through the arterial tree, wave refl ec-
tion distorts the pressure waveform, leading to 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
88 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
an exaggeration of systolic and pulse pressures 
( Figure 5–1 ). For example, radial artery systolic 
pressure is usually greater than aortic systolic pres-
sure because of its more distal location. In contrast, 
radial artery systolic pressures oft en underestimate 
more “central” pressures following hypothermic 
cardiopulmonary bypass because of changes in 
hand vascular resistance. Vasodilating drugs may 
accentuate this discrepancy. Th e level of the sam-
pling site relative to the heart aff ects the measure-
ment of blood pressure because of the eff ect of 
gravity ( Figure 5–2 ). In patients with severe periph-
eral vascular disease, there may be a signifi cant dif-
ference in blood pressure measurements among 
the extremities. Th e higher value should be used in 
these patients. 
 Because noninvasive (palpation, Doppler, aus-
cultation, oscillometry, plethysmography) and inva-
sive (arterial cannulation) methods of blood pressure 
determination diff er greatly, they are discussed 
separately. 
 1. Noninvasive Arterial Blood 
Pressure Monitoring 
 Indications 
 Th e use of any anesthetic, no matter how “trivial,” 
is an indication for arterial blood pressure measure-
ment. Th e techniques and frequency of pressure 
determination depend on the patient’s condition 
and the type of surgical procedure. An oscillometric 
 FIGURE 51  Changes in 
conﬁ guration as a waveform 
moves peripherally. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Shah N, Bedford RF: 
Invasive and noninvasive blood  pressuring 
monitoring. In:  Clinical Monitoring: 
Practical Applications in Anesthesia and 
Critical Care Medicine . Lake CL, Hines 
RL, Blitt CD [editors]. WB Saunders, 
Philadelphia, 2001.) 
Aortic root
Circulation
Central
Peripheral
Subclavian artery
Axillary artery
Brachial artery
Radial artery
blood pressure measurement every 3–5 min is ade-
quate in most cases. 
 Contraindications 
 Although some method of blood pressure measure-
ment is mandatory, techniques that rely on a blood 
pressure cuff  are best avoided in extremities with 
vascular abnormalities (eg, dialysis shunts) or with 
intravenous lines. Rarely, it may prove impossible to 
monitor blood pressure in cases (eg, burns) in which 
there may be no accessible site from which the blood 
pressure can be safely recorded. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 A. Palpation 
 SBP can be determined by (1) locating a palpable 
peripheral pulse, (2) infl ating a blood pressure cuff  
proximal to the pulse until fl ow is occluded, (3) 
releasing cuff  pressure by 2 or 3 mm Hg per heart-
beat, and (4) measuring the cuff  pressure at which 
pulsations are again palpable. Th is method tends to 
underestimate systolic pressure, however, because of 
the insensitivity of touch and the delay between fl ow 
under the cuff  and distal pulsations. Palpation does 
not provide a diastolic pressure or MAP. Th e equip-
ment required is simple and inexpensive. 
 B. Doppler Probe 
 When a Doppler probe is substituted for the 
anesthesiologist’s fi nger, arterial blood pressure 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
89 
a coupling gel (but not corrosive electrode jelly) is 
applied between the probe and the skin. Positioning 
the probe directly above an artery is crucial, since the 
beam must pass through the vessel wall. Interference 
from probe movement or electrocautery is an annoy-
ing distraction. Note that only systolic pressures can 
be reliably determined with the Doppler technique. 
 A variation of Doppler technology uses a piezo-
electric crystal to detect lateral arterial wall move-
ment to the intermittent opening and closing of 
vessels between systolic and diastolic pressure. Th is 
instrument thus detects both systolic and diastolic 
pressures. Th e Doppler eff ect is routinely employed 
by perioperative echocardiographers to discern both 
the directionality and velocity of both blood fl ow 
measurement becomes sensitive enough to be useful 
in obese patients, pediatric patients, and patients in 
shock ( Figure 5–3 ). Th e  Doppler eff ect is the shift  
in the frequency of sound waves when their source 
moves relative to the observer. For example, the pitch 
of a train’s whistle increases as a train approaches 
and decreases as it departs. Similarly, the refl ection 
of sound waves off  of a moving object causes a fre-
quency shift . A Doppler probe transmits an ultra-
sonic signal that is refl ected by underlying tissue. As 
red blood cells move through an artery, a Doppler 
frequency shift  will be detected by the probe. Th e dif-
ference between transmitted and received frequency 
causes the characteristic swishing sound, which 
indicates blood fl ow. Because air refl ects ultrasound, 
 FIGURE 52  The diﬀ erence in blood pressure (mm Hg) at two diﬀ erent sites of measurement equals the height of an 
interposed column of water (cm H 2 O) multiplied by a conversion factor (1 cm H 2 O = 0.74 mm Hg). 
100
0
20 cm
115
100
0
(20 cm H  O)
2
0.74 mm Hg
cm H  O
2
= 14.7 mm Hg
(
)
90 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 D. Oscillometry 
 Arterial pulsations cause oscillations in cuff  pres-
sure. Th ese oscillations are small if the cuff  is 
infl ated above systolic pressure. When the cuff 
pressure decreases to systolic pressure, the pulsa-
tions are transmitted to the entire cuff , and the 
oscillations markedly increase. Maximal oscilla-
tion occurs at the MAP, aft er which oscillations 
decrease. Because some oscillations are present 
above and below arterial blood pressure, a mer-
cury or aneroid manometer provides an inaccurate 
and unreliable measurement. Automated blood 
pressure monitors electronically measure the pres-
sures at which the oscillation amplitudes change 
( Figure 5–4 ). A microprocessor derives systolic, 
mean, and diastolic pressures using an algorithm. 
Machines that require identical consecutive pulse 
waves for measurement confi rmation may be unre-
liable during arrhythmias (eg, atrial fi brillation). 
Oscillometric monitors should not be used on 
patients on cardiopulmonary bypass. Nonetheless, 
the speed, accuracy, and versatility of oscillomet-
ric devices have greatly improved, and they have 
become the preferred noninvasive blood pressure 
monitors in the United States and worldwide. 
 E. Arterial Tonometry 
 Arterial tonometry measures beat-to-beat arterial 
blood pressure by sensing the pressure required to 
partially fl atten a superfi cial artery that is supported 
by a bony structure (eg, radial artery). A tonometer 
consisting of several independent pressure trans-
ducers is applied to the skin overlying the artery 
( Figure 5–5 ). Th e contact stress between the trans-
ducer directly over the artery and the skin refl ects 
intraluminal pressure. Continuous pulse recordings 
produce a tracing very similar to an invasive arterial 
blood pressure waveform. Limitations to this tech-
nology include sensitivity to movement artifact and 
the need for frequent calibration. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Adequate oxygen delivery to vital organs must 
be maintained during anesthesia. Unfortunately, 
instruments to monitor specifi c organ perfusion 
and oxygenation are complex, expensive, and oft en 
unreliable, and, for that reason, an adequate arterial 
within the heart and the movement of the heart’s 
muscle tissue (tissue Doppler). 
 C. Auscultation 
 Infl ation of a blood pressure cuff  to a pressure 
between systolic and diastolic pressures will par-
tially collapse an underlying artery, producing tur-
bulent fl ow and the characteristic Korotkoff  sounds. 
Th ese sounds are audible through a stethoscope 
placed under—or just distal to—the distal third of 
the blood pressure cuff . Th e clinician measures pres-
sure with an aneroid or mercury manometer. 
 Occasionally, Korotkoff  sounds cannot be 
heard through part of the range from systolic to 
diastolic pressure. Th is auscultatory gap is most 
common in hypertensive patients and can lead 
to an inaccurate diastolic pressure measurement. 
Korotkoff  sounds are oft en diffi  cult to auscultate 
during episodes of hypotension or marked periph-
eral vasoconstriction. In these situations, the sub-
sonic frequencies associated with the sounds can be 
detected by a microphone and amplifi ed to indicate 
systolic and diastolic pressures. Motion artifact and 
electrocautery interference limit the usefulness of 
this method. 
 FIGURE 53  A Doppler probe secured over the radial 
artery will sense red blood cell movement as long as the 
blood pressure cuﬀ  is below systolic pressure. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Parks  Medical Electronics.) 
Aneroid gauge
Brachial artery
Doppler
Radial artery
Doppler probe
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
91 
pressure should be viewed as an indicator—but not 
a measure—of organ perfusion. 
 Th e accuracy of any method of blood pressure 
measurement that involves a blood pressure cuff 
depends on proper cuff  size ( Figure 5–6 ). Th e cuff ’s 
bladder should extend at least halfway around the 
extremity, and the width of the cuff  should be 20% 
to 50% greater than the diameter of the extremity. 
blood pressure is assumed to predict adequate organ 
blood fl ow. However, fl ow also depends on vascular 
resistance: 
 
Flow
Pressure
Resistance
=
 
 Even if the pressure is high, when the resistance 
is also high, fl ow can be low. Th us, arterial blood 
 FIGURE 54  Oscillometric determination of blood pressure. 
Cuff
pressure
170
162
Oscillation
amplitude
Systole
MAP
Diastole
154
146
138
130
122
114
106
98
90
82
74
66
58
Time
 FIGURE 55  Tonometry is a method of continuous (beat-to-beat) arterial blood pressure determination. The sensors 
must be positioned directly over the artery. 
Air chamber
Pressure
Sensor
Artery
wall
Surface of
skin
Element of 
pressure sensor
Sensor frame
92 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Automated blood pressure monitors, using one 
or a combination of the methods described above, 
are frequently used in anesthesiology. A self-con-
tained air pump infl ates the cuff  at set intervals. 
Incorrect or too frequent use of these automated 
devices has resulted in nerve palsies and extensive 
extravasation of intravenously administered fl uids. 
In case of equipment failure, an alternative method 
of blood pressure determination must be immedi-
ately available. 
 2. Invasive Arterial Blood 
Pressure Monitoring 
 Indications 
 Indications for invasive arterial blood pressure 
monitoring by catheterization of an artery include 
induced current or anticipated hypotension or wide 
blood pressure deviations, end-organ disease neces-
sitating precise beat-to-beat blood pressure regula-
tion, and the need for multiple arterial blood gas 
measurements. 
 FIGURE 56  Blood pressure 
cuﬀ  width inﬂ uences the pressure 
readings. Three cuﬀ s, all inﬂ ated 
to the same pressure, are shown. 
The narrowest cuﬀ  ( A ) will require 
more pressure, and the widest cuﬀ  
( C ) less pressure, to occlude the 
brachial artery for determination of 
systolic pressure. Too narrow a cuﬀ  
may produce a large overestima-
tion of systolic pressure. Whereas 
the wider cuﬀ  may underestimate 
the systolic pressure, the error 
with a cuﬀ  20% too wide is not as 
signiﬁ cant as the error with a cuﬀ  
20% too narrow. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Gravenstein JS, Paulus 
DA:  Clinical Monitoring Practice , 2nd ed. 
Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1987.) 
A
B
C
 Contraindications 
 If possible, catheterization should be avoided in 
smaller end arteries with inadequate collateral blood 
fl ow or in extremities where there is a suspicion of 
preexisting vascular insuffi  ciency. 
 A. Selection of Artery for Cannulation 
 Several arteries are available for percutaneous 
catheterization. 
 1. 
Th e  radial artery is commonly cannulated 
because of its superfi cial location and 
substantial collateral fl ow (in most patients 
the ulnar artery is larger than the radial and 
there are connections between the two via the 
palmar arches). Five percent of patients have 
incomplete palmar arches and lack adequate 
collateral blood fl ow. Allen’s test is a simple, 
but not reliable, method for assessing the 
safety of radial artery cannulation. In this test, 
the patient exsanguinates his or her hand by 
making a fi st. While the operator occludes 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
93 
the radial and ulnar arteries with fi ngertip 
pressure, the patient relaxes the blanched 
hand. Collateral fl ow through the palmar 
arterial arch is confi rmed by fl ushing of the 
thumb within 5 sec aft er pressure on the ulnar 
artery is released. Delayed return of normal 
color (5–10 s) indicates an equivocal test 
or insuffi  cient collateral circulation (>10 s). 
Th e Allen’s test is of such questionable utility 
that many practitioners routinely avoid it. 
Alternatively, blood fl ow distal to the radial 
artery occlusion can be detected by palpation, 
Doppler probe, plethysmography, or pulse 
oximetry. Unlike Allen’s test, these methods 
of determining the adequacy of collateral 
circulation do not require patient cooperation. 
2. 
 Ulnar artery catheterization is usually more 
diffi  cult than radial catheterization because of 
the ulnar artery’s deeper and more tortuous 
course. Because of the risk of compromising 
blood fl ow to the hand, ulnar catheterization 
would not normally be considered if the 
ipsilateral radial artery has been punctured 
but unsuccessfully cannulated. 
3. 
 Th e  brachial artery is large and easily 
identifi able in the antecubital fossa. Its 
proximity to the aorta provides less waveform 
distortion. However, being near the elbow 
predisposes brachial artery catheters to kinking. 
4. 
 Th e  femoral artery is prone to atheroma 
formation and pseudoaneurysm, but oft en 
provides an excellent access. Th e femoral site 
has been associated with an increased incidence 
of infectious complications and arterial 
thrombosis. Aseptic necrosis of the head of 
the femur is a rare, but tragic, complication of 
femoral artery cannulation in children. 
5. 
 Th e  dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial 
arteries are some distance from the aorta and 
therefore have the most distorted waveforms. 
6. 
 Th e  axillary artery is surrounded by the 
axillary plexus, and nerve damage can result 
from a hematoma or traumatic cannulation. 
Air or thrombi can quickly gain access to the 
cerebral circulation during vigorous retrograde 
fl ushing of axillary artery catheters. 
 B. Technique of Radial Artery Cannulation 
 One technique of radial artery cannulation is illus-
trated in  Figure 5–7 . Supination and extension of 
the wrist provide optimal exposure of the radial 
artery. Th e pressure–tubing–transducer system 
should be nearby and already fl ushed with saline 
to ensure easy and quick connection aft er cannula-
tion. Th e radial pulse is palpated, and the artery’s 
course is determined by lightly pressing the  tips of 
the index and middle fi ngers of the anesthesiolo-
gist’s nondominant hand over the area of maximal 
impulse or by use of ultrasound. Using aseptic tech-
nique, 1% lidocaine is infi ltrated in the skin of awake 
patients, directly above the artery, with a small gauge 
needle. A larger gauge needle can then be used as 
a skin punch, facilitating entry of an 18-, 20-, or 
22-gauge catheter over a needle through the skin at a 
45° angle, directing it toward the point of palpation. 
Upon blood fl ashback, a guidewire may be advanced 
through the catheter into the artery and the cath-
eter advanced over the guidewire. Alternatively, 
the needle is lowered to a 30° angle and advanced 
another 1–2 mm to make certain that the tip of the 
catheter is well into the vessel lumen. Th e catheter 
is advanced off  the needle into the arterial lumen, 
aft er which the needle is withdrawn. Applying fi rm 
pressure over the artery proximal to the catheter tip, 
with the middle and ring fi ngertips, prevents blood 
from spurting from the catheter while the tubing is 
connected. Waterproof tape or suture can be used to 
hold the catheter in place. 
 C. Complications 
 Complications of intraarterial monitoring include 
hematoma, bleeding (particularly with catheter 
tubing disconnections), vasospasm, arterial throm-
bosis, embolization of air bubbles or thrombi, pseu-
doaneurysm formation, necrosis of skin overlying 
the catheter, nerve damage, infection, necrosis of 
extremities or digits, and unintentional intraarterial 
drug injection. Factors associated with an increased 
rate of complications include prolonged cannula-
tion, hyperlipidemia, repeated insertion attempts, 
female gender, extracorporeal circulation, the use 
of larger catheters in smaller vessels, and the use 
of vasopressors. Th e risks are minimized when the 
ratio of catheter to artery size is small, saline is 
94 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Because intraarterial cannulation allows continu-
ous beat-to-beat blood pressure measurement, it is 
considered the optimal blood pressure monitoring 
technique. Th e quality of the transduced waveform, 
however, depends on the dynamic characteristics of 
continuously infused through the catheter at a rate 
of 2–3 mL/hr, fl ushing of the catheter is limited, and 
meticulous attention is paid to aseptic technique. 
Adequacy of perfusion can be continually moni-
tored during radial artery cannulation by placing a 
pulse oximeter on an ipsilateral fi nger. 
 FIGURE 57  Cannulation of the radial artery.  A: Proper 
positioning and palpation of the artery are crucial. After 
skin preparation, local anesthetic is inﬁ ltrated with 
a 25-gauge needle.  B: A 20- or 22-gauge catheter is 
advanced through the skin at a 45° angle.  C: Flashback 
of blood signals entry into the artery, and the catheter– 
needle assembly is lowered to a 30° angle and advanced 
1–2 mm to ensure an intraluminal catheter position.  
D: The catheter is advanced over the needle, which is 
 withdrawn.  E: Proximal pressure with middle and ring 
ﬁ ngers prevents blood loss, while the arterial tubing 
 Luer-lock connector is secured to the intraarterial catheter. 
E
D
C
B
A
To transducer
High-pressure
tubing
45°
30°
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
95 
the catheter–tubing–transducer system ( Figure 5–8 ). 
False readings can lead to inappropriate therapeutic 
interventions. 
 A complex waveform, such as an arterial pulse 
wave, can be expressed as a summation of simple 
harmonic waves (according to the Fourier theorem). 
For accurate measurement of pressure, the catheter– 
tubing–transducer system must be capable of 
responding adequately to the highest frequency of 
the arterial waveform ( Figure 5–9 ). Stated another 
way, the natural frequency of the measuring system 
must exceed the natural frequency of the arterial 
pulse (approximately 16–24 Hz). 
 Most transducers have frequencies of several 
hundred Hz (>200 Hz for disposable transducers). 
The addition of tubing, stopcocks, and air in the 
line all decrease the frequency of the system. If 
the frequency response is too low, the system will 
be overdamped and will not faithfully reproduce 
the arterial waveform, underestimating the sys-
tolic pressure. Underdamping is also a serious 
problem, leading to overshoot and a falsely high 
SBP. 
 Catheter–tubing–transducer 
systems 
must 
also prevent  hyperresonance, an artifact caused by 
reverberation of pressure waves within the system. 
A  damping coeffi  cient (β) of 0.6–0.7 is optimal. Th e 
natural frequency and damping coeffi  cient can be 
determined by examining tracing oscillations aft er a 
high-pressure fl ush ( Figure 5–10 ). 
 FIGURE 58  The catheter–tubing–transducer system. 
Transducer
Dome
Flush pigtail
To pressurized
flush solution
High-pressure
tubing
Stopcock
Catheter
To monitor
Reconstructed from
four harmonics
Reconstructed from
eight harmonics
300
200
mm Hg
100
0
 FIGURE 59  An original waveform overlays a four-
harmonic reconstruction ( left ) and an eight-harmonic 
reconstruction ( right ). Note that the higher harmonic plot 
more closely resembles the original waveform. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Saidman LS, Smith WT:  Monitoring in Anesthesia . 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1985.) 
96 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
300
120
DAMPING
NATURAL FREQUENCY:
Natural frequency = fn =
Reverberations
in system
D1 22.5 mm
D2 (mm)
(D2/D1)
D2
D1
13
π2
πD2 ∆P
∆V
∆P
D
= Internal diameter of tubing
= Density of blood
Paper speed (mm/sec)
25 mm/sec
4ρ L∆V
2 mm
12.5 Hz
Lenght of 1 cycle (mm)
= Length of tubing
= Compliance (stiffness) of system
L
ρ
2π
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
.034
.071
.113
.160
.215
.280
.358
.456
.591
In
D2
D1
In
22.5
= 0.58
= 0.17
=
=
=
=
+
2
2
1
D1 (mm)
D2 13 mm
2 mm
1 cycle length (peak to peak,
or trough to trough)
(paper speed 25 mm/s)
80
High-
pressure
flush
Amplitude ratio =
Amplitude ratio
Damping coefficient ß =
Damping
coefficient
Arterial
waveform
 FIGURE 510  Damping and natural frequency of a transducer system can be determined by a high-pressure ﬂ ush test. 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
97 
 Transducer accuracy depends on correct cali-
bration and zeroing procedures. A stopcock at the 
level of the desired point of measurement—usually 
the midaxillary line—is opened, and the zero trigger 
on the monitor is activated. If the patient’s position 
is altered by raising or lowering the operating table, 
the transducer must either be moved in tandem or 
zeroed to the new level of the midaxillary line. In a 
seated patient, the arterial pressure in the brain dif-
fers signifi cantly from left  ventricular pressure. In 
this circumstance, cerebral pressure is determined by 
setting the transducer to zero at the level of the ear, 
which approximates the circle of Willis. Th e trans-
ducer’s zero should be checked regularly, as some 
transducer measurements can “drift ” over time. 
 External calibration of a transducer compares 
the transducer’s reading with a manometer, but mod-
ern transducers rarely require external calibration. 
 Digital readouts of systolic and diastolic pres-
sures are a running average of the highest and lowest 
measurements within a certain time interval. Because 
motion or cautery artifacts can result in some very 
misleading numbers, the arterial waveform should 
always be monitored. Th e shape of the arterial wave 
provides clues to several hemodynamic variables. 
Th e rate of upstroke indicates contractility, the rate of 
downstroke indicates peripheral vascular resistance, 
and exaggerated variations in size during the respi-
ratory cycle suggest hypovolemia. MAP is calculated 
by integrating the area under the pressure curve. 
 Intraarterial catheters also provide access for 
intermittent arterial blood gas sampling and analy-
sis. Th e development of fi beroptic sensors that can be 
inserted through a 20-gauge arterial catheter enables 
continuous blood gas monitoring. Unfortunately, these 
sensors are quite expensive and are oft en inaccurate, so 
they are rarely used. Analysis of the arterial pressure 
waveform allows for estimation of cardiac output (CO) 
and other hemodynamic parameters. Th ese devices 
are discussed in the section on CO monitoring. 
 ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
 Indications & Contraindications 
 All patients should have intraoperative monitor-
ing of their electrocardiogram (ECG). Th ere are no 
contraindications. 
 System dynamics are improved by minimizing 
tubing length, eliminating unnecessary stopcocks, 
removing air bubbles, and using low-compliance 
tubing. Although smaller diameter catheters lower 
natural frequency, they improve underdampened 
systems and are less apt to result in vascular compli-
cations. If a large catheter totally occludes an artery, 
refl ected waves can distort pressure measurements. 
 Pressure transducers have evolved from bulky, 
reusable instruments to miniaturized, disposable 
devices. Transducers contain a diaphragm that is 
distorted by an arterial pressure wave. Th e mechani-
cal energy of a pressure wave is converted into an 
electric signal. Most transducers are resistance types 
that are based on the  strain gauge principle: stretch-
ing a wire or silicone crystal changes its electrical 
resistance. Th e sensing elements are arranged as a 
“Wheatstone bridge” circuit so that the voltage out-
put is proportionate to the pressure applied to the 
diaphragm ( Figure 5–11 ). 
1
2
3
4
 FIGURE 511  In the original strain gauge pressure 
transducers, a deformable diaphragm was connected to 
a Wheatstone bridge. When pressure was applied to the 
diaphragm, strain on two of the resistors (No. 2 and No. 3) 
increased, whereas strain on the other two (No. 1 and 
No. 4) decreased. The change in total resistance across the 
bridge was proportional to the change in blood pressure, 
allowing direct accurate measurement of intravascular 
blood pressure for the ﬁ rst time. 
98 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e ECG is a recording of the electrical poten-
tials generated by myocardial cells. Its routine 
use allows arrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Lead selection determines the diagnostic sensitivity 
of the ECG. ECG leads are positioned on the chest 
and extremities to provide diff erent perspectives of 
the electrical potentials generated by the heart. At 
the end of diastole, the atria contract, which pro-
vides the atrial contribution to CO, generating the 
“P” wave. Following atrial contraction, the ven-
tricle is loaded awaiting systole. Th e QRS complex 
begins the electrical activity of systole following the 
120–200 msec atrioventricular (AV) nodal delay. 
Depolarization of the ventricle proceeds from the 
AV node through the interventricular system via the 
His–Purkinje fi bers. Th e normal QRS lasts approxi-
mately 120 msec, which can be prolonged in patients 
with cardiomyopathies and heart failure. Th e T wave 
represents repolarization as the heart prepares to 
contract again. Prolongation of the QT interval sec-
ondary to electrolyte imbalances or drug eff ects can 
potentially lead to life-threatening arrhythmias (les 
torsade de pointes). 
 Th e electrical axis of lead II is approximately 60° 
from the right arm to the left  leg, which is parallel to 
the electrical axis of the atria, resulting in the larg-
est P-wave voltages of any surface lead. Th is orienta-
tion enhances the diagnosis of arrhythmias and the 
detection of inferior wall ischemia. Lead V 5 lies over 
the fi ft h intercostal space at the anterior axillary line; 
this position is a good compromise for detecting 
anterior and lateral wall ischemia. A true V 5 lead is 
possible only on operating room ECGs with at least 
fi ve lead wires, but a modifi ed V 5 can be monitored 
by rearranging the standard three-limb lead place-
ment ( Figure 5–12 ). Ideally, because each lead pro-
vides unique information, leads II and V 5 should be 
monitored simultaneously. If only a single-channel 
machine is available, the preferred lead for monitor-
ing depends on the location of any prior infarction 
or ischemia. Esophageal leads are even better than 
lead II for arrhythmia diagnosis, but have not yet 
gained general acceptance in the operating room. 
 Electrodes are placed on the patient’s body to 
monitor the ECG ( Figure 5–13 ). Conductive gel 
lowers the skin’s electrical resistance, which can be 
further decreased by cleansing the site with alco-
hol. Needle electrodes are used only if the disks are 
unsuitable (eg, with an extensively burned patient). 
 FIGURE 512  Rearranged three-limb lead placement. 
Anterior and lateral ischemia can be detected by placing 
the left arm lead (LA) at the V 5 position. When lead I 
is selected on the monitor, a modiﬁ ed V 5 lead (CS 5 ) is 
displayed. Lead II allows detection of arrhythmias and 
inferior wall ischemia. RA, right arm; LL, left leg. 
RA
I (CS5)
LA
LL
 FIGURE 513  A cross-sectional view of a silver 
chloride electrode. 
Lead connection
Silver chloride
electrolyte
Sponge
Conductive
gel
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
99 
large T waves—oft en seen in pediatric patients—as 
QRS complexes. 
 Depending on equipment availability, a pre-
induction rhythm strip can be printed or frozen 
on the monitor’s screen to compare with intraop-
erative tracings. To interpret ST-segment changes 
properly, the ECG must be standardized so that a 
1-mV signal results in a defl ection of 10 mm on a 
standard strip monitor. Newer units continuously 
analyze ST segments for early detection of myo-
cardial ischemia. Automated ST-segment analysis 
increases the sensitivity of ischemia detection, does 
not require additional physician skill or vigilance, 
conduction abnormalities, pacemaker malfunc-
tion, and electrolyte disturbances to be detected 
(Figure 5–14). Because of the small voltage poten-
tials being measured, artifacts remain a major 
problem. Patient or lead-wire movement, use of 
electrocautery, 60-cycle interference from nearby 
alternating current devices, and faulty electrodes 
can simulate arrhythmias. Monitoring fi lters incor-
porated into the amplifi er to reduce “motion” arti-
facts will lead to distortion of the ST segment and 
may impede the diagnosis of ischemia. Digital 
readouts of the heart rate (HR) may be misleading 
because of monitor misinterpretation of artifacts or 
 FIGURE 514  Common ECG ﬁ ndings during cardiac surgery. (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, 
Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
Tented
‘T’ wave
Normal sinus
rhythm
Atrial fibrillation
Supraventricular
tachycardia
Ventricular
fibrillation
Hyperkalemia
Ventricular
tachycardia
ST depression
ST elevation
Q waves
100 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
and may help diagnose intraoperative myocardial 
ischemia. 
 Commonly accepted criteria for diagnos-
ing myocardial ischemia require that the ECG be 
recorded in “diagnostic mode” and include a fl at 
or downsloping ST-segment depression exceed-
ing 1 mm, 80 msec aft er the J point (the end of 
the QRS complex), particularly in conjunction 
with T-wave inversion. ST-segment elevation with 
peaked T waves can also represent ischemia. Wolff –
Parkinson–White syndrome, bundle-branch blocks, 
extrinsic pacemaker capture, and digoxin therapy 
may preclude the use of ST-segment information. 
Th e audible beep associated with each QRS complex 
should be loud enough to detect rate and rhythm 
changes when the anesthesiologist’s visual attention 
is directed elsewhere. Some ECGs are capable of 
storing aberrant QRS complexes for further analysis, 
and some can even interpret and diagnose arrhyth-
mias. Th e interference caused by electrocautery 
units, however, has limited the usefulness of auto-
mated arrhythmia analysis in the  operating room. 
 CENTRAL VENOUS 
CATHETERIZATION 
 Indications 
 Central venous catheterization is indicated for 
monitoring central venous pressure (CVP), admin-
istration of fl uid to treat hypovolemia and shock, 
infusion of caustic drugs and total parenteral nutri-
tion, aspiration of air emboli, insertion of transcu-
taneous pacing leads, and gaining venous access in 
patients with poor peripheral veins. With special-
ized catheters, central venous catheterization can be 
used for continuous monitoring of central venous 
oxygen saturation. 
 Contraindications 
 Relative contraindications include tumors, clots, 
or tricuspid valve vegetations that could be dis-
lodged or embolized during cannulation. Other 
contraindications relate to the cannulation site. For 
example, subclavian vein cannulation is relatively 
contraindicated in patients who are receiving anti-
coagulants (due to the inability to provide direct 
compression in the event of an accidental arterial 
puncture). Some clinicians avoid central venous 
cannulation on the side of a previous carotid endar-
terectomy due to concerns about the possibility of 
unintentional carotid artery puncture. Th e presence 
of other central catheters or pacemaker leads may 
reduce the number of sites available for central line 
placement. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Central venous cannulation involves introducing a 
catheter into a vein so that the catheter’s tip lies with 
the venous system within the thorax. Generally, the 
optimal location of the catheter tip is just superior to 
or at the junction of the superior vena cava and the 
right atrium. When the catheter tip is located within 
the thorax, inspiration will increase or decrease CVP, 
depending on whether ventilation is controlled or 
spontaneous. Measurement of CVP is made with a 
water column (cm H 2 O), or, preferably, an electronic 
transducer (mm Hg). Th e pressure should be mea-
sured during end expiration. 
 Various sites can be used for cannulation 
( Figure 5–15 and Table 5–1). All cannulation sites 
have an increased risk of line-related infections the 
longer the catheter remains in place. Compared with 
other sites, the subclavian vein is associated with a 
greater risk of pneumothorax during insertion, but 
a reduced risk of other complications during pro-
longed cannulations (eg, in critically ill patients). Th e 
right internal jugular vein provides a combination of 
accessibility and safety . Left -sided internal jugular 
vein catheterization has an increased risk of pleural 
eff usion and chylothorax. Th e external jugular veins 
can also be used as entry sites, but due to the acute 
angle at which they join the great veins of the chest, 
are associated with a slightly increased likelihood of 
failure to gain access to the central circulation than 
the internal jugular veins. Femoral veins can also be 
cannulated, but are associated with an increased risk 
of line-related sepsis. Th ere are at least three cannu-
lation techniques: a catheter over a needle (similar 
to peripheral catheterization), a catheter through 
a needle (requiring a large-bore needle stick), and 
a catheter over a guidewire (Seldinger’s technique; 
 Figure 5–16 ). Th e overwhelming majority of central 
lines are placed using Seldinger’s technique. 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
101 
preparation (alcohol-based solutions are preferred), 
and sterile drapes. Th e two heads of the sternoclei-
domastoid muscle and the clavicle form the three 
sides of a triangle ( Figure 5–16A ). A 25-gauge nee-
dle is used to infi ltrate the apex of the triangle 
with local anesthetic. Th e internal jugular vein 
can be located using ultrasound, and we strongly 
 Th e following scenario describes the placement 
of an internal jugular venous line. Th e patient is 
placed in the Trendelenburg position to decrease the 
risk of air embolism and to distend the internal jug-
ular (or subclavian) vein. Venous catheterization 
requires full aseptic technique, including scrub, 
 sterile gloves, gown, mask, hat, bactericidal skin 
Internal
jugular
Subclavian
Sternal
notch
Ipsilateral
nipple
 FIGURE 515  The subclavian and internal 
jugular veins are both used for central access 
perioperatively with the sternal notch and 
ipsilateral nipple in the direction of needle 
passage for each, respectively. (Redrawn and 
reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, 
Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal 
Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
 TABLE 51 Relative rating of central venous access.  1  
Basilic
External 
Jugular
Internal 
Jugular
Subclavian
Femoral
Ease of cannulation
1
3
2
5
3
Long-term use
4
3
2
1
5
Success rate (pulmonary artery catheter placement)
4
5
1
2
3
Complications (technique-related)
1
2
4
5
3
  1  In each category, 1 = best, 5 = worst.
102 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
same path as the locator needle ( Figure 5–16B ), and, 
with the latter apparatus, the needle is removed from 
the catheter once the catheter has been advanced 
into the vein. When free blood fl ow is achieved, a J 
wire with a 3-mm radius curvature is introduced 
aft er confi rmation of vein puncture ( Figure 5–16C ). 
Th e needle (or catheter) is removed, and a dilator is 
advanced over the wire. Th e catheter is prepared for 
insertion by fl ushing all ports with saline, and all 
distal ports are “capped” or clamped, except the one 
through which the wire must pass. Next, the dilator 
is removed, and the fi nal catheter is advanced over 
recommend that it be used whenever possible 
(Figure 5–17). Alternatively, it may be located by 
advancing the 25-gauge needle—or a 23-gauge nee-
dle in heavier patients—along the medial border of 
the lateral head of the sternocleidomastoid, toward 
the ipsilateral nipple, at an angle of 30° to the skin. 
Aspiration of venous blood confi rms the vein’s loca-
tion. It is essential that the vein (and not the artery) 
be cannulated. Cannulation of the carotid artery can 
lead to hematoma, stroke, airway compromise, and 
possibly death. An 18-gauge thin-wall needle or an 
18-gauge catheter over needle is advanced along the 
 FIGURE 516  Right internal jugular cannulation with Seldinger’s technique (see text). 
A
C
B
D
Internal
jugular vein
Mastoid
process
External
jugular vein
Sternum
Clavicle
Trendelenburg position
Medial head
sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Lateral head
sternocleidomastoid
muscle
30° 
18-gauge needle
18-gauge
thinwall needle
J-wire is inserted
through needle
Catheter slides over J-wire,
which is subsequently removed
J-wire
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring
103
the wire ( Figure 5–16D ). Th e guidewire is removed, 
with a thumb placed over the catheter hub to pre-
vent aspiration of air until the intravenous catheter 
tubing is connected to it. Th e catheter is then 
secured, and a sterile dressing is applied. Correct 
location is confi rmed with a chest radiograph. 
 Th e catheter’s tip should not be allowed to 
migrate into the heart chambers. Fluid-
administration sets should be changed frequently, 
per your medical center protocol. 
 Th e possibility of placement of the vein dilator 
or catheter into the carotid artery can be decreased 
by transducing the vessel’s pressure waveform from 
the introducer needle (or catheter, if a catheter over 
needle has been used) before passing the wire (most 
simply accomplished by using a sterile intravenous 
extension tubing as a manometer). Alternatively, 
one may compare the blood’s color or Pa o 2 with 
an arterial sample. Blood color and pulsatility can 
be misleading or inconclusive, and more than one 
confi rmation method should be used. In cases where 
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is used, 
the guide wire can be seen in the right atrium, con-
fi rming venous entry ( Figure 5–18 ). 
 Th e risks of central venous cannulation include 
line infection, blood stream infection, air or throm-
bus embolism, arrhythmias (indicating that the 
catheter tip is in the right atrium or ventricle), hema-
toma, pneumothorax, hemothorax, hydrothorax, 
1
chylothorax, cardiac perforation, cardiac tampon-
ade, trauma to nearby nerves and arteries, and 
thrombosis. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Normal cardiac function requires adequate ven-
tricular fi lling by venous blood. CVP approximates 
right atrial pressure. Ventricular volumes are related 
to pressures through compliance. Highly compliant 
 FIGURE 517  A: Probe position for ultrasound of the 
large internal jugular vein with deeper carotid artery and 
 B: corresponding ultrasound image. CA, carotid artery; IJ, 
internal jugular vein. (Reproduced, with permission, from Tintinalli 
JE, et al:  Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 
7 th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2011.) 
A
B
 FIGURE 518  A wire is seen on this transesophageal 
echocardiography image of the right atrium. 
104 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 PULMONARY ARTERY 
CATHETERIZATION 
 Th e pulmonary artery (PA) catheter (or Swan-
Ganz catheter) was introduced into routine prac-
tice in operating rooms and intensive care units in 
the 1970s. It quickly became common for patients 
undergoing major surgery to be managed with PA 
catheterization. Th e catheter provides measure-
ments of both CO and PA occlusion pressures and 
was used to guide hemodynamic therapy, especially 
when patients became unstable. Determination of 
the PA occlusion or wedge pressure permitted (in 
the absence of mitral stenosis) an estimation of the 
left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), 
and, depending upon ventricular compliance, an 
estimate of ventricular volume. Th rough its ability 
to perform measurements of CO, the patient’s stroke 
volume (SV) was also determined. 
 CO = SV × HR 
 SV = CO/HR 
 Blood pressure = CO × systemic vascular 
resistance (SVR) 
 Consequently, hemodynamic monitoring with 
the PA catheter attempted to discern why a patient 
was unstable so that therapy could be directed at the 
underlying problem. 
 If the SVR is diminished, such as in states of 
vasodilatory shock (sepsis), the SV may increase. 
Conversely, a reduction in SV may be second-
ary to poor cardiac performance or hypovolemia. 
Determination of the “wedge” or pulmonary cap-
illary occlusion pressure (PCOP) by infl ating the 
catheter balloon estimates the LVEDP. A decreased 
SV in the setting of a low PCOP/ LVEDP indicates 
hypovolemia and the need for volume adminis-
tration. A “full” heart, refl ected by a high PCOP/ 
LVEDP and low SV, indicates the need for a positive 
inotropic drug. Conversely, a normal or increased 
SV in the setting of hypotension could be treated 
with the administration of vasoconstrictor drugs to 
restore SVR in a vasodilated patient. 
 Although patients can present concurrently 
with hypovolemia, sepsis, and heart failure, this 
basic treatment approach and the use of the 
ventricles accommodate volume with minimal 
changes in pressure. Noncompliant systems have 
larger swings in pressure with less volume changes. 
Consequently, an individual CVP measurement 
will reveal only limited information about ventricu-
lar volumes and fi lling. Although a very low CVP 
may indicate a volume-depleted patient, a mod-
erate to high pressure reading may refl ect either 
volume overload or poor ventricular compliance. 
Changes associated with volume loading coupled 
with other measures of hemodynamic performance 
(eg, blood pressure, HR, urine output) may be a bet-
ter indicator of the patient’s volume responsiveness. 
CVP measurements should always be considered 
within the context of the patient’s overall clinical 
perspective. 
 Th e shape of the central venous waveform 
corresponds to the events of cardiac contraction 
( Figure 5–19 ):  a waves from  a trial contraction are 
absent in atrial fi brillation and are exaggerated in 
junctional rhythms (“cannon”  a waves);  c waves are 
due to tricuspid valve elevation during early ven-
tricular contraction;  v waves refl ect  v enous return 
against a closed tricuspid valve; and the  x and  y 
descents are probably caused by the downward dis-
placement of the tricuspid valve during systole and 
tricuspid valve opening during diastole. 
 FIGURE 519  The upward waves ( a, c, v ) and the 
downward descents ( x, y ) of a central venous tracing in 
relation to the electrocardiogram (ECG). 
a
P
mm Hg
c
T
Q
S
R
ECG
tracing
Jugular
tracing
x
v
y
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring
105
PA catheter to guide therapy became more or less 
synonymous with perioperative intensive care and 
cardiac anesthesia. However, numerous large obser-
vational studies have shown that patients managed 
with PA catheters had worse outcomes than similar 
patients who were managed without PA catheters. 
Other studies seem to indicate that although PA 
catheter-guided patient management may do no 
harm, it off ers no specifi c benefi ts.  Although 
the PA catheter can be used to guide goal-
directed hemodynamic therapy to ensure organ per-
fusion in shock states, other less invasive methods to 
determine hemodynamic performance are available, 
including transpulmonary thermodilution CO mea-
surements and pulse contour analyses of the arterial 
pressure waveform. Both methods permit calcula-
tion of the SV as a guide for hemodynamic manage-
ment. Moreover, right atrial blood oxygen saturation, 
as opposed to mixed venous saturation (normal is 
75%), can be used as an alternative measure to dis-
cern tissue oxygen extraction and the adequacy of 
tissue oxygen delivery. 
 Despite numerous reports of its questionable 
utility and the increasing number of alternative 
methods to determine hemodynamic parameters, 
the PA catheter is still employed perioperatively 
more oft en in the United States than elsewhere. 
Although echocardiography can readily inform 
hemodynamic decision-making through imag-
ing the heart to determine if it is full, compressed, 
contracting, or empty echocardiography requires a 
trained individual to obtain and interpret the images. 
Alternative less invasive hemodynamic monitors 
have gained acceptance in Europe and may expand 
in the United States, further decreasing the use of PA 
catheters. 
 Until other alternatives are available, PA cath-
eterization should be considered whenever cardiac 
index, preload, volume status, or the degree of mixed 
venous blood oxygenation need to be known. Th ese 
measurements might prove particularly important 
in surgical patients at high risk for hemodynamic 
instability (eg, those who recently sustained myo-
cardial infarction) or during surgical procedures 
associated with an increased incidence of hemody-
namic complications (eg, thoracic aortic aneurysm 
repair). 
2
 Contraindications 
 Relative contraindications to pulmonary artery 
catheterization include left  bundle-branch block 
(because of the concern about complete heart block) 
and conditions associated with a greatly increased 
risk of arrhythmias, such as Wolff –Parkinson–White 
syndrome. A catheter with pacing capability is better 
suited to these situations. A PA catheter may serve as 
a nidus of infection in bacteremic patients or throm-
bus formation in patients prone to hypercoagulation. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Although various PA catheters are available, the 
most popular design integrates fi ve lumens into a 
7.5 FR catheter, 110-cm long, with a polyvinylchlo-
ride body ( Figure 5–20 ). Th e lumens house the 
3
Thermistor
Pulmonary artery distal port
Proximal infusion port
Right atrial port
Balloon
Proximal 
infusion
RA
 FIGURE 520  Balloon-tipped pulmonary artery ﬂ ota-
tion catheter (Swan–Ganz catheter). RA, right atrium. 
106 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Th e PA catheter is advanced through the intro-
ducer and into the internal jugular vein. At approxi-
mately 15 cm, the distal tip should enter the right 
atrium, and a central venous tracing that varies with 
respiration confi rms an intrathoracic position. Th e 
balloon is then infl ated with air according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations (usually 1.5 mL) 
to protect the endocardium from the catheter tip 
and to allow the right ventricle’s CO to direct the 
catheter forward. Th e balloon is always defl ated 
during withdrawal. During the catheter’s advance-
ment, the ECG should be monitored for arrhyth-
mias. Transient ectopy from irritation of the right 
ventricle by the balloon and catheter tip is common 
and rarely requires treatment. A sudden increase 
in the  systolic pressure on the distal tracing indi-
cates a right ventricular location of the catheter tip 
( Figure 5–22 ). Entry into the pulmonary artery nor-
mally occurs by 35–45 cm and is heralded by a sud-
den increase in  diastolic pressure. 
following: wiring to connect the thermistor near the 
catheter tip to a thermodilution CO computer; an air 
channel for infl ation of the balloon; a proximal port 
30 cm from the tip for infusions, CO injections, and 
measurements of right atrial pressures; a ventricular 
port at 20 cm for infusion of drugs; and a distal port 
for aspiration of mixed venous blood samples and 
measurements of PA pressure. 
 Insertion of a PA catheter requires central 
venous access, which can be accomplished using 
Seldinger’s technique, described above. Instead of 
a central venous catheter, a dilator and sheath are 
threaded over the guidewire. Th e sheath’s lumen 
accommodates the PA catheter aft er removal of the 
dilator and guidewire ( Figure 5–21 ). 
 Prior to insertion, the PA catheter is checked 
by infl ating and defl ating its balloon and irrigating 
all three intravascular lumens with saline. Th e distal 
port is connected to a transducer that is zeroed to 
the patient’s midaxillary line. 
 FIGURE 521  A percutaneous 
introducer consisting of a vessel 
dilator and sheath is passed over 
the guidewire. 
Guidewire
Sheath
Vessel
dilator
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
107 
fl otation of the catheter may be enhanced by having 
the patient inhale deeply; positioning the patient in 
a head-up, right lateral tilt position; injecting iced 
saline through the proximal lumen to stiff en the cath-
eter (which also increases the risk of perforation); or 
 To prevent catheter knotting, the balloon should 
be defl ated and the catheter withdrawn if pressure 
changes do not occur at the expected distances. 
In particularly diffi  cult cases (low CO, pulmo-
nary hypertension, or congenital heart anomalies), 
 FIGURE 522  Although its utility is increasingly 
questioned, pulmonary artery catheters continue to be a 
part of perioperative management of the cardiac surgery 
patient. Following placement of a sheath introducer in 
the central circulation (panels 1 and 2), the pulmonary 
artery catheter is ﬂ oated. Central line placement should 
always be completed using rigorous sterile technique, 
full body draping, and only after multiple, redundant 
conﬁ rmations of the correct localization of the venous 
circulation. Pressure guidance is used to ascertain the 
localization of the PA catheter in the venous circulation 
and the heart. Upon entry into the right atrium (panels 
3 and 4), the central venous pressure tracing is noted. 
Passing through the tricuspid valve (panels 5 and 6) 
right ventricular pressures are detected. At 35 to 50 cm 
depending upon patient size, the catheter will pass from 
the right ventricle through the pulmonic valve into the 
pulmonary artery (panels 7 and 8). This is noted by the 
measurement of diastolic pressure once the pulmonic 
valve is passed. Lastly, when indicated the balloon-
tipped catheter will wedge or occlude a pulmonary 
artery branch (panels 9, 10, and 11). When this occurs, 
the pulmonary artery pressure equilibrates with that of 
the left atrium which, barring any mitral valve pathology, 
should be a reﬂ ection of left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure. (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Soni N. 
 Practical Procedures in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care. Butterworth 
Heinemann, 1994.) 
8
PA
LA
LV
RV
RA
Interventricular
septum
(P1)
PA
(P1)
LA
1
2
3
4
7
6
5
9
10
11
8
IVC
Papillary
muscle
Coronary
sinus
SVC
5
0
10
20
0
10
20
0
10
20
0
10
20
135
80
25
10
130
8
25
5
108 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
chapter) can be used to measure CO, from which 
a multitude of hemodynamic values can be derived 
(Table 5–3). Some catheter designs incorporate 
electrodes that allow intracavitary ECG recording 
and pacing. Optional fi beroptic bundles allow con-
tinuous measurement of the oxygen saturation of 
mixed venous blood. 
 Starling demonstrated the relationship between 
left  ventricular function and left  ventricular end-
diastolic muscle fi ber length, which is usually 
proportionate to end-diastolic volume. If compli-
ance is not abnormally decreased (eg, by myocar-
dial ischemia, overload, ventricular hypertrophy, 
administering a small dose of an inotropic agent to 
increase CO. Occasionally, the insertion may require 
fl uoroscopy or TEE for guidance. 
 Aft er attaining a PA position, minimal PA cath-
eter advancement results in a pulmonary artery 
occlusion pressure (PAOP) waveform. Th e PA trac-
ing should reappear when the balloon is defl ated. 
Wedging before maximal balloon infl ation signals 
an overwedged position, and the catheter should be 
slightly withdrawn (with the balloon down, of 
course). Because  PA rupture may cause mortality 
and can occur because of balloon overinfl ation, the 
frequency of wedge readings should be minimized. 
 PA pressure should be continuously moni-
tored to detect an overwedged position indica-
tive of catheter migration. Furthermore, if the 
catheter has a right ventricular port 20 cm from the 
tip, distal migration can oft en be detected by a 
change in the pressure tracing that indicates a pul-
monary artery location. 
 Correct catheter position can be confi rmed by a 
chest radiograph. 
 Th e numerous complications of PA catheter-
ization include all complications associated with 
central venous cannulation plus bacteremia, endo-
carditis, thrombogenesis, pulmonary infarction, PA 
rupture, and hemorrhage (particularly in patients 
taking anticoagulants, elderly or female patients, 
or patients with pulmonary hypertension), catheter 
knotting, arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities, 
and pulmonary valvular damage (Table 5–2). Even 
trace hemoptysis should not be ignored, as it may 
herald PA rupture. If the latter is suspected, prompt 
placement of a double-lumen tracheal tube may 
maintain adequate oxygenation by the unaff ected 
lung. Th e risk of complications increases with the 
duration of catheterization, which usually should 
not exceed 72 hr. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e introduction of PA catheters into the operat-
ing room revolutionized the intraoperative man-
agement of critically ill patients. PA catheters allow 
more precise estimation of left  ventricular preload 
than either CVP or physical examination, as well as 
the sampling of mixed venous blood. Catheters with 
self-contained thermistors (discussed later in this 
4
 TABLE 52 Reported incidence of adverse 
eﬀ ects of pulmonary artery catheterization.  1  
Complication
Reported 
Incidence (%)
Central venous access
 Arterial puncture
 Bleeding at cut-down site
 Postoperative neuropathy
 Pneumothorax
 Air embolism
0.1–13
5.3
0.3–1.1
0.3–4.5
0.5
Catheterization
 Minor arrhythmias  2  
 Severe arrhythmias (ventricular 
tachycardia or ﬁ brillation) 2  
 Minor increase in tricuspid 
regurgitation
 Right bundle-branch block  2  
 Complete heart block (in patients with 
prior LBBB)  2  
4.7–68.9
0.3–62.7
17
0.1–4.3
0–8.5
Catheter residence
 Pulmonary artery rupture  2 
 Positive catheter tip cultures
 Catheter-related sepsis
 Thrombophlebitis
 Venous thrombosis
 Pulmonary infarction  2  
 Mural thrombus
 Valvular/endocardial vegetations or 
endocarditis  2  
 Deaths  2  
0.03–1.5
1.4–34.8
0.7–11.4
6.5
0.5–66.7
0.1–5.6
28–61
2.2–100
0.02–1.5
 1  Adapted from Practice guidelines for pulmonary artery 
catheterization: an updated report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on pulmonary artery catheterization. 
Anesthesiology 2003;99:999.
 2  Complications thought to be more common (or exclusively 
associated) with pulmonary artery catheterization than with central 
venous catheterization. LBBB, left bundle-branch block.
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
109 
become unreliable during conditions associated 
with changing left  atrial or ventricular compliance, 
mitral valve function, or pulmonary vein resistance. 
Th ese conditions are common immediately follow-
ing major cardiac or vascular surgery and in criti-
cally ill patients who are on inotropic agents or in 
septic shock. 
 Ultimately, the information provided by the PA 
catheter is like that from any perioperative moni-
tor dependent upon its correct interpretation by the 
patient’s care givers. In this context, the PA catheter 
is a tool to assist in goal-directed perioperative ther-
apy. Given the increasing number of less invasive 
methods now available to obtain similar informa-
tion, we suspect that PA catheterization will become 
mostly of historic interest. 
 CARDIAC OUTPUT 
 Indications 
 CO measurement to permit calculation of the SV is 
one of the primary reasons for PA catheterization. 
Currently, there are a number of alternative, less 
invasive methods to estimate ventricular function to 
assist in goal-directed therapy. 
or pericardial tamponade), LVEDP should refl ect 
fi ber length. In the presence of a normal mitral 
valve, left  atrial pressure approaches left  ventricu-
lar pressure during diastolic fi lling. Th e left  atrium 
connects with the right side of the heart through 
the pulmonary vasculature. Th e distal lumen of a 
correctly wedged PA catheter is isolated from right-
sided pressures by balloon infl ation. Its distal open-
ing is exposed only to capillary pressure, which—in 
the absence of high airway pressures or pulmonary 
vascular disease—equals left  atrial pressure. In fact, 
aspiration through the distal port during balloon 
infl ation samples arterialized blood. PAOP is an 
indirect measure of LVEDP which depending upon 
ventricular compliance approximates left  ventricu-
lar end diastolic volume. 
 Whereas central venous pressure may refl ect 
right ventricular function, a PA catheter may be 
indicated if either ventricle is markedly depressed, 
causing disassociation of right- and left -sided 
hemodynamics. CVP is poorly predictive of pul-
monary capillary pressures, especially in patients 
with abnormal left -ventricular function. Even the 
PAOP does not always predict LVEDP. Th e relation-
ship between left  ventricular end-diastolic volume 
(actual preload) and PAOP (estimated preload) can 
 TABLE 53 Hemodynamic variables derived from pulmonary artery catheterization data.  1  
Variable
Formula
Normal
Units
Cardiac index
 Cardiac output (L/min)
Body surface area (m2) 
2.2–4.2
L/min/m 2 
Total peripheral resistance
 (MAP − CVP) × 80
Cardiac output (L/min) 
1200–1500
dynes • s cm −5 
Pulmonary vascular resistance
 (PA − PAOP) × 80
Cardiac output (L/min) 
100–300
dynes • s cm −5 
Stroke volume
 Cardiac output (L/min) × 1000
Heart rate (beats/min) 
60–90
mL/beat
Stroke index (SI)
 Stroke volume (mL/beat)
Body surface area (m2) 
20–65
mL/beat/m 2 
Right ventricular stroke-work index
0.0136 ( PA − CVP )×SI
30–65
g-m/beat/m 2 
Left ventricular stroke-work index
0.0136 (MAP − PAOP) × SI
46–60
g-m/beat/m 2 
  1  g-m, gram meter; MAP, mean arterial pressure; CVP, central venous pressure;  PA , mean pulmonary artery pressure; PAOP, pulmonary artery occlusion 
pressure.
110 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Techniques & Complications 
 A. Thermodilution 
 Th e injection of a quantity (2.5, 5, or 10 mL) of fl uid 
that is below body temperature (usually room tem-
perature or iced) into the right atrium changes the 
temperature of blood in contact with the thermistor 
at the tip of the PA catheter. Th e degree of change is 
inversely proportionate to CO: Temperature change 
is minimal if there is a high blood fl ow, whereas tem-
perature change is greater when fl ow is reduced. 
Aft er injection, one can plot the temperature as a 
function of time to produce a  thermodilution curve
( Figure 5–23 ). CO is determined by a computer 
program that integrates the area under the curve. 
 Accurate measurements of CO depend on 
rapid and smooth injection, precisely known 
injectant temperature and volume, correct entry of 
the calibration factors for the specifi c type of PA 
catheter into the CO computer, and avoidance of 
measurements during electrocautery. Tricuspid 
regurgitation and cardiac shunts invalidate results 
because only right ventricular output into the PA is 
actually being measured. Rapid infusion of the iced 
injectant has rarely resulted in cardiac arrhythmias. 
5
∆T [°C]
t [s]
Injection of indicator
Transcardiopulmonary
thermodilution curve
Pulmonary artery
thermodilution curve
 FIGURE 523  Comparison of thermodilution curves 
after injection of cold saline into the superior vena cava. 
The peak temperature change arrives earlier when 
measured in the pulmonary artery (a) than if measured 
in the femoral artery (b). Thereafter, both curves soon 
reapproximate baseline. (Redrawn and reproduced, with 
permission from Reuter D, Huang C, Edrich T, et al: Cardiac output 
monitoring using indicator dilution techniques: basics, limits and 
perspectives. Anesth Analg 2010;110:799.) 
 A modifi cation of the thermodilution technique 
allows continuous CO measurement with a special 
catheter and monitor system. Th e catheter contains 
a thermal fi lament that introduces small pulses of 
heat into the blood proximal to the pulmonic valve 
and a thermistor that measures changes in PA blood 
temperature. A computer in the monitor determines 
CO by cross-correlating the amount of heat input 
with the changes in blood temperature. 
 Transpulmonary thermodilution (PiCCO ® sys-
tem) relies upon the same principles of thermodi-
lution, but does not require PA catheterization. A 
central line and a thermistor-equipped arterial cath-
eter (usually placed in the femoral artery) are nec-
essary to perform transpulmonary thermodilution. 
Th ermal measurements from radial artery catheters 
have been found to be invalid. Transpulmonary 
thermodilution measurements involve injection 
of cold indicator into the superior vena cava via a 
central line ( Figure 5–24 ). A thermistor notes the 
change in temperature in the arterial system follow-
ing the cold indicator’s transit through the heart and 
lungs and estimates the CO. 
Transpulmonary thermodilution also per-
mits the calculation of both the global-end dia-
stolic volume (GEDV) and the extravascular lung 
water (EVLW). Th rough mathematical analysis 
and extrapolation of the thermodilution curve, it 
is possible for the transpulmonary thermodilu-
tion computer to calculate both the mean transit 
time of the indicator and its exponential decay time 
( Figure 5–25 ). Th e intrathoracic thermal volume 
(ITTV) is the product of the CO and the mean tran-
sit time (MTT). Th e ITTV includes the pulmonary 
blood volume (PBV), EVLW, and the blood con-
tained within the heart. Th e pulmonary thermal 
volume (PTV) includes both the EVLW and the 
PBV and is obtained by multiplying the CO by the 
exponential decay time (EDT). Subtracting the PTV 
from the ITTV gives the GEDV (Figure 5–26). Th e 
GEDV is a hypothetical volume that assumes that 
all of the heart’s chambers are simultaneously full in 
diastole. With a normal index between 640 and 800 
mL/m 2 , the GEDV can assist in determining volume 
status. An extra vascular lung water index of less 
than 10 mL/kg is normative. Th e EVLW is the ITTV 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
111 
minus the intrathoracic blood volume (ITBV). Th e 
ITBV = GEDV × 1.25. 
 Th us EVLW = ITTV – ITBV. An increased EVLW 
can be indicative of fl uid overload. Th us, through 
mathematical analysis of the transpulmonary 
thermodilution curve, it is possible to obtain volu-
metric indices to guide fl uid replacement therapy. 
Moreover, the PiCCO ® system calculates SV varia-
tion and pulse pressure variation through pulse 
contour analysis, both of which can be used to 
Transpulmonary thermodilution
Pulse contour analysis
Time
Time
Time
Time
Bolus
detection
Bolus
injection
Bolus
Pressure
Temperature
Transpulmonary thermodilution
Pulse contour analysis
PiCCO® - Two methods combined for precise monitoring
Temperature
Pressure
• Continuous cardiac output
• Afterload (SVR - Systemic Vascular Resistance)
• Stroke Volume (SV - Stroke Volume)
• Volume responsiveness (SVV - Stroke Volume 
Variation, PPV - Pulse Pressure Variation)
• Thermodilution cardiac output
• Volumetric preload (GEDV - Global End-Diastolic Volume)
• Contractility (CFI - Cardiac Function Index)
• Lung water (EVLW - Extravascular Lung Water)
• The cold indicator passes through the right heart, lungs and left heart.
• The indicator is detected in a central artery.
• Precise cardiac output measurement based on Stewart-Hamilton algorithm.
• Breathing cycle independent.
• Passage through the heart and lungs allow determination of preload volumes 
and lung water.
Calibration
• Stroke volume is reflected by the area under the systolic part of the pressure curve
  (red area) of one heart beat.
• Cardiac output is calculated beat-by-beat: stroke volume µ heart rate
 FIGURE 524  Two methods combined for precise monitoring. (Reproduced, with permission, from Royal Philips Electronics.) 
112 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
determine fl uid responsiveness. Both SV and pulse 
pressure are decreased during positive pressure ven-
tilation. Th e greater the variations over the course 
of positive pressure inspiration and expiration, the 
more likely the patient is to improve hemodynamic 
measures following volume administration. 
 B. Dye Dilution 
 If indocyanine green dye (or another indicator such 
as lithium) is injected through a central venous cath-
eter, its appearance in the systemic arterial circula-
tion can be measured by analyzing arterial samples 
with an appropriate detector (eg, a densitometer for 
indocyanine green). Th e area under the resulting 
 dye indicator curve is related to CO. By analyzing 
arterial blood pressure and integrating it with CO, 
systems that use lithium (LiDCO TM ) also calculate 
beat-to-beat SV. In the LiDCO TM system, a small 
bolus of lithium chloride is injected into the circu-
lation. A lithium-sensitive electrode in an arterial 
catheter measures the decay in lithium concentra-
tion over time. Integrating the concentration over 
time graph permits the machine to calculate the 
CO. Th e LiDCO TM device, like the PiCCO ® ther-
modilution device, employs pulse contour analysis 
of the arterial wave form to provide ongoing beat-
to-beat determinations of CO and other calculated 
parameters. Lithium dilution determinations can be 
made in patients who have only peripheral venous 
access. Lithium should not be administered to 
patients in the fi rst trimester of pregnancy. Th e dye 
dilution technique, however, introduces the prob-
lems of indicator recirculation, arterial blood sam-
pling, and background tracer buildup, potentially 
Injection of indicator
e-1
ln C
C
t
t
MTTT
EDTT
 FIGURE 525  The upper curve represents the classic 
thermodilution curve, showing the concentration of an 
indicator over time at the site of detection. By extrapola-
tion of the curve (dashed line), potential recirculation 
phenomena are excluded. Logarithmic illustration (lower 
curve) allows deﬁ ning the mean transit time (MTT T ) and 
the exponential decay time (EDT T ) of the indicator. (Redrawn 
and reproduced, with permission from Reuter D, Huang C, Edrich T, 
et al: Cardiac output monitoring using indicator dilution techniques: 
basics, limits and perspectives. Anesth Analg 2010;110:799.) 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
113 
parameters, such as pulse pressure and SV variation 
with mechanical ventilation. Th ese indices are used 
to help determine if hypotension is likely to respond 
to fl uid therapy. 
 Pulse contour devices rely upon algorithms that 
measure the area of the systolic portion of the arte-
rial pressure trace from end diastole to the end of 
ventricular ejection. Th e devices then incorporate a 
calibration factor for the patient’s vascular compli-
ance, which is dynamic and not static. Some pulse 
contour devices rely fi rst on transpulmonary ther-
modilution or lithium thermodilution to calibrate 
the machine for subsequent pulse contour measure-
ments. Th e FloTrac (Edwards Life Sciences) does not 
require calibration with another measure and relies 
upon a statistical analysis of its algorithm to account 
for changes in vascular compliance occurring as a 
consequence of changed vascular tone. 
 D. Esophageal Doppler 
 Esophageal Doppler relies upon the Doppler prin-
ciple to measure the velocity of blood fl ow in the 
descending thoracic aorta. Th e Doppler princi-
ple is integral in perioperative echocardiography, 
as discussed below. Th e Doppler eff ect has been 
described previously in this chapter and is the result 
of the apparent change in sound frequency when the 
source of the sound wave and the observer of the 
sound wave are in relative motion. Blood in the aorta 
is in relative motion compared with the Doppler 
probe in the esophagus. As red blood cells travel, 
they refl ect a frequency shift , depending upon both 
the direction and velocity of their movement. When 
blood fl ows toward the transducer, its refl ected fre-
quency is higher than that which was transmitted 
by the probe. When blood cells move away from the 
transducer, the frequency is lower than that which 
was initially sent by the probe. By using the Doppler 
equation, it is possible to determine the velocity of 
blood fl ow in the aorta. Th e equation is: 
 Velocity of blood blow = {frequency change/
cosine of the angle of incidence between the Doppler 
beam and the blood fl ow} × {speed of sound in tis-
sue/2 (source frequency)} 
 For Doppler to provide a reliable estimate of 
velocity, the angle of incidence should be as close 
to zero as possible, since the cosine of 0 is 1. As the 
limiting the use of such approaches perioperatively. 
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers may 
aff ect the lithium sensor. 
 C. Pulse Contour Devices 
 Pulse contour devices use the arterial pressure 
tracing to estimate the CO and other dynamic 
 FIGURE 526  Assessment of global end-diastolic 
volume (GEDV) by transcardiopulmonary thermodilu-
tion. Upper row: The intrathroacic thermal volume (ITTV) 
is the complete volume of distribution of the thermal 
indicator, including the right atrium end-diastolic vol-
ume (RAEDV), the right ventricle (RVEDV), the left atrium 
(LAEDV), the left ventricle (LVEDV), the pulmonary blood 
volume (PBV), and the extravascular lung water (EVLW). 
It is calculated by multiplying cardiac output (FT) with the 
mean transit time (MTT T ) of the indicator. Middle row: 
The pulmonary thermal volume (PTV) represents the 
largest mixing chamber in this system and includes the 
PBV and the EVLW and is assessed by multiplying FT with 
the exponential decay time (EDT T ) of the thermal indica-
tor. Bottom row: The GEDV, including the volumes of the 
right and the left heart, now is calculated by subtracting 
PTV from ITTV. (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission from 
Reuter D, Huang C, Edrich T, et al: Cardiac output monitoring using 
indicator dilution techniques: basics, limits and perspectives. Anesth 
Analg 2010;110:799.) 
EVLW
EVLW
LVEDV
RVEDV
RAEDV
LAEDV
LVEDV
RVEDV
RAEDV
ITTV = FT × MTTT
PTV = FT × EDTT
GEDV = ITTV – PTV
PBV
LAEDV
PBV
114 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
angle approaches 90°, the Doppler measure is unre-
liable, as the cosine of 90° is 0. 
 Th e esophageal Doppler device calculates the 
velocity of fl ow in the aorta. As the velocities of 
the cells in the aorta travel at diff erent speeds over 
the cardiac cycle, the machine obtains a measure of 
all of the velocities of the cells moving over time. 
Mathematically integrating the velocities represents 
the distance that the blood travels. Next, using nor-
mograms, the monitor approximates the area of the 
descending aorta. Th e monitor thus calculates both 
the distance the blood travels, as well as the area: 
area × length = volume. 
 Consequently, the SV of blood in the descend-
ing aorta is calculated. Knowing the HR allows cal-
culation of that portion of the CO fl owing through 
the descending thoracic aorta, which is approxi-
mately 70% of total CO. Correcting for this 30% 
allows the monitor to estimate the patient’s total 
CO. Esophageal Doppler is dependent upon many 
assumptions and nomograms, which may hinder its 
ability to accurately refl ect CO in a variety of clinical 
situations. 
 E. Thoracic Bioimpedance 
 Changes in thoracic volume cause changes in tho-
racic resistance (bioimpedance) to low amplitude, 
high frequency currents. If thoracic changes in 
bioimpedance are measured following ventricular 
depolarization, SV can be continuously determined. 
Th is noninvasive technique requires six electrodes to 
inject microcurrents and to sense bioimpedance on 
both sides of the chest. Increasing fl uid in the chest 
results in less electrical bioimpedance. Mathematical 
assumptions and correlations are then made to 
calculate CO from changes in bioimpedance. 
Disadvantages of thoracic bioimpedance include 
susceptibility to electrical interference and reliance 
upon correct electrode positioning. Th e accuracy of 
this technique is questionable in several groups of 
patients, including those with aortic valve disease, 
previous heart surgery, or acute changes in thoracic 
sympathetic nervous function (eg, those undergoing 
spinal anesthesia). 
 F. Fick Principle 
 Th e amount of oxygen consumed by an individual 
(V o 2 ) equals the diff erence between arterial and 
venous (a–v) oxygen content (C) (Ca o 2 and Cv o 2 ) 
multiplied by CO. Th erefore 
 
CO
Oxygen consumption
a−v O2 content difference
=
V˙o2
Cao2 − Cvo2
=
 
 Mixed venous and arterial oxygen content are 
easily determined if a PA catheter and an arterial 
line are in place. Oxygen consumption can also be 
calculated from the diff erence between the oxygen 
content in inspired and expired gas. Variations of the 
Fick principle are the basis of all indicator–dilution 
methods of determining CO. 
 G. Echocardiography 
 Th ere are no more powerful tools to diagnose and 
assess cardiac function perioperatively than trans-
thoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transesoph-
ageal echocardiography (TEE). Both approaches 
are increasingly used in the operative setting. In 
the operating rooms, limited access to the chest 
makes TEE an ideal option to visualize the heart. 
Both TTE and TEE can be employed preopera-
tively and postoperatively. TTE has the advantage 
of being completely noninvasive; however, acquir-
ing the “windows” to view the heart can be diffi  cult. 
Disposable TEE probes are now available that can 
remain in position in critically ill patients for days, 
during which intermittent TEE examinations can be 
performed. 
 Echocardiography can be employed by anes-
thesia staff  in two ways, depending upon degrees of 
training and certifi cation. Basic (or hemodynamic) 
TEE permits the anesthesiologist to discern the pri-
mary source of a patient’s hemodynamic instability. 
Whereas in past decades the PA fl otation catheter 
would be used to determine why the patient might 
be hypotensive, the anesthetist performing hemody-
namic TEE is attempting to determine if the heart 
is adequately fi lled, contracting appropriately, not 
externally compressed, and devoid of any grossly 
obvious structural defects. At all times, information 
obtained from hemodynamic TEE may be corre-
lated with other information as to the patient’s gen-
eral condition. 
 Anesthesiologists performing advanced TEE 
make therapeutic and surgical recommendations 
based upon their TEE interpretations. Various 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
115 
two-dimensional image planes and windows 
to mentally recreate the three-dimensional 
anatomy. Th e ability to interpret these images 
at the advanced certifi cation level requires 
much training. 
•  Epiaortic and epicardiac ultrasound imaging 
techniques employ an echo probe wrapped in 
a sterile sheath and manipulated by thoracic 
surgeons intraoperatively to obtain views of 
organizations and boards have been established 
worldwide to certify individuals in all levels of peri-
operative echocardiography. More importantly, 
individuals who perform echocardiography should 
be aware of the credentialing requirements of their 
respective institutions. 
 Echocardiography has many uses, including: 
•  Diagnosis of the source of hemodynamic 
instability, including myocardial ischemia, 
systolic and diastolic heart failure, valvular 
abnormalities, hypovolemia, and pericardial 
tamponade 
•  Estimation of hemodynamic parameters, such 
as SV, CO, and intracavitary pressures 
•  Diagnosis of structural diseases of the heart, 
such as valvular heart disease, shunts, aortic 
diseases 
•  Guiding surgical interventions, such as mitral 
valve repair. 
 Various echocardiographic modalities are 
employed perioperatively by anesthesiologists, 
including TTE, TEE, epiaortic and epicardiac ultra-
sound, and three-dimensional echocardiography. 
Some advantages and disadvantages of the modali-
ties are as follows: 
•  TTE has the advantage of being noninvasive 
and essentially risk free. Limited scope TTE 
exams are now increasingly common in the 
intensive care unit ( Figure 5–27 ). 
•  Unlike TTE, TEE is an invasive procedure 
with the potential for life-threatening 
complications (esophageal rupture and 
mediastinitis) ( Figure 5–28 ). Th e close 
proximity of the esophagus to the left  
atrium eliminates the problem of obtaining 
“windows” to view the heart and permits great 
detail. TEE has been used frequently in the 
cardiac surgical operating room over the past 
decades. Its use to guide therapy in general 
cases has been limited by both the cost of 
the equipment and the learning necessary to 
correctly interpret the images. Both TTE and 
TEE generate two-dimensional images of the 
three-dimensional heart. Consequently, it is 
necessary to view the heart through many 
 FIGURE 527  Normal apical four-chamber view. RV, 
right ventrical; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; LA, left 
atrium. (Reproduced, with permission, from Carmody KA, et al: Hand-
book of Critical Care and Emergency Ultrasound. McGraw-Hill, 2011.) 
 FIGURE 528  The structures of the heart as seen 
on a midesophageal four-chamber view, including the 
right atrium (RA), tricuspid valve (TV), right ventricle 
(RV), left atrium (LA), mitral valve (MV), and left ventricle 
(LV). (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick 
J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal 
Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
116 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
through the tissues, encountering the blood, the 
heart, and other structures. Sound waves pass read-
ily through tissues of similar acoustic impedance; 
however, when they encounter diff erent tissues, they 
are scattered, refracted, or refl ected back toward the 
ultrasound probe. Th e echo wave then interacts with 
the ultrasound probe, generating an electrical signal 
that can be reconstructed as an image. Th e machine 
knows the time delay between the transmitted and 
the refl ected sound wave. By knowing the time delay, 
the location of the source of the refl ected wave can 
be determined and the image generated. Th e TEE 
probe contains myriad crystals generating and pro-
cessing waves, which then create the echo image. 
Th e TEE probe can generate images through mul-
tiple planes and can be physically manipulated in the 
stomach and esophagus, permitting visualization 
of heart structures ( Figure 5–30 ). Th ese views can 
be used to determine if the heart’s walls are being 
delivered adequate blood supply ( Figure 5–31 ). In 
the healthy heart, the heart’s walls thicken and move 
inwardly with each beat. Wall motion abnormalities, 
in which the heart’s walls fail to thicken during sys-
tole or move in a dyskinetic fashion, can be associ-
ated with myocardial ischemia. 
 Th e Doppler eff ect is routinely used in echocar-
diographic examinations to determine the heart’s 
function. In the heart, both the blood fl owing 
through the heart and the heart tissue move relative 
to the echo probe in the esophagus or on the chest 
wall. By using the Doppler eff ect, it is possible for 
echocardiographers to determine both the direction 
and the velocity of blood fl ow and tissue movement. 
 Blood fl ow in the heart follows the law of the 
conservation of mass. Th erefore, the volume of 
blood that fl ows through one point (eg, the left 
ventricular outfl ow tract) must be the same volume 
that passes through the aortic valve. When the path-
way through which the blood fl ows becomes nar-
rowed (eg, aortic stenosis), the blood velocity must 
increase to permit the volume to pass. Th e increase 
in velocity as blood moves toward an esophageal 
echo probe is detected. Th e Bernoulli equation 
(pressure change = 4V 2 ) allows echocardiographers 
to determine the pressure gradient between areas 
of diff erent velocity, where v represents the area of 
the aorta and the heart. Th e air-fi lled trachea 
prevents TEE imaging of the ascending aorta. 
Because the aorta is manipulated during 
cardiac surgery, detection of atherosclerotic 
plaques permits the surgeon to potentially 
minimize the incidence of embolic stroke. 
Imaging of the heart with epicardial ultrasound 
permits intraoperative echocardiography when 
TEE is contraindicated because of esophageal 
or gastric pathology. 
•  Th ree-dimensional echocardiography (TTE 
and TEE) has become available in recent years 
( Figure 5–29 ). Th ese techniques provide a 
three-dimensional view of the heart’s structure. 
In particular, three-dimensional images can 
better quantify the heart’s volumes and can 
generate a surgeon’s view of the mitral valve to 
aid in guiding valve repair. 
 Echocardiography employs ultrasound (sound 
at frequencies greater than normal hearing) from 
2 to 10 MHz. A piezoelectrode in the probe trans-
ducer converts electrical energy delivered to the 
probe into ultrasound waves. Th ese waves then travel 
 FIGURE 529  Three dimensional echocardiography of 
the mitral valve demonstrates the anterior leaﬂ et (AML), 
the posterior leaﬂ et (PML), the antero lateral commissure 
(ALC) and the postero medial commissure (PMC). The 
aortic valve (AV) is also seem. (Redrawn and reproduced, with 
permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia 
& Transesophageal Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
117 
4 m/sec refl ects a pressure gradient of 84 mm Hg 
between an area of slow fl ow (the left  ventricular 
outfl ow tract) and a region of high fl ow (a stenotic 
aortic valve). 
maximal velocity ( Figure 5–32 ). Using continuous 
wave Doppler, it is possible to determine the maxi-
mal velocity as blood accelerates through a patho-
logic heart structure. For example, a blood fl ow of 
 FIGURE 530  The echo probe is manipulated by 
the examiner in multiple ways to create the standard 
images that constitute the comprehensive periopera-
tive tee examination. At all times never force the probe. 
If resistance is encountered abandon the examination. 
Echocardiographic information can be provided by intra-
operative epicardial and epiaortic examination. Advancing 
the probe in the esophagus permits the upper, mid and 
transgastric examinations ( A ). The probe can be turned in 
the esophagus from left to right to examine both left and 
right sided structures ( A ). Using the button located on the 
probe permits the echocardiographer to rotate the scan 
beam through 180 degrees thereby creating various two 
dimensional imaging slices of the three dimensional heart 
( B ). Lastly, panels (C) and (D) demonstrate manipulation of 
the tip of the probe to permit the beam to be directed to 
best visualize the image. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Shanewise JS, et.al. ASE/SCA guidelines for performing a 
comprehensive intraoperative multiplane transesophageal echocar-
diography examination; recommendations of the American Society of 
Echocardiography Council for Intraoperative Echocardiography and the 
Society for Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force for Certiﬁ cation 
in Perioperative Transesophageal Echocardiography. Anesth Analg 
1999;89:870-884.) 
Withdraw
Advance
Rotate
right/left
Anteflex
Retroflex
Flex right
Flex left
A
C
B
D
118 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Likewise, the Bernoulli equation permits echo-
cardiographers to estimate PA and other intracavi-
tary pressures, if assumptions are made. 
 Assume P 1 >> P 2 
 Blood fl ow proceeds from an area of high pres-
sure P 1 to an area of low pressure P 2 . 
 Th e pressure gradient = 4V 2 , where V is the 
maximal velocity measured in meters per second. 
 Th us, 
 4V 2 = P 1 − P 2 
 Th us, assuming that there is a jet of regurgitant 
blood fl ow from the left  ventricle into the left  atrium 
and that left  ventricular systolic pressure (P 1 ) is the 
same as systemic blood pressure (eg, no aortic ste-
nosis), it is possible to calculate left  atrial pressure 
(P 2 ). In this manner, echocardiographers can esti-
mate intracavitary pressures when there are pressure 
gradients, measurable fl ow velocities between areas 
 FIGURE 532  The time-velocity interval (TVI) of the 
aortic valve is calculated using continuous wave Doppler, 
while pulse wave Doppler is useful for measurements at 
lower blood velocities. This continuous wave Doppler has 
been aligned parallel to that aortic valve ﬂ ow as imaged 
using the deep transgastric view. Of note, the bold veloc-
ity across the aortic valve is greater than 4 m/sec. (Redrawn 
and reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer 
D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal Echocardiography, 
McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
 FIGURE 531  The midesophageal four-chamber 
view ( A ), the midesophageal two-chamber view ( B ), the 
midesophageal long-axis vew ( C ), and the transgastric 
mid short-axis vew ( D ) are depicted. The diﬀ erent views 
provide the opportunity to observe the myocardium 
supplied by each of the three main coronary vessels, the 
left circumﬂ ex (Cx), the left anterior descending (LAD) 
and the right coronary artery (RCA). Areas of impaired 
myocardial perfusion are suggested by the inability of 
the myocardium to both thicken and move inwardly 
during systole. Image  D is very useful for monitoring in 
the operating room because left ventricular myocardium 
supplied by each of the three vessels can be seen in one 
image. (Modifed and reproduced, with permission, from Shanewise 
JS, et.al. ASE/SCA guidelines for performing a comprehensive 
intraoperative multiplane transesophageal echocardiography 
examination; recommendations of the American Society of 
Echocardiography Council for Intraoperative Echocardiography and the 
Society for Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force for Certiﬁ cation 
in Perioperative Transesophageal Echocardiography. Anesth Analg 
1999;89:870-884.) 
A
B
C
D
Cx
LAD
RCA
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
119 
of high and low pressure, and knowledge of either P 1 
or P 2 ( Figure 5–33 ). 
 Th e Doppler principle is also used by echo-
cardiographers to identify areas of abnormal fl ow 
using color fl ow Doppler. Color fl ow Doppler cre-
ates a visual picture of the heart’s blood fl ow by 
assigning a color code to the velocities in the heart. 
Blood fl ow directed away from the echocardio-
graphic transducer is color-coded blue, whereas 
that which is moving toward the probe is red. Th e 
higher the velocity of fl ow, the lighter the color hue 
( Figure 5–34 ). When the velocity of blood fl ow 
becomes greater than that which the machine can 
measure, fl ow toward the probe is misinterpreted as 
fl ow away from the probe, creating images of turbu-
lent fl ow and “aliasing” of the image. Such changes 
in fl ow pattern are used by echocardiographers to 
identify areas of pathology. 
 Doppler can also be used to provide an estimate 
of SV and CO. Similar to esophageal Doppler probes 
 FIGURE 533  Intracavity pressures can be calculated 
using known pressures and the Bernoulli equation when 
regurgitant jets are present. The PA systolic pressure is 
obtained when tricuspid regurgitation is present and the 
right atrial pressure known. Assuming no pulmonic valve 
disease, the right ventricular systolic pressure and the 
pulmonary systolic pressure are the same. The left atrial 
pressure can be similarly calculated if mitral regurgitation 
is present. Again, assuming no valvular disease LV systolic 
pressure should equal systemic systolic blood pressure. 
Subtracting 4V 2 from the LVSP estimates the left atrial 
pressure. (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, 
Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal Echocar-
diography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
Tricuspid
regurgitation
jet velocity
Mitral regurgitation
jet velocity
LVSP = Systolic blood pressure
V = Velocity MR jet
LVSP – LAP = 4VV
LVSP = 4VV + LAP
RVSP = PA systolic pressure
RAP = Central venous pressure
V = Velocity TR jet
RVSP – RAP = 4VV
RVSP = 4VV + RAP
RA
LA
LV
RV
TV
MV
 FIGURE 534  The color ﬂ ow Doppler image of the 
midesophageal aortic valve long-axis view demonstrates 
measurement of the vena contracta of aortic regurgitation. 
The vena contracta represents the smallest diameter of 
the regurgitant jet at the level of the aortic valve. A vena 
conracta of 6.2 mm grades the aortic regurgitation in 
this case as severe. (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, 
from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & 
Transesophageal Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
120 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
previously described, TTE and TEE can be used to 
estimate CO. Assuming that the left  ventricular 
outfl ow tract is a cylinder, it is possible to measure 
its diameter ( Figure 5–35 ). Knowing this, it is pos-
sible to calculate the area through which blood fl ows 
using the following equation: 
 Area = πr 2 = 0.785 × diameter 2 
 Next, the time velocity integral is determined. 
A Doppler beam is aligned in parallel with the left  
ventricular outfl ow tract ( Figure 5–36 ). Th e veloci-
ties passing through the left  ventricular outfl ow tract 
are recorded, and the machine integrates the veloc-
ity/time curve to determine the distance the blood 
traveled. 
 Area × length = volume 
 In this instance, the SV is calculated: 
 SV × HR = CO 
 Lastly, Doppler can be used to examine the 
movement of the myocardial tissue. Tissue veloc-
ity is normally 8–15 cm/sec (much less than that of 
 FIGURE 535  The midesophageal long-axis view 
is employed in this image to measure the diameter of 
the left ventricular outﬂ ow track (LVOT). Knowing the 
diameter of the LVOT permits calculation of the LVOT 
area (D 2 × 0.785 = LVOT area). (Redrawn and reproduced, with 
permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia 
& Transesophageal Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
 FIGURE 536  PW Doppler is employed in this deep 
transgastric view interrogation of the left ventricular 
outﬂ ow track (LVOT). Blood is ﬂ owing in the LVOT away 
from the esophagus. Therefore, the ﬂ ow velocities appear 
below the baseline. Flow velocity through the LVOT is 
46.5 cm/s. This is as expected when there is no pathology 
noted as blood is ejected along the LVOT. Tracing the 
ﬂ ow envelope (dotted lines) identiﬁ es the time-velocity 
interval (TVI). In this example the TVI is 14 cm. (Redrawn 
and reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, 
et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal Echocardiography, 
McGraw-Hill, 2011.) 
blood, which is 100 cm/s). Using the tissue Doppler 
function of the echo machine, it is possible to dis-
cern both the directionality and velocity of the 
heart’s movement. During diastolic fi lling, the lat-
eral annulus myocardium will move toward a TEE 
probe. Reduced myocardial velocities (<8 cm/s) 
are associated with impaired diastolic function and 
higher left  ventricular end-diastolic pressures. 
 Ultimately, echocardiography can provide com-
prehensive cardiovascular monitoring. Its routine 
use outside of the cardiac operating room has been 
hindered by both the costs of the equipment and the 
training required to correctly interpret the images. 
As equipment becomes more readily available, it is 
likely that anesthesia staff  will perform an increas-
ing number of echocardiographic examinations for 
hemodynamic monitoring perioperatively. When 
questions arise beyond those related to hemody-
namic guidance, interpretation by an individual 
credentialed in advanced perioperative echocar-
diography is warranted. 
 
CHAPTER 5 Cardiovascular Monitoring 
121 
 The choice of hemodynamic monitors remains 
with the individual physician and the availability 
of various monitoring techniques. It is important 
to also consider monitors that will be available in 
the postoperative setting to insure continuation of 
goal-directed therapy. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Alhasemi J, Cecconi M, della Rocca G, et al: Minimally 
invasive monitoring of cardiac output in the cardiac 
surgery intensive care unit. Curr Heart Fail Rep 
2010;7:116. 
 Beaulieu Y, Marik P: Bedside ultrasonography in the 
ICU: part 1. Chest 2005;128:881. 
 Beaulieu Y, Marik P: Bedside ultrasonography in the 
ICU: part 2. Chest 2005;128:1766. 
 Breukers RM, Groeneveld AB, de Wilde RB, 
Jansen JR: Transpulmonary versus continuous 
thermodilution cardiac output aft er valvular and 
coronary artery surgery. Interact CardioVasc 
Th orac Surg 2009;9:4. 
 Chatterjee K: Th e Swan Ganz catheters: past, present, and 
future. A viewpoint. Circulation 2009;119:147. 
 Falyar C: Ultrasound in anesthesia: applying scientifi c 
principles to clinical practice. AANA J 2010;78:332. 
 Funk D, Moretti E, Gan T: Minimally invasive cardiac 
monitoring in the perioperative setting. Anesth Analg 
2009;108:887. 
 Goepfert M, Reuter D, Akyol D, et al: Goal-directed fl uid 
management reduces vasopressor and catecholamine 
use in cardiac surgery patients. Intensive Care Med 
2007;33:96. 
 Hadian M, Kim H, Severyn D, Pinsky M: Cross 
comparison of cardiac output trending accuracy 
of LiDCO, PiCCO, FloTrac and pulmonary artery 
catheters. Crit Care 2010;14:R212. 
 Hett D, Jonas M: Non-invasive cardiac output 
monitoring. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 2003;14:187. 
 Hung J, Lang R, Flachskampf F, et al: 3D echocardiography: 
a review of the current status and future directions. J 
Am Soc Echocardiogr 2007;20:213. 
 Leier C: Invasive hemodynamic monitoring the aft ermath 
of the ESCAPE trial. Cardiol Clin 2007; 25:565. 
 Metzelder S, Coburn M, Fries M, et al: Performance of 
cardiac output measurement derived from arterial 
pressure waveform analysis in patients requiring 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Hemodynamic Monitoring and 
Management of a Complicated Patient 
 A 68-year-old male presents with a perforated 
colon secondary to diverticulitis. Vital signs are: 
heart rate, 120 beats/min; blood pressure, 80 mm 
Hg/55 mm Hg; respiratory rate, 28 breaths/min; 
and body temperature, 38 C°. He is scheduled for 
emergency exploratory laparotomy. His past his-
tory includes placement of a drug-eluting stent 
in the left anterior descending artery two weeks 
earlier. His medications include metoprolol and 
clopidogrel. 
 What hemodynamic monitors should be 
employed? 
 This patient presents with multiple medical 
issues that could lead to perioperative hemody-
namic instability. He has a history of coronary 
 artery disease for which he has been given stents. 
His previous and current ECGs should be reviewed 
for signs of new ST- and T-wave changes, heralding 
ischemia. He is both tachycardic and febrile, and, 
consequently, may be concurrently ischemic, vaso-
dilated, and hypovolemic. All of these conditions 
could complicate perioperative management. 
 Arterial cannulation and monitoring will pro-
vide beat-to-beat blood pressure determinations 
intraoperatively and will also provide for blood 
gas measurements in a patient likely to be acidotic 
and hemodynamically unstable. Central venous 
access is obtained to permit volume resuscitation 
and to provide a port for delivery of ﬂ uid for trans-
pulmonary measurements of CO and SV variation. 
Alternatively, pulse contour analysis can be em-
ployed from an arterial trace to determine volume 
responsiveness, should the patient become he-
modynamically unstable. Echocardiography can 
be used to determine ventricular function, ﬁ lling 
pressures, and CO and to provide surveillance for 
the development of ischemia-induced wall motion 
abnormalities. 
 PA catheters can also be placed to measure CO 
and pulmonary capillary occlusion pressure. 
122 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force 
for Certifi cation in Perioperative Transesophageal 
Echocardiography. Anesth Analg 1999;89:870. 
 Skubas N: Intraoperative Doppler tissue imaging is 
a valuable addition to cardiac anesthesiologists’ 
armamentarium: a core review. Anesth Analg 
2009;108:48. 
 Singer M: Oesophageal Doppler monitoring: should it 
be routine for high-risk surgical patients? Curr Opin 
Anesthesiol 2011;24:171. 
 Wouters P: New modalities in echocardiography: 
tissue Doppler and strain rate imaging. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2005;18:47. 
 Yeates T, Zimmerman J, Cahalan M: Perioperative 
echocardiography: two-dimensional and three-
dimensional applications. Anesthesiol Clin 
2008;26:419. 
high-dose vasopressor therapy. Br J Anaesth 
2011;106:776. 
 Michard F, Alaya S, Zarka V, et al: Global end diastolic 
volume as an indicator of cardiac preload in patients 
with septic shock. Chest 2003;124:1900. 
 Reuter D, Huang C, Edrich T, et al: Cardiac output 
monitoring using indicator dilution techniques: basics, 
limits and perspectives. Anesth Analg 2010;110:799. 
 Rex S. Brose S, Metzelder S, et al: Prediction of fl uid 
responsiveness in patients during cardiac surgery. 
Br J Anaesth 2004;93:782. 
 Shanewise J, Cheung A, Aronson S, et al: ASE/
SCA guidelines for performing a comprehensive 
intraoperative multiplane transesophageal 
echocardiography examination: recommendations of 
the American Society of Echocardiography Council 
for Intraoperative Echocardiography and the Society 
 123 
6
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
 Capnography rapidly and reliably indicates 
esophageal intubation—a common cause 
of anesthetic catastrophe—but does not 
detect bronchial intubation . 
1
 Close monitoring of neuromuscular 
blockade using both clinical and 
quantitative means can reduce the 
incidence of postoperative curarization . 
2
 Th e previous chapter reviewed routine hemody-
namic monitoring used by anesthesiologists. Th is 
chapter examines the vast array of techniques and 
devices used perioperatively to monitor neuromus-
cular transmission, neurological condition, respira-
tory gas exchange, and body temperature. 
 Respiratory Gas 
Exchange Monitors 
 PRECORDIAL & ESOPHAGEAL 
STETHOSCOPES 
 Indications 
 Prior to the routine availability of gas exchange 
monitors, anesthesiologists used a precordial or 
esophageal stethoscope to ensure that the lungs were 
being ventilated in the event that the circuit became 
disconnected. Likewise, the heart tones could be 
auscultated to confi rm a beating heart. Although 
less essential today because other modalities are 
available, the fi nger on the pulse and auscultation 
remain front-line monitors, especially when tech-
nology fails. Chest auscultation remains the primary 
method to confi rm bilateral lung ventilation in the 
operating room, even if end tidal CO 2 detection 
is the primary mechanism to exclude esophageal 
intubation. 
 Contraindications 
 Instrumentation of the esophagus should be avoided 
in patients with esophageal varices or strictures. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 A precordial stethoscope (Wenger chestpiece) is a 
heavy, bell-shaped piece of metal placed over the 
chest or suprasternal notch. Although its weight 
tends to maintain its position, double-sided adhe-
sive disks provide an acoustic seal to the patient’s 
skin. Various chestpieces are available, but the child 
size works well for most patients. Th e bell is con-
nected to the anesthesiologist by extension tubing. 
 Th e esophageal stethoscope is a soft  plastic cath-
eter (8–24F) with balloon-covered distal openings 
( Figure 6–1 ). Although the quality of breath and 
heart sounds is much better than with a precordial 
stethoscope, its use is limited to intubated patients. 
Temperature probes, electrocardiogram (ECG) 
leads, ultrasound probes, and even atrial pacemaker 
electrodes have been incorporated into esophageal 
stethoscopes. Placement through the mouth or nose 
can occasionally cause mucosal irritation and bleed-
ing. Rarely, the stethoscope slides into the trachea 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
124 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
instead of the esophagus, resulting in a gas leak 
around the tracheal tube cuff . 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e information provided by a precordial or esoph-
ageal stethoscope includes confi rmation of ventila-
tion, quality of breath sounds (eg, stridor, wheezing), 
regularity of heart rate, and quality of heart tones 
(muffl  ed tones are associated with decreased cardiac 
output). 
 Th e confi rmation of bilateral breath sounds 
aft er tracheal intubation, however, is made with a 
binaural stethoscope. 
 PULSE OXIMETRY 
 Indications & Contraindications 
 Pulse oximeters are mandatory monitors for any 
anesthetic, including cases of moderate sedation. 
Th ere are no contraindications. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Pulse oximeters combine the principles of oximetry 
and plethysmography to noninvasively measure 
oxygen saturation in arterial blood. A sensor con-
taining light sources (two or three light-emitting 
diodes) and a light detector (a photodiode) is placed 
across a fi nger, toe, earlobe, or any other perfused 
tissue that can be transilluminated. When the light 
source and detector are opposite one another across 
the perfused tissue, transmittance oximetry is used. 
When the light source and detector are placed on 
the same side of the patient (eg, the forehead), the 
backscatter (refl ectance) of light is recorded by the 
detector. 
 Oximetry depends on the observation that 
oxygenated and reduced hemoglobin diff er in their 
absorption of red and infrared light (Lambert–Beer 
law). Specifi cally, oxyhemoglobin (HbO 2 ) absorbs 
more infrared light (940 nm), whereas deoxyhemo-
globin absorbs more red light (660 nm) and thus 
appears blue, or cyanotic, to the naked eye. Th e 
change in light absorption during arterial pulsations 
is the basis of oximetric determinations ( Figure 6–2 ). 
Th e ratio of the absorptions at the red and infrared 
wavelengths is analyzed by a microprocessor to pro-
vide the oxygen saturation (Sp o 2 ) of arterial blood 
based on established norms. Th e greater the ratio of 
red/ infrared absorption, the lower the arterial satu-
ration. Arterial pulsations are identifi ed by plethys-
mography, allowing corrections for light absorption 
by nonpulsating venous blood and tissue. Heat from 
the light source or sensor pressure may, rarely, result 
in tissue damage if the monitor is not periodically 
moved. No user calibration is required. 
 FIGURE 61  Esophageal stethoscope. 
Connection to
monaural
earpiece
Connection to
temperature
monitor
Thermocouple
 FIGURE 62  Oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin 
diﬀ er in their absorption of red and infrared light. 
Deoxyhemoglobin
Oxyhemoglobin
20,000
10,000
5000
1000
500
550
650
(Red)
(Infrared)
750
850
950
100
50
10
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
125 
(Sv o 2 ) and noninvasive brain oximetry. Th e for-
mer requires the placement of a pulmonary artery 
catheter containing fi beroptic sensors that continu-
ously determine Sv o 2 in a manner analogous to 
pulse oximetry. Because Sv o 2 varies with changes in 
hemoglobin concentration, cardiac output, arterial 
oxygen saturation, and whole-body oxygen con-
sumption, its interpretation is somewhat complex. 
A variation of this technique involves placing the 
fi beroptic sensor in the internal jugular vein, which 
provides measurements of jugular bulb oxygen satu-
ration in an attempt to assess the adequacy of cere-
bral oxygen delivery. 
 Noninvasive brain oximetry monitors regional 
oxygen saturation (rS o 2 ) of hemoglobin in the brain. 
A sensor placed on the forehead emits light of spe-
cifi c wavelengths and measures the light refl ected 
back to the sensor (near-infrared optical spectros-
copy). Unlike pulse oximetry, brain oximetry mea-
sures venous and capillary blood oxygen saturation 
in addition to arterial blood saturation. Th us, its 
oxygen saturation readings represent the average 
oxygen saturation of all regional microvascular 
hemoglobin (approximately 70%). Cardiac arrest, 
cerebral embolization, deep hypothermia, or severe 
hypoxia cause a dramatic decrease in rS o 2 . (See the 
section “Neurological System Monitors.”) 
 CAPNOGRAPHY 
 Indications & Contraindications 
 Determination of end-tidal CO 2 (E tco 2 ) concentra-
tion to confi rm adequate ventilation is mandatory 
during all anesthetic procedures, but particularly 
so for general anesthesia. A rapid fall of E tco 2 is a 
sensitive indicator of air embolism, a major com-
plication of sitting craniotomies. Th ere are no 
contraindications. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Capnography is a valuable monitor of the pul-
monary, cardiovascular, and anesthetic breathing 
systems. Capnographs in common use rely on the 
absorption of infrared light by CO 2 ( Figure 6–3 ). 
As with oximetry, absorption of infrared light by 
CO 2 is governed by the Beer–Lambert law. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 In addition to Sp o 2 , pulse oximeters provide an 
indication of tissue perfusion (pulse amplitude) and 
measure heart rate. Because Sp o 2 is normally close 
to 100%, only gross abnormalities are detectable in 
most anesthetized patients. Depending on a particu-
lar patient’s oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve, 
a 90% saturation may indicate a Pa o 2 of less than 
65 mm Hg. Th is compares with clinically detect-
able cyanosis, which requires 5 g of desaturated 
hemoglobin and usually corresponds to an Sp o 2 of 
less than 80%. Bronchial intubation will usually go 
undetected by pulse oximetry in the absence of lung 
disease or low fraction of inspired oxygen concen-
trations (F io 2 ). 
 Because carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) and 
Hb O 2 absorb light at 660 nm identically, pulse oxim-
eters that compare only two wavelengths of light will 
register a falsely high reading in patients with car-
bon monoxide poisoning. Methemoglobin has the 
same absorption coeffi  cient at both red and infra-
red wavelengths. Th e resulting 1:1 absorption ratio 
corresponds to a saturation reading of 85%.  Th us, 
methemoglobinemia causes a falsely low satura-
tion reading when Sa o 2 is actually greater than 
85% and a falsely high reading if Sa o 2 is actually 
less than 85% . 
 Most pulse oximeters are inaccurate at low Sp o 2 , 
and all demonstrate a delay between changes in Sa o 2 
and Sp o 2 .  Other causes of pulse oximetry artifact 
include excessive ambient light, motion, methy-
lene blue dye, venous pulsations in a dependent 
limb, low perfusion (eg, low cardiac output, pro-
found anemia, hypothermia, increased systemic 
vascular resistance), malpositioned sensor, and 
leakage of light from the light-emitting diode to 
the photodiode, bypassing the arterial bed (opti-
cal shunting) . Nevertheless, pulse oximetry can be 
an invaluable aid to the rapid diagnosis of hypoxia, 
which may occur in unrecognized esophageal intu-
bation, and it furthers the goal of monitoring oxygen 
delivery to vital organs. In the recovery room, pulse 
oximetry helps identify postoperative pulmonary 
problems, such as severe hypoventilation, broncho-
spasm, and atelectasis. 
 Two extensions of pulse oximetry technol-
ogy are mixed venous blood oxygen saturation 
126 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
of detecting inspired CO 2 , such as would occur with 
a breathing circuit malfunction (eg, absorbent 
exhaustion, sticking unidirectional valves). Th e 
weight of the sensor causes traction on the tracheal 
tube, and its generation of radiant heat can cause 
skin burns. Newer designs address these problems. 
 B. Diverting (Aspiration) 
 Diverting (sidestream) capnographs continuously 
suctions gas from the breathing circuit into a sample 
cell within the monitor. CO 2 concentration is deter-
mined by comparing infrared light absorption in the 
sample cell with a chamber free of CO 2 . Continuous 
aspiration of anesthetic gas essentially represents a 
leak in the breathing circuit that will contaminate the 
operating room unless it is scavenged or returned to 
the breathing system. High aspiration rates (up to 
250 mL/min) and low-dead-space sampling tubing 
usually increase sensitivity and decrease lag time. If 
tidal volumes (V t ) are small (eg, pediatric patients), 
however, a high rate of aspiration may entrain fresh 
gas from the circuit and dilute E tco 2 measure-
ment. Low aspiration rates (less than 50 mL/min) 
can retard E tco 2 measurement and underestimate 
it during rapid ventilation. New units autocalibrate, 
but older units must be zeroed to room air and 
against a known CO 2 concentration (usually 5%). 
Diverting units are prone to water precipitation in 
the aspiration tube and sampling cell that can cause 
 A. Nondiverting (Flowthrough) 
 Nondiverting (mainstream) capnographs mea-
sure CO 2 passing through an adaptor placed in the 
breathing circuit ( Figure 6–4 ). Infrared light trans-
mission through the gas is measured and CO 2 con-
centration is determined by the monitor. Because of 
problems with drift , older fl owthrough models self-
zeroed during inspiration. Th us, they were incapable 
 FIGURE 63  Absorption spectrum for CO 2 . (Reproduced, with permission, from Hill DW: Methods of analysis in the gaseous and vapour 
phase. In:  Scientific Foundations of Anesthesia . Scurr C, Feldman S [editors]. Year Book, 1982, p 85.) 
4.259 µm
Wavelength (µm)
13C16O2 isotope
Absorption (%)
4.297 µm
4.218 µm
 FIGURE 64  A nondiverting sensor placed in-line 
analyzes CO 2 concentration at the sampling site. 
End-tidal
CO2 monitor
Infrared
transducer
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring
127
infrared spectrophotometry, or piezoelectric crystal 
(quartz) oscillation. Mass spectrometry and Raman 
spectroscopy are primarily of historical interest, as 
most anesthetic gases are now measured by infrared 
absorption analysis. 
 Infrared units use a variety of techniques similar 
to that described for capnography. Th ese devices are 
all based on the Beer–Lambert law, which provides 
a formula for measuring an unknown gas within 
inspired gas because the absorption of infrared 
light passing through a solvent (inspired or expired 
gas) is proportional to the amount of the unknown 
gas. Oxygen and nitrogen do not absorb infrared 
light. Th ere are a number of commercially available 
devices that use a single- or dual-beam infrared light 
source and positive or negative fi ltering. Because 
oxygen molecules do not absorb infrared light, their 
concentration cannot be measured with monitors 
that rely on infrared technology and, hence, it must 
be measured by other means (see below). 
 Clinical Considerations 
 A. Piezoelectric Analysis 
 Th e piezoelectric method uses oscillating quartz 
crystals, one of which is covered with lipid. Volatile 
anesthetics dissolve in the lipid layer and change the 
frequency of oscillation, which, when compared with 
the frequency of oscillation of an uncovered crystal, 
allows the concentration of the volatile anesthetic 
to be calculated. Neither these devices nor infrared 
photoacoustic analysis allow diff erent anesthetic 
agents to be distinguished. New dual-beam infrared 
optical analyzers do allow gases to be separated and 
an improperly fi lled vaporizer to be detected. 
 B. Oxygen Analysis 
 To measure the F io 2 of inhaled gas, manufactur-
ers of anesthesia machines have relied on various 
technologies. 
 C. Galvanic Cell 
 Galvanic cell (fuel cell) contains a lead anode and 
gold cathode bathed in potassium chloride. At the 
gold terminal, hydroxyl ions are formed that react 
with the lead electrode (thereby gradually con-
suming it) to produce lead oxide, causing current, 
which is proportional to the amount of oxygen being 
obstruction of the sampling line and erroneous 
readings. Expiratory valve malfunction is detected 
by the presence of CO 2 in inspired gas. Although 
inspiratory valve failure also results in rebreathing 
CO 2 , this is not as readily apparent because part of 
the inspiratory volume will still be free of CO 2 , caus-
ing the monitor to read zero during part of the inspi-
ratory phase. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Other gases (eg, nitrous oxide) also absorb infrared 
light, leading to a pressure-broadening eff ect. To 
minimize the error introduced by nitrous oxide, 
various modifi cations and fi lters have been incorpo-
rated into monitor design.  Capnographs rap-
idly 
and 
reliably 
indicate 
esophageal 
intubation—a common cause of anesthetic catastro-
phe—but do not reliably detect bronchial intuba-
tion. Although there may be some CO 2 in the 
stomach from swallowing expired air, this should be 
washed out within a few breaths. Sudden cessation 
of CO 2 during the expiratory phase may indicate a 
circuit disconnection. Th e increased metabolic rate 
caused by malignant hyperthermia causes a marked 
rise in E tco 2 . 
 Th e gradient between Pa co 2 and E tco 2 (nor-
mally 2–5 mm Hg) refl ects alveolar dead space 
(alveoli that are ventilated but not perfused). Any 
signifi cant reduction in lung perfusion (eg, air 
embolism, decreased cardiac output, or decreased 
blood pressure) increases alveolar dead space, 
dilutes expired CO 2 , and lessens E tco 2 . True capno-
graphs (as opposed to capnometers) display a wave-
form of CO 2 concentration that allows recognition 
of a variety of conditions ( Figure 6–5 ). 
 ANESTHETIC GAS ANALYSIS 
 Indications 
 Analysis of anesthetic gases is essential during any 
procedure requiring inhalation anesthesia. Th ere are 
no contraindications to analyzing these gases. 
 Techniques 
 Techniques for analyzing multiple anesthetic gases 
involve mass spectrometry, Raman spectroscopy, 
1
128 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 FIGURE 65  A: A normal capnograph demonstrating 
the three phases of expiration: phase I—dead space; 
phase II—mixture of dead space and alveolar gas; phase 
III—alveolar gas plateau.  B: Capnograph of a patient with 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. No plateau 
is reached before the next inspiration. The gradient 
between end-tidal CO 2 and arterial CO 2 is increased. 
 C: Depression during phase III indicates spontaneous 
respiratory eﬀ ort.  D: Failure of the inspired CO 2 to return 
to zero may represent an incompetent expiratory valve or 
exhausted CO 2 absorbent.  E: The persistence of exhaled 
gas during part of the inspiratory cycle signals the 
presence of an incompetent inspiratory valve. 
A
D
E
B
C
40
40
Inspiration
Inspiration
Expiration
Inspiration
Expiration
Expiration
II
III
I
II
III
I
I
II
I
II
III
I
II
III
40
0
40
40
0
0
0
0
Inspiration
Expiration
Inspiration
Expiration
measured, to fl ow. Because the lead electrode is con-
sumed, monitor life can be prolonged by exposing it 
to room air when not in use. Th ese are the oxygen 
monitors used on many anesthesia machines in the 
inspiratory limb. 
 D. Paramagnetic Analysis 
 Oxygen is a nonpolar gas, but it is paramagnetic, 
and when placed in a magnetic fi eld, the gas will 
expand, contracting when the magnet is turned off . 
By switching the fi eld on and off  and comparing the 
resulting change in volume (or pressure or fl ow) to 
a known standard, the amount of oxygen can be 
measured. 
 E. Polarographic Electrode 
 A polarographic electrode has a gold (or platinum) 
cathode and a silver anode, both bathed in an elec-
trolyte, separated from the gas to be measured by 
a semipermeable membrane. Unlike the galvanic 
cell, a polarographic electrode works only if a small 
voltage is applied to two electrodes. When voltage 
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
129 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Th e EEG is a recording of electrical potentials gen-
erated by cells in the cerebral cortex. Although 
standard ECG electrodes can be used, silver disks 
containing a conductive gel are preferred. Platinum 
or stainless steel needle electrodes traumatize the 
scalp and have high impedance (resistance); how-
ever, they can be sterilized and placed in a surgi-
cal fi eld. Electrode position (montage) is governed 
by the international 10–20 system ( Figure 6–7 ). 
Electric potential diff erences between combinations 
of electrodes are fi ltered, amplifi ed, and displayed 
by an oscilloscope or pen recorder. EEG activity 
occurs mostly at frequencies between 1–30 cycles/
sec (Hz). Alpha waves have a frequency of 8–13 Hz 
and are found oft en in a resting adult with eyes 
closed. Beta waves at 8–13 Hz are found in con-
centrating individuals, and at times, in individuals 
under anesthesia. Delta waves have a frequency of 
is applied to the cathode, electrons combine with 
oxygen to form hydroxide ions. Th e amount of cur-
rent that fl ows between the anode and the cathode is 
proportional to the amount of oxygen present. 
 F. Spirometry 
 Newer anesthesia machines can measure (and 
therefore manage) airway pressures, volume, and 
fl ow to calculate resistance and compliance and to 
display the relationship of these variables as fl ow (ie, 
volume or pressure–volume loops). Measurements 
of fl ow and volume are made by mechanical devices 
that are usually fairly lightweight and are oft en 
placed in the inspiratory limb of the anesthesia 
circuit. 
 Th e most fundamental measurements include 
low peak inspiratory pressure and high peak inspi-
ratory pressure, which indicate either a ventilator or 
circuit disconnect, or an airway obstruction, respec-
tively. By measuring V t and breathing frequency ( f ), 
exhaled minute ventilation (V e ) can be calculated, 
providing some sense of security that ventilation 
requirements are being met. 
 Spirometric loops and waveforms are charac-
teristically altered by certain disease processes and 
events. If a normal loop is observed shortly aft er 
induction of anesthesia and a subsequent loop is dif-
ferent, the observant anesthesiologist is alerted to 
the fact that pulmonary and/or airway compliance 
may have changed. Spirometric loops are usually 
displayed as fl ow versus volume and volume ver-
sus pressure ( Figure 6–6 ). Th ere are characteristic 
changes with obstruction, bronchial intubation, 
reactive airways disease, and so forth. 
 Neurological System Monitors 
 ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
 Indications & Contraindications 
 Th e electroencephalogram (EEG) is occasionally 
used during cerebrovascular surgery to confi rm 
the adequacy of cerebral oxygenation. Monitoring 
the depth of anesthesia with a full 16-lead, 
8-channel EEG is not warranted, considering the 
availability of simpler techniques. Th ere are no 
contraindications. 
 FIGURE 66  A: Normal volume–pressure loop. 
 B: Normal ﬂ ow–volume loop. 
End
inspiration
Expiration
A
B
Volume
Inspiration
Pressure
Volume
Exhalation
Flow
RV
TLC
Inhalation
130 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 During inhalational anesthesia, initial beta acti-
vation is followed by slowing, burst suppression, 
and isoelectricity. Intravenous agents, depending on 
dose and drug used, can produce a variety of EEG 
patterns. 
 To reduce the incidence of anesthesia aware-
ness, devices have been developed in recent years 
that process two-channel EEG signals and create 
a dimensionless variable to indicate wakefulness. 
Bispectral index (BIS) is most commonly used in 
this regard. BIS monitors examine four components 
within the EEG that are associated with the anes-
thetic state: (1) low frequency, as found during deep 
anesthesia; (2) high-frequency beta activation found 
during “light” anesthesia; (3) suppressed EEG waves; 
and (4) burst suppression. 
 Other devices attempt to include measures of 
spontaneous muscle activity, as infl uenced by the 
activity of subcortical structures not contribut-
ing to the EEG to further provide an assessment of 
anesthetic depth. Various devices, each with its own 
algorithm to process the EEG and/or incorporate 
other variables to ascertain patient wakefulness, may 
become available in the future ( Table 6–1 ). 
 Controversy still exists as to the exact role 
of processed EEG devices in assessing anesthetic 
depth. Some studies have demonstrated a reduced 
awareness when these devices were used, whereas 
other studies have failed to reveal any advantage 
over the use of inhalational gas measurements to 
ensure a minimal alveolar concentration of anes-
thetic agent. Because individual EEG responsiveness 
to anesthetic agents may be variable, EEG monitors 
to assess anesthesia depth or to titrate anesthetic 
delivery might not always ensure an absence of 
wakefulness. Moreover, many monitors have a delay, 
which might only indicate a risk for the patient being 
aware aft er he or she had already become conscious 
( Table 6–2 ). 
 Clinical Considerations 
 To perform a bispectral analysis, data measured 
by EEG are taken through a number of steps 
( Figure 6–9 ) to calculate a single number that cor-
relates with depth of anesthesia/hypnosis. 
 BIS values of 65–85 have been advocated as 
a measure of sedation, whereas values of 40–65 
0.5–4 Hz and are found in brain injury, deep sleep, 
and anesthesia. Th eta waves (4–7 Hz) are also found 
in sleeping individuals and during anesthesia. EEG 
waves are also characterized by their amplitude, 
which is related to their potential (high amplitude, 
>50 microV; medium amplitude, 20–50 microV; 
and low amplitude, <20 microV). Lastly, the EEG is 
examined as to symmetry between the left  and right 
hemispheres. 
 Examination of a multichannel EEG is at times 
performed during surgery to detect areas of cerebral 
ischemia, such as during carotid endarterectomy as 
well as during epilepsy surgery. Likewise, it can be 
used to detect EEG isoelectricity and maximal cere-
bral protection during hypothermic arrest. Th e strip 
chart EEG is cumbersome in the operating room, 
and oft en the EEG is processed using power spec-
tral analysis. Frequency analysis divides the EEG 
into a series of sine waves at diff erent frequencies 
and then plots the power of the signal at each fre-
quency, allowing for a presentation of EEG activity 
in a more manageable way than reviewing the raw 
EEG ( Figure 6–8 ). 
T
T
C
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
C
Z
O
F
 FIGURE 67  International 10–20 system. Montage 
letters refer to cranial location. F, frontal; C, coronal; 
T, temporal; O, occipital; Z, middle. 
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
131 
Patient State Device
Features
Reading
Wakeful
EEG
SEF95
BIS
Entropy
AAI
NI
ETAG
↑ƒ, ↓ Amp, blinks
Twenties
High β ratio
High entropy
↓ lat, ↑ ∆Amp
EEG ƒ band analysis
Age-adjusted MAC
↑ γ, β, α, ↓ θ, δ
26 Hz.
96
97
81
A
0 MAC
Sedated
EEG
SEF95
BIS
Entropy
AAI
NI
ETAG
α oscillations
High teens
Low β ratio
High entropy
↑ing lat, ↓ing ∆Amp
EEG ƒ band analysis
Age-adjusted MAC
↓ γ, β, ↑ α, θ, δ
19 Hz.
78
85
45
B/C
0.4 MAC
Unresponsive
EEG
SEF95
BIS
Entropy
AAI
NI
ETAG
Spindles, K, ↓ƒ
Low teens
Bispectral coherence
Entropy drop
↑ing lat, ↓ing ∆Amp
EEG ƒ band analysis
Age-adjusted MAC
↑ α, θ, δ
14 Hz.
52
43
30
D
0.8 MAC
Surgically
Anesthetized
EEG
SEF95
BIS
Entropy
AAI
NI
ETAG
Slow δ waves, ↓ƒ
< 12 Hz.
Bispectral coherence
Low entropy
↑ing lat, ↓ing ∆Amp
EEG ƒ band analysis
Age-adjusted MAC
δ dominance
10 Hz.
42
38
22
E
1.3 MAC
Deeply
Anesthetized
EEG
SEF95
BIS
Entropy
AAI
NI
ETAG
BS, isoelectricity
< 2 Hz. (BS corrected)
High BSR
Burst suppression
↑ latency, ↓ ∆Amp
EEG ƒ band analysis
Age-adjusted MAC
Bursts & flat
2 Hz.
9
8
11
F
2 MAC
Frontal Electroencephalography (EEG) Trace
50 µV
50 µV
 FIGURE 68  Patient states, candidate depth of 
anesthesia devices or approaches, key features of 
diﬀ erent monitoring approaches, and possible readings 
at diﬀ erent depths of anesthesia. The readings shown 
represent examples of possible readings that may be seen 
in conjunction with each frontal electroencephalography 
trace. The electroencephalography traces show 3-s 
epochs (x-axis), and the scale (y-axis) is 50 µV. AAI, 
A-Line Autoregressive Index (a proprietary method of 
extracting the mid-latency auditory evoked potential 
from the electroencephalogram); Amp, amplitude of 
an EEG wave; BIS bispectral index; blinks, eye blink 
artifacts; BS, burst suppression; BSR, burst suppression 
ratio; EEG, electroencephalography; ETAG, end-tidal 
anesthetic gas concentration;  f , frequency;  γ, β, α, θ, δ , EEG 
waves in decreasing frequencies ( γ , more than 30 hertz 
[Hz];  β ,12–30 Hz;  α , 8–12 Hz;  θ , 4–8 Hz;  δ , 0–4 Hz); K, K 
complexes; Lat, latency between an auditory stimulus 
and an evoked EEG waveform response; MAC, minimum 
alveolar concentration; NI, Narcotrend index; SEF 95 , spectral 
edge frequency below which 95% of the EEG frequencies 
reside; Spindles, sleep spindles. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Mashour GA, Orser BA, Avidan MS: Intraoperative awareness: from 
neurobiology to clinical practice. Anesthesiology 2011;114:1218.) 
have been recommended for general anesthe-
sia ( Figure 6–10 ). Bispectral analysis may reduce 
patient awareness during anesthesia, an issue that is 
important to the public. 
 Many of the initial studies of its use were not 
prospective, randomized, controlled trials, but were 
primarily observational in nature. Artifacts can be a 
problem. Th e monitor, in and of itself, costs several 
thousand dollars and the electrodes are approxi-
mately $10 to $15 per anesthetic and cannot be 
reused. 
 Some cases with awareness have been identifi ed 
as having a BIS of less than 65. However, in other 
cases of awareness, either there were problems with 
132 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 TABLE 61 Characteristics of the commercially available monitors of anesthetic depth. 
Parameters
Machine/
Manufacturer
Consumable
Physiologic 
Signals
Recommended 
Range of Values 
for Anesthesia
Principles of Measurement
Bispectral 
index (BIS)
A-2000/Aspect 
Medical Systems, 
Newton, MA
BIS sensor
Single 
channel 
EEG
40–60
BIS is derived from the weighted sum of three EEG parameters: relative α/β ratio; 
bio-coherence of the EEG waves; and burst suppression. The relative contribution 
of these parameters has been tuned to correlate with the degree of sedation 
produced by various sedative agents. BIS ranges from 0 (asleep)–100 (awake).
Patient state 
index (PSI)
Patient state 
analyzer 
(PSA 400)/
Physiometrix, 
Inc., N. Billerica, 
MA
PSArray 2 
4-channel 
EEG
25–50
PSI is derived from progressive discriminant analysis of several quantitative 
EEG variables that are sensitive to changes in the level of anesthesia, but 
insensitive to the speciﬁ c agents producing such changes. It includes changes 
in power spectrum in various EEG frequency bands; hemispheric symmetry; 
and synchronization between brain regions and the inhibition of regions of the 
frontal cortex. PSI ranges from 0 (asleep)-100 (awake).
 Narcotrend 
stage 
 Narcotrend 
index 
Nacrotrend 
monitor/
Monitor-Technik, 
Bad Bramstedt, 
Germany
Ordinary 
ECG 
electrode
1–2 channel 
EEG
Narcotrend stage 
D 0–2 to C 1 , which 
corresponds to an 
index of 40–60
The Narcotrend monitor classiﬁ es EEG signals into diﬀ erent stages of anesthesia 
(A = awake; B 0–2 = sedated; C 0–2 = light anesthesia; D 0–2 = general anesthesia; E 0,  1 
= general anesthesia with deep hypnosis; F 0,  1 = burst suppression). The classiﬁ cation 
algorithm is based on a discriminant analysis of entropy measures and EEG 
spectral variables. More recently the monitor converts the Narcotrend stages into a 
dimensionless number from 0 (asleep) to 100 (awake) by nonlinear regression.
Entropy
S/5 Entropy 
Module, 
M-ENTROPY/ 
Datex-Ohmeda, 
Instrumentarium 
Corp., Helsinki, 
Finland
Special 
entropy 
sensor
Single-
channel 
EEG
40–60
Entropy described the ‘irregularity’ of the EEG signal. As the dose of anesthetic 
is increased, EEG becomes more regular and the entropy value approaches 
zero. M-ENTROPY calculates the entropy of the EEG spectrum (spectral entropy). 
In order to shorten the response time, it uses diﬀ erent time windows according 
to the corresponding EEG frequencies. Two spectral parameters are calculated: 
state entropy (frequency band 0–32 Hz) and response entropy (0–47 Hz), which 
also includes muscle activity. Both entropy variables have been re-scaled, so that 
0 is asleep and 100 is awake.
Aline 
autore-
gressive 
index 
(AAI)
AEP/2 monitor/
Danmeter A/S, 
Odense, Demark
Ordinary 
ECG 
electrode
AEP
10–25
AAI is derived from the middle latency AEP (20–80 ms). AAI is extracted from an 
autoregressive model with exogenous input (ARX model) so that only 18 sweeps 
are required to reproduce the AEP waveform in 2–6 s. The resultant waveform is 
then transformed into a numeric index (0–100) that describes the shape of the AEP. 
AAI > 60 is awake, AAI of 0 indicates deep anesthesia.
Cerebral state 
index (CSI)
Cerebral state 
monitor (CSM), 
Danmeter A/S, 
Odense, Demark
Ordinary 
ECG 
electrode
Single-
channel EEG
40–60
CSI is a weighted sum of (1) α ratio, (2) β ratio, (3) diﬀ erence between the two and 
(4) burst suppression. It correlates with the degree of sedation by an ‘adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy inference system’. CSI ranges from 0 (asleep) to 100 (awake).
EEG, electroencephalogram; ECG, electrocardiogram; AEP, auditory evoked potential.
Reproduced, with permission, from Chan MTV, Gin T, Goh KYC: Interventional neurophysiologic monitoring. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2004;17:389.
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
133 
 TABLE 62 Checklist for preventing 
awareness. 
Ï  Check all equipment, drugs, and dosages; ensure that 
drugs are clearly labeled and that infusions are running 
into veins. 
Ï  Consider administering an amnesic premedication. 
Ï  Avoid or minimize the administration of muscle 
relaxants. Use a peripheral nerve stimulator to guide 
minimal required dose. 
Ï  Consider using the isolated forearm technique if intense 
paralysis is indicated. 
Ï  Choose potent inhalation agents rather than total 
intravenous anesthesia, if possible. 
Ï  Administer at least 0.5 to 0.7 minimum alveolar 
concentration (MAC) of the inhalation agent. 
Ï  Set an alarm for a low anesthetic gas concentration. 
Ï  Monitor anesthetic gas concentration during 
cardiopulmonary bypass from the bypass machine. 
Ï  Consider alternative treatments for hypotension other 
than decreasing anesthetic concentration. 
Ï  If it is thought that suﬃ  cient anesthesia cannot 
be administered because of concern about 
hemodynamic compromise, consider the 
administration of benzodiazepines or scopolamine 
for amnesia. 
Ï  Supplement hypnotic agents with analgesic agents 
such as opioids or local anesthetics, which may 
help decrease the experience of pain in the event of 
awareness. 
Ï  Consider using a brain monitor, such as a raw or 
processed electroencephalogram but do not try to 
minimize the anesthetic dose based on the brain 
monitor because there currently is insuﬃ  cient evidence 
to support this practice. 
Ï  Monitor the brain routinely if using total intravenous 
anesthesia. 
Ï  Evaluate known risk factors for awareness, and if 
speciﬁ c risk factors are identiﬁ ed consider increasing 
administered anesthetic concentration. 
Ï  Redose intravenous anesthesia when delivery 
of inhalation anesthesia is diﬃ  cult, such as 
during a long intubation attempt or during rigid 
bronchoscopy. 
Reproduced, with permission, from Mashour GA, Orser BA, Avidan 
MS: Intraoperative awareness: from neurobiology to clinical practice. 
Anesthesiology 2011;114:1218.
of a potential awareness event. Ask patients to recall 
the following: 
•  What do you remember before going to sleep? 
•  What do you remember right when awakening? 
•  Do you remember anything in between going 
to sleep and awakening? 
•  Did you have any dreams while asleep? 
 Close follow-up and involvement of men-
tal health experts may avoid the traumatic stress 
that can be associated with awareness events. 
Increasingly, patients are managed with regional 
anesthesia and propofol sedation. Patients undergo-
ing such anesthetics should be made aware that they 
are not having general anesthesia and might recall 
perioperative events. Clarifi cation of the techniques 
used may prevent patients so managed from the 
belief that they “were awake” during anesthesia. 
the recordings, or awareness could not be related to 
any specifi c time or BIS value. Whether this moni-
toring technique becomes a standard of care in the 
future remains to be seen, and studies are ongoing. 
 Detection of awareness oft en can minimize its 
consequences. Use of the Brice questions during 
postoperative visits can alert anesthesia providers 
EEG signal
Digitizing
Artifact
filtering
Fast Fourier
transform
Suppression
detection
BSR &
QUAZI
Beta ratio
BIS = weighted sum of subparameters
SynchSlow
Bispectrum
 FIGURE 69  Calculation of the Bispectral Index. EEG, 
electroencephalogram; BSR, burst suppression ratio; BIS, 
Bispectral Index Scale. (Reproduced, with permission, from Rampil 
IJ: A primer for EEG signal processing in anesthesia. Anesthesiology 
1998;89:980.) 
134 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
on the brain. Th e middle latency auditory EP may 
be a more sensitive indicator than BIS in regard to 
anesthetic depth. Th e amplitude and latency of this 
signal following an auditory stimulus is infl uenced 
by anesthetics. 
 Contraindications 
 Although there are no specifi c contraindications 
for somatosensory-evoked potentials (SEPs), this 
modality is severely limited by the availability of 
monitoring sites, equipment, and trained personnel. 
Sensitivity to anesthetic agents can also be a limit-
ing factor, particularly in children. Motor-evoked 
potentials (MEPs) are contraindicated in patients 
with retained intracranial metal, a skull defect, and 
implantable devices, as well as aft er seizures and 
any major cerebral insult. Brain injury secondary to 
repetitive stimulation of the cortex and inducement 
of seizures is a concern with MEPs. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 EP monitoring noninvasively assesses neural func-
tion by measuring electrophysiological responses to 
sensory or motor pathway stimulation. Commonly 
monitored EPs are brainstem auditory evoked 
responses (BAERs), SEPs, and increasingly, MEPs 
( Figure 6–11 ). 
 For SEPs, a brief electrical current is delivered 
to a sensory or mixed peripheral nerve by a pair 
of electrodes. If the intervening pathway is intact, 
a nerve action potential will be transmitted to the 
contralateral sensory cortex to produce an EP. 
Th is potential can be measured by cortical surface 
electrodes, but is usually measured by scalp elec-
trodes. To distinguish the cortical response to a 
specifi c stimulus, multiple responses are averaged 
and background noise is eliminated. EPs are repre-
sented by a plot of voltage versus time. Th e result-
ing waveforms are analyzed for their poststimulus 
latency (the time between stimulation and potential 
detection) and peak amplitude. Th ese are compared 
with baseline tracings. Technical and physiological 
causes of a change in an EP must be distinguished 
from changes due to neural damage. Complications 
of EP monitoring are rare, but include skin irrita-
tion and pressure ischemia at the sites of electrode 
application. 
 EVOKED POTENTIALS 
 Indications 
 Indications for intraoperative monitoring of  evoked 
potentials (EPs) include surgical procedures asso-
ciated with possible neurological injury: spinal 
fusion with instrumentation, spine and spinal cord 
tumor resection, brachial plexus repair, thoracoab-
dominal aortic aneurysm repair, epilepsy surgery, 
and cerebral tumor resection. Ischemia in the spi-
nal cord or cerebral cortex can be detected by EPs. 
EP monitoring facilitates probe localization during 
stereotactic neurosurgery. Auditory EPs have also 
been used to assess the eff ects of general anesthesia 
 FIGURE 610  The Bispectral Index Scale (BIS versions 
3.0 and higher) is a dimensionless scale from 0 (complete 
cortical electroencephalographic suppression) to 100 
(awake). BIS values of 65–85 have been recommended 
for sedation, whereas values of 40–65 have been recom-
mended for general anesthesia. At BIS values lower than 
40, cortical suppression becomes discernible in a raw 
electroencephalogram as a burst suppression pattern. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Johansen JW et al: Development 
and clinical application of electroencephalographic bispectrum moni-
toring. Anesthesiology 2000;93:1337.) 
Awake, memory intact
Sedation
General anesthesia
“Deep” hypnosis, memory function lost
“Near” suppression
Increasing
burst suppression
Cortical silence
0
20
40
60
80
100
BIS
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
135 
spinal cord) EP preservation does not guarantee 
normal  motor (ventral spinal cord) function (false 
negative). Furthermore, SEPs elicited from pos-
terior tibial nerve stimulation cannot distinguish 
between peripheral and central ischemia (false posi-
tive). Techniques that elicit MEPs by using transcra-
nial magnetic or electrical stimulation of the cortex 
allow the detection of action potentials in the mus-
cles if the neural pathway is intact. Th e advantage 
of using MEPs as opposed to SEPs for spinal cord 
monitoring is that MEPs monitor the ventral spi-
nal cord, and if sensitive and specifi c enough, can 
be used to indicate which patients might develop a 
postoperative motor defi cit. MEPs are more sensi-
tive to spinal cord ischemia than are SEPs. Th e same 
considerations for SEPs are applicable to MEPs 
in that they are aff ected by volatile inhalational 
agents, high-dose benzodiazepines, and moderate 
hypothermia (temperatures less than 32°C). MEPs 
 Clinical Considerations 
 EPs are altered by many variables other than neural 
damage. Th e eff ect of anesthetics is complex and not 
easily summarized.  In general, balanced anesthetic 
techniques (nitrous oxide, neuromuscular block-
ing agents, and opioids) cause minimal changes, 
whereas volatile agents (halothane, sevofl urane, 
desfl urane, and isofl urane) are best avoided or 
used at a constant low dose . Early-occurring (spe-
cifi c) EPs are less aff ected by anesthetics than are 
late-occurring (nonspecifi c) responses. Changes in 
BAERs may provide a measure of the depth of anes-
thesia. Physiological (eg, blood pressure, tempera-
ture, and oxygen saturation) and pharmacological 
factors should be kept as constant as possible. 
 Persistent obliteration of EPs is predictive of 
postoperative neurological defi cit. Although SEPs 
usually identify spinal cord damage, because of 
their diff erent anatomic pathways,  sensory (dorsal 
SEP
Sensory cortex
Cervical spine
Epidural
Epidural
Muscle – CMAP
D
I1 I2
Peripheral n.
Motor cortex
Milliseconds
Millivolts
Milliseconds
Millivolts
NMJ
MEP
 FIGURE 611  Neuroanatomic pathways of somato-
sensory-evoked potential and motor-evoked potential. 
The somatosensory-evoked potential (SEP) is produced 
by stimulation of a peripheral nerve wherein a response 
can be measured. The electrical volley ascends the spinal 
cord by the posterior columns and can be recorded in the 
epidural space and over the posterior cervical spine. It 
crosses the mid-line after synapsing at the cervicomedul-
lary junction and ascends the lemniscal pathways having 
a second synapse in the thalamus. From there, it travels to 
the primary sensory cortex where the cortical response is 
measured. The motor-evoked potential (MEP) is produced 
by stimulation of the motor cortex leading to an electrical 
volley that descends to the anterior horn cells of the spinal 
cord via the corticospinal tract. After synapsing there it 
travels via a peripheral nerve and crosses the neuromuscu-
lar junction (NMJ) to produce a muscle response. The MEP 
can be measured in the epidural space as D and I waves 
produced by direct and indirect (via internuncial neurons) 
stimulation of the motor cortex, respectively. It can also be 
measured as a compound muscle action potential (CMAP) 
in the muscle. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sloan TB, Janik 
D, Jameson L: Multimodality monitoring of the central nervous system 
using motor-evoked potentials. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2008;21:560.) 
136 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Measurements of jugular venous bulb satura-
tion can also provide estimates of cerebral tissue 
oxygen extraction/decreased cerebral oxygen deliv-
ery. Reduced saturations may indicate poor out-
comes. Direct tissue oxygen monitoring of the brain 
is accomplished by placement of a probe to deter-
mine the oxygen tension in the brain tissue. In addi-
tion to maintaining a cerebral perfusion pressure 
that is greater than 60 mm Hg and an intracranial 
pressure that is less than 20 mm Hg, neuroanesthe-
siologists/intensivists attempt to preserve brain tis-
sue oxygenation by intervening when oxygen tissue 
tension is less than 20 mm Hg. Such interventions 
center upon improving oxygen delivery by increas-
ing F io 2 , augmenting hemoglobin, adjusting cardiac 
output, or decreasing oxygen demand. 
 Other Monitors 
 TEMPERATURE 
 Indications 
 Th e temperature of patients undergoing anesthe-
sia must be monitored. Postoperative temperature 
is increasingly used as a quality anesthesia indica-
tor. Hypothermia is associated with delayed drug 
metabolism, increased blood glucose, vasoconstric-
tion, impaired coagulation, and impaired resistance 
to surgical infections. Hyperthermia can likewise 
require monitoring of the level of neuromuscu-
lar blockade. Close communication with a neu-
rophysiologist is essential prior to the start of any 
case where these monitors are used to review the 
optimal anesthetic technique to ensure monitoring 
integrity. MEPs are sensitive to volatile anesthet-
ics. Consequently, intravenous techniques are oft en 
preferred. 
 CEREBRAL OXIMETRY 
AND OTHER MONITORS 
OF THE BRAIN 
 Cerebral oximetry uses near infrared spectros-
copy (NIRS). Using refl ectance spectroscopy near 
infrared light is emitted by a probe on the scalp 
( Figure 6–12 ). Receptors are likewise positioned to 
detect the refl ected light from both deep and super-
fi cial structures. As with pulse oximetry, oxygenated 
and deoxygenated hemoglobin absorb light at dif-
ferent frequencies. Likewise, cytochrome absorbs 
infrared light in the mitochondria. Th e NIRS satura-
tion largely refl ects the absorption of venous hemo-
globin, as it does not have the ability to identify the 
pulsatile arterial component. Regional saturations 
of less than 40% on NIRS measures, or changes of 
greater than 25% of baseline measures, may herald 
neurological events secondary to decreased cerebral 
oxygenation. 
Skin
Sensor
Skull
Light emitting
diode
Surface
photodetector
Deep
photodetector
Cerebral
cortex
 FIGURE 612  Principle of the INVOS ® near-infrared 
spectroscopy technique. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Rubio A, Hakami L, Münch F, Tandler R, Harig F, Weyand M: Noninvasive 
control of adequate cerebral oxygenation during low-ﬂ ow antegrade 
selective cerebral perfusion on adults and infants in the aortic arch 
surgery. J Card Surg 2008;23:474.) 
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
137 
the best combination of economy, performance, and 
safety. To avoid measuring the temperature of tracheal 
gases, the temperature sensor should be positioned 
behind the heart in the lower third of the esophagus. 
Conveniently, heart sounds are most prominent at 
this location. For more on the clinical considerations 
of temperature control, see Chapter 52. 
 URINARY OUTPUT 
 Indications 
 Urinary bladder catheterization is the only reliable 
method of monitoring urinary output. Insertion of 
a urinary catheter is indicated in patients with con-
gestive heart failure, renal failure, advanced hepatic 
disease, or shock. Catheterization is routine in some 
surgical procedures such as cardiac surgery, aortic or 
renal vascular surgery, craniotomy, major abdomi-
nal surgery, or procedures in which large fl uid 
shift s are expected. Lengthy surgeries and intraop-
erative diuretic administration are other possible 
indications. Occasionally, postoperative bladder 
catheterization is indicated in patients having diffi  -
culty voiding in the recovery room aft er general or 
regional anesthesia. 
 Contraindications 
 Bladder catheterization should be done with utmost 
care in patients at high risk for infection. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Bladder catheterization is usually performed by 
surgical or nursing personnel. To avoid unneces-
sary trauma, a urologist should catheterize patients 
suspected of having abnormal urethral anatomy. A 
soft  rubber Foley catheter is inserted into the blad-
der transurethrally and connected to a disposable 
calibrated collection chamber. To avoid urine refl ux 
and minimize the risk of infection, the cham-
ber should remain at a level below the bladder. 
Complications of catheterization include urethral 
trauma and urinary tract infections. Rapid decom-
pression of a distended bladder can cause hypoten-
sion. Suprapubic catheterization of the bladder with 
tubing inserted through a large-bore needle is an 
uncommon alternative. 
have deleterious eff ects perioperatively, leading to 
tachycardia, vasodilation, and neurological injury. 
Consequently, temperature must be measured and 
recorded perioperatively. 
 Contraindications 
 Th ere are no contraindications, although a particu-
lar monitoring site may be unsuitable in certain 
patients. 
 Techniques & Complications 
 Intraoperatively, temperature is usually measured 
using a thermistor or thermocouple. Th ermistors 
are semiconductors whose resistance decreases pre-
dictably with warming. A thermocouple is a circuit 
of two dissimilar metals joined so that a potential 
diff erence is generated when the metals are at dif-
ferent temperatures. Disposable thermocouple and 
thermistor probes are available for monitoring the 
temperature of the tympanic membrane, nasophar-
ynx, esophagus, bladder, rectum, and skin. Infrared 
sensors estimate temperature from the infrared 
energy that is produced. Tympanic membrane tem-
peratures refl ect core body temperature; however, 
the devices used may not reliably measure the tem-
perature at the tympanic membrane. Complications 
of temperature monitoring are usually related to 
trauma caused by the probe (eg, rectal or tympanic 
membrane perforation). 
 Each monitoring site has advantages and dis-
advantages. Th e tympanic membrane theoretically 
refl ects brain temperature because the auditory 
canal’s blood supply is the external carotid artery. 
Trauma during insertion and cerumen insulation 
detract from the routine use of tympanic probes. 
Rectal temperatures have a slow response to changes 
in core temperature. Nasopharyngeal probes are 
prone to cause epistaxis, but accurately measure core 
temperature if placed adjacent to the nasopharyn-
geal mucosa. Th e thermistor on a pulmonary artery 
catheter also measures core temperature. Th ere is a 
variable correlation between axillary temperature 
and core temperature, depending on skin perfusion. 
Liquid crystal adhesive strips placed on the skin are 
inadequate indicators of core body temperature dur-
ing surgery. Esophageal temperature sensors, oft en 
incorporated into esophageal stethoscopes, provide 
138 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Techniques & Complications 
 A peripheral nerve stimulator delivers current (60-
80 mA) to a pair of either ECG silver chloride pads 
or subcutaneous needles placed over a peripheral 
motor nerve. Th e evoked mechanical or electri-
cal response of the innervated muscle is observed. 
Although electromyography provides a fast, accu-
rate, and quantitative measure of neuromuscular 
transmission, visual or tactile observation of mus-
cle contraction is usually relied upon in clinical 
practice. Ulnar nerve stimulation of the adductor 
pollicis muscle and facial nerve stimulation of the 
orbicularis oculi are most commonly monitored 
( Figure 6–13 ). Because it is the inhibition of the 
 Clinical Considerations 
 An additional advantage of placing a Foley catheter 
is the ability to include a thermistor in the catheter 
tip so that bladder temperature can be monitored. 
As long as urinary output is high, bladder tempera-
ture accurately refl ects core temperature. An added 
value with more widespread use of urometers is the 
ability to electronically monitor and record urinary 
output and temperature. 
 Urinary output is a refl ection of kidney perfu-
sion and function and an indicator of renal, car-
diovascular, and fl uid volume status. Inadequate 
urinary output (oliguria) is oft en arbitrarily defi ned 
as urinary output of less than 0.5 mL/kg/hr, but 
actually is a function of the patient’s concentrating 
ability and osmotic load. Urine electrolyte composi-
tion, osmolality, and specifi c gravity aid in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of oliguria. 
 PERIPHERAL NERVE 
STIMULATION 
 Indications 
 Because of the variation in patient sensitivity to 
neuromuscular blocking agents, the neuromus-
cular function of all patients receiving intermedi-
ate- or long-acting neuromuscular blocking agents 
should be monitored. In addition, peripheral nerve 
stimulation is helpful in assessing paralysis dur-
ing rapid-sequence inductions or during continu-
ous infusions of short-acting agents. Furthermore, 
peripheral nerve stimulators can help locate nerves 
to be blocked by regional anesthesia. 
 Contraindications 
 Th ere are no contraindications to neuromuscu-
lar monitoring, although certain sites may be pre-
cluded by the surgical procedure. Additionally, 
atrophied muscles in areas of hemiplegia or nerve 
damage may appear refractory to neuromuscular 
blockade secondary to the proliferation of receptors. 
Determining the degree of neuromuscular block-
ade using such an extremity could lead to potential 
overdosing of competitive neuromuscular blocking 
agents. 
A
B
 FIGURE 613  A: Stimulation of the ulnar nerve causes 
contraction of the adductor pollicis muscle.  B: Stimulation 
of the facial nerve leads to orbicularis oculi contraction. 
The orbicularis oculi recovers from neuromuscular 
blockade before the adductor pollicis. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE:  Understanding Anesthesia 
Equipment , 4th ed. Williams & Wilkins, 1999.) 
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring
139
and the second twitch a 90% block. Clinical relax-
ation usually requires 75% to 95% neuromuscular 
blockade. 
 Tetany at 50 or 100 Hz is a sensitive test of neu-
romuscular function. Sustained contraction for 5 sec 
indicates adequate—but not necessarily complete—
reversal from neuromuscular blockade. Double-
burst stimulation (DBS) represents two variations 
of tetany that are less painful to the patient. Th e 
DBS 3,3 pattern of nerve stimulation consists of three 
short (200-µs) high-frequency bursts separated by 
20 ms intervals (50 Hz) followed 750 ms later by 
another three bursts. DBS 3,2 consists of three 200-µs 
impulses at 50 Hz followed 750 ms later by two such 
impulses. DBS is more sensitive than train-of-four 
stimulation for the clinical (ie, visual) evaluation of 
fade. 
 Because muscle groups differ in their sensi-
tivity to neuromuscular blocking agents, use of 
the peripheral nerve stimulator cannot replace 
direct observation of the muscles (eg, the dia-
phragm) that need to be relaxed for a specific sur-
gical 
procedure. 
Furthermore, 
recovery 
of 
adductor pollicis function does not exactly paral-
lel recovery of muscles required to maintain an 
airway.  The diaphragm, rectus abdominis, 
laryngeal adductors, and orbicularis oculi mus-
cles recover from neuromuscular blockade 
sooner than do the adductor pollicis . Other 
indicators of adequate recovery include sustained 
(≥5 s) head lift, the ability to generate an inspira-
tory pressure of at least –25 cm H 2 O, and a force-
ful hand grip. Twitch tension is reduced by 
hypothermia of the monitored muscle group 
(6%/°C). Decisions regarding adequacy of rever-
sal of neuromuscular blockade, as well as timing 
of extubation, should be made only by consider-
ing both the patient’s clinical presentation and 
assessments determined by peripheral nerve 
stimulation.  Postoperative residual curari-
zation (PORC) remains a problem in post-
anesthesia care, producing potentially injurious 
airway and respiratory function compromise. 
Reversal of neuromuscular blocking agents is 
warranted, as is the use of intermediate acting 
neuromuscular blocking agents instead of longer 
acting drugs. 
2
neuromuscular receptor that needs to be monitored, 
direct stimulation of muscle should be avoided by 
placing electrodes over the course of the nerve and 
not over the muscle itself. To deliver a supramaxi-
mal stimulation to the underlying nerve, peripheral 
nerve stimulators must be capable of generating at 
least a 50-mA current across a 1000-Ω load. Th is 
current is uncomfortable for a conscious patient. 
Complications of nerve stimulation are limited to 
skin irritation and abrasion at the site of electrode 
attachment. 
 Because of concerns of residual neuromus-
cular blockade, increased attention has been 
focused on providing quantitative measures of the 
degree of neuromuscular blockade perioperatively. 
Acceleromyography uses a piezoelectric transducer 
on the muscle to be stimulated. Movement of the 
muscle generates an electrical current that can be 
quantifi ed and displayed. Indeed, acceleromyogra-
phy can better predict residual paralysis, compared 
with routine tactile train-of-four monitoring used in 
most operating rooms, if calibrated from the begin-
ning of the operative period to establish baselines 
prior to administration of neuromuscular blocking 
agents. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e degree of neuromuscular blockade is monitored 
by applying various patterns of electrical stimula-
tion ( Figure 6–14 ). All stimuli are 200 µs in dura-
tion and of square-wave pattern and equal current 
intensity. A twitch is a single pulse that is delivered 
from every 1 to every 10 sec (1–0.1 Hz). Increasing 
block results in decreased evoked response to 
stimulation. 
 Train-of-four stimulation denotes four suc-
cessive 200-µs stimuli in 2 sec (2 Hz). Th e twitches 
in a train-of-four pattern progressively fade as 
nondepolarizing muscle relaxant block increases. 
Th e ratio of the responses to the fi rst and fourth 
twitches is a sensitive indicator of nondepolarizing 
muscle paralysis. Because it is diffi  cult to estimate 
the train-of-four ratio, it is more convenient to 
visually observe the sequential disappearance of the 
twitches, as this also correlates with the extent of 
blockade. Disappearance of the fourth twitch rep-
resents a 75% block, the third twitch an 80% block, 
140 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
0.2 msec
500 msec
B  Train-of-four
0.2 msec
20 msec
C  Tetany
50 Hz 
0.2 msec
10 msec
D  Tetany
100 Hz
750 msec
0.2 msec
E  Double-burst
stimulation
(DBS3,2)
750 msec
0.2 msec
F  Double-burst
stimulation
(DBS3,3)
0.2 msec duration
A  Single twitch
Time
 FIGURE 614  Peripheral nerve stimulators can generate various patterns of electrical impulses. 
 
CHAPTER 6 Noncardiovascular Monitoring 
141 
tubing, and use of ﬁ beroptic technologies. Anes-
thesia machines with no ferromagnetic compo-
nents (eg, aluminum gas cylinders) have been ﬁ t-
ted with MRI-compatible ventilators and long circle 
systems or Mapleson D breathing circuits . 
 What factors inﬂ uence the choice between 
general anesthesia and intravenous sedation? 
 Although most patients will tolerate an MRI 
study with sedation, head injured and pediatric 
patients present special challenges and will often 
require general anesthesia. Because of machine 
and monitoring limitations, an argument could be 
made that sedation, when possible, would be a saf-
er choice. On the other hand, loss of airway control 
from deep sedation could prove catastrophic be-
cause of poor patient access and delayed detection. 
Other important considerations include the moni-
toring modalities available at a particular facility 
and the general medical condition of the patient . 
 Which monitors should be considered 
mandatory in this case? 
 The patient should receive at least the same 
level of monitoring and care in the MRI suite as in 
the operating room for a similarly noninvasive pro-
cedure. Thus, the American Society of Anesthesi-
ologists Standards for Basic Anesthetic Monitoring 
(see Guidelines on next page) apply as they would 
to a patient undergoing general anesthesia . 
 Continuous auscultation of breath sounds with 
a plastic (not metal) precordial stethoscope can help 
to identify airway obstruction caused by excessive 
sedation. Palpation of a peripheral pulse or listening 
for Korotkoﬀ  sounds is impractical in this setting. 
Ensuring adequacy of circulation depends on elec-
trocardiographic and oscillometric blood pressure 
monitoring. End-tidal CO 2 analyzers can be adapted 
to sedation cases by connecting the sampling line 
to a site near the patient’s mouth or nose if nasal 
cannula with a CO 2 sampling channel are not avail-
able. Because room air entrainment precludes exact 
measurements, this technique provides a qualita-
tive indicator of ventilation. Whenever sedation is 
planned, equipment for emergency conversion to 
general anesthesia (eg, tracheal tubes, resuscitation 
bag) must be immediately available . 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Monitoring During Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging 
 A 50-year-old man with recent onset of seizures 
is scheduled for magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI). A prior MRI attempt was unsuccessful be-
cause of the patient’s severe claustrophobic reac-
tion. The radiologist requests your help in provid-
ing either sedation or general anesthesia . 
 Why does the MRI suite pose special problems 
for the patient and the anesthesiologist? 
 MRI studies tend to be long (often more than 
1 h) and many scanners totally surround the body, 
causing a high incidence of claustrophobia in pa-
tients already anxious about their health. Good 
imaging requires immobility, something that is dif-
ﬁ cult to achieve in many patients without sedation 
or general anesthesia . 
 Because the MRI uses a powerful magnet, no 
ferromagnetic objects can be placed near the 
scanner. This includes implanted prosthetic joints, 
artiﬁ cial pacemakers, surgical clips, batteries, ordi-
nary anesthesia machines, watches, pens, or credit 
cards. Ordinary metal lead wires for pulse oximeters 
or electrocardiography act as antennas and may at-
tract enough radiofrequency energy to distort the 
MRI image or even cause patient burns. In addition, 
the scanner’s magnetic ﬁ eld causes severe monitor 
artifact. The more powerful the scanner’s magnet, 
as measured in Tesla units (1 T = 10,000 gauss), the 
greater the potential problem. Other obstacles in-
clude poor access to the patient during the imag-
ing (particularly the patient’s airway), hypothermia 
in pediatric patients, dim lighting within the pa-
tient tunnel, and very loud noise (up to 100 dB) . 
 How have these monitoring and anesthesia 
machine problems been addressed? 
 Equipment manufacturers have modiﬁ ed 
monitors so that they are compatible with the MRI 
environment. These modiﬁ cations include non-
ferromagnetic electrocardiographic electrodes, 
graphite and copper cables, extensive ﬁ ltering and 
gating of signals, extra-long blood pressure cuﬀ  
142 
SECTION I Anesthetic Equipment & Monitors 
 Kasman N, Brady K: Cerebral oximetry for pediatric 
anesthesia: why do intelligent clinicians disagree? 
Pediatr Anaesth 2011;21:473. 
 Mashour G, Orser B, Avidan M: Intraoperative 
awareness. Anesthiology 2011;114:1218. 
 Moritz S, Kasprzak P, Arit M, et al: Accuracy of 
cerebral monitoring in detecting cerebral ischemia 
during carotid endarterectomy. Anesthiology 
2007;107:563. 
 Myles P, Leslie K, McNeil J: Bispectral function 
monitoring to prevent awareness during anaesthesia. 
Th e B-Aware randomized controlled trial. Lancet 
2004;363:1757. 
 Naguib M, Koman A, Ensor J: Neuromuscular 
monitoring and postoperative residual curarization: a 
meta analysis. Br J Anaesth 2007;98:302. 
 Nishiyama T: Recent advance in patient monitoring. 
Korean J Anesthesiol 2010;59:144. 
 Pellicer A, Bravo Mdel C: Near infrared spectroscopy: a 
methodology focused review. Semin Fetal Neonatal 
Med 2011;16:42. 
 Rubio A, Hakami L, Munch F, et al: Noninvasive control 
of adequate cerebral oxygenation during low fl ow 
antegrade selective cerebral perfusion on adults 
and infants in the aortic arch surgery. J Card Surg 
2008;23:474. 
 Saidi N, Murkin J: Applied neuromonitoring in cardiac 
surgery; patient specifi c management. Semin 
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2005;9:17. 
 Schell RM, Cole DJ: Cerebral monitoring: jugular venous 
oximetry. Anesth Analg 2000;90:559. 
 Sessler D: Temperature monitoring and perioperative 
thermoregulation. Anesthesiology 2008;109:318. 
 Sloan T, Janik D, Jameson L: Multimodality monitoring 
of the central nervous system using motor evoked 
potentials. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008;21:560. 
 Tortoriello T, Stayer S, Mott A, et al: A noninvasive 
estimation of mixed venous oxygen saturation using 
near infrared spectroscopy by cerebral oximetry in 
pediatric cardiac surgery patients. Pediatr Anesth 
2005;15:495. 
 Is the continuous presence of anesthesia 
personnel required during these cases? 
 Absolutely, yes. Sedated patients need to have 
continuous monitored anesthesia care to prevent 
a multitude of unforeseen complications, such as 
apnea or emesis . 
GUIDELINES
American Society of Anesthesiologists Standards for 
basic anesthetic monitoring, July 2011. http://www.
asahq.org/For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-
Statements.aspx. Accessed January 9, 2013.
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Avidan M, Zhang L, Burnside B, et al: Anesthesia 
awareness and bispectral index. New Eng J Med 
2008;358:1097. 
 Ben Julian A, Mashour G, Avidan M: Processed 
electroencephalogram in depth of anesthesia 
monitoring. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:553. 
 Fenelly M: Spinal cord monitoring. Anaesthesia 
1998;53:41. 
 Frye E, Levy J: Cerebral monitoring in the operating 
and the intensive care unit—an introductory 
for the clinician and a guide for the novice 
wanting to open a window to the brain. Part I: 
Th e electroencephalogram. J Clin Monit Comput 
2005;19:1. 
 Fuchs-Binder T, Schreiber J, Meistelman C: Monitoring 
neuromuscular block: an update. Anaesthesia 
2009;64:82. 
 Grocott J, Davie S, Fedorow C: Monitoring of brain 
function in anesthesia and intensive care. Curr Opin 
Anesthesiol 2010; 23:759. 
 Jubran A: Advances in respiratory monitoring during 
mechanical ventilation. Chest 1999;116:1416. 
 143 
 Pharmacological Principles 
 C
H
A
P
T
E
R7
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Drug molecules obey the law of mass action. 
When the plasma concentration exceeds 
the tissue concentration, the drug moves 
from the plasma into tissue. When the 
plasma concentration is less than the tissue 
concentration, the drug moves from the 
tissue back to plasma. 
 Most drugs that readily cross the blood–brain 
barrier (eg, lipophilic drugs like hypnotics 
and opioids) are avidly taken up in body fat. 
 Biotransformation is the chemical process 
by which the drug molecule is altered in 
the body. The liver is the primary organ of 
metabolism for drugs. 
 Small unbound molecules freely pass from 
plasma into the glomerular ﬁ ltrate. The 
nonionized (uncharged) fraction of drug is 
1
2
3
4
reabsorbed in the renal tubules, whereas 
the ionized (charged) portion is excreted 
in urine. 
 Elimination half-life is the time required 
for the drug concentration to fall by 50%. 
For drugs described by multicompartment 
pharmacokinetics (eg, all drugs used in 
anesthesia), there are multiple elimination 
half-lives. 
 The oﬀ set of a drug’s eﬀ ect cannot be 
predicted from half-lives. The context-
sensitive half-time is a clinically useful 
concept to describe the rate of decrease 
in drug concentration and should be 
used instead of half-lives to compare the 
pharmacokinetic properties of intravenous 
drugs used in anesthesia. 
5
6
 S E C T I O N I I
Clinical Pharmacology 
 Th e clinical practice of anesthesiology is connected 
more directly than any other specialty to the sci-
ence of clinical pharmacology. One would think, 
therefore, that the study of pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics would receive attention 
comparable to that given to airway assessment, 
choice of inhalation anesthetic for ambulatory 
surgery, or neuromuscular blockade in anesthe-
siology curricula and examinations. Th e frequent 
misidentifi cation or misuse of pharmacokinetic 
principles and measurements suggests that this is 
not the case. 
 PHARMACOKINETICS 
 Pharmacokinetics defi nes the relationships among 
drug dosing, drug concentration in body fl uids 
and tissues, and time. It consists of four linked 
144 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 TABLE 71 Tissue group composition, 
relative body mass, and percentage of 
cardiac output. 
Tissue 
Group
Composition
Body 
Mass (%)
Cardiac 
Output (%)
Vessel-rich
Brain, heart, 
liver, kidney, 
endocrine 
glands
10
75
Muscle
Muscle, skin
50
19
Fat
Fat
20
6
Vessel-poor
Bone, ligament, 
cartilage
20
0
processes: absorption, distribution, biotransforma-
tion, and excretion. 
 Absorption 
 Absorption defi nes the processes by which a drug 
moves from the site of administration to the blood-
stream. Th ere are many possible routes of drug 
administration: oral, sublingual, rectal, inhalational, 
transdermal, transmucosal, subcutaneous, intra-
muscular, and intravenous. Absorption is infl uenced 
by the physical characteristics of the drug (solubility, 
p K a , diluents, binders, and formulation), dose, and 
the site of absorption (eg, gut, lung, skin, muscle). 
Bioavailability is the fraction of the administered 
dose reaching the systemic circulation. For example, 
nitroglycerin is well absorbed by the gastrointestinal 
tract but has low bioavailability when administered 
orally. Th e reason is that nitroglycerin undergoes 
extensive fi rst-pass hepatic metabolism as it transits 
the liver before reaching the systemic circulation. 
 Oral drug administration is convenient, inex-
pensive, and relatively tolerant of dosing errors. 
However, it requires cooperation of the patient, 
exposes the drug to fi rst-pass hepatic metabolism, 
and permits gastric pH, enzymes, motility, food, and 
other drugs to potentially reduce the predictability 
of systemic drug delivery. 
 Nonionized (uncharged) drugs are more readily 
absorbed than ionized (charged) forms. Th erefore, 
an acidic environment (stomach) favors the absorp-
tion of acidic drugs (A – + H + → AH), whereas a more 
alkaline environment (intestine) favors basic drugs 
(BH + → H + + B). Most drugs are largely absorbed 
from the intestine rather than the stomach because 
of the greater surface area of the small intestine and 
longer transit duration. 
 All venous drainage from the stomach and small 
intestine fl ows to the liver. As a result, the bioavailabil-
ity of highly metabolized drugs may be signifi cantly 
reduced by fi rst-pass hepatic metabolism. Because 
the venous drainage from the mouth and esophagus 
fl ows into the superior vena cava rather than into the 
portal system, sublingual or buccal drug absorption 
bypasses the liver and fi rst-pass metabolism. Rectal 
administration partly bypasses the portal system, 
and represents an alternative route in small children 
or patients who are unable to tolerate oral ingestion. 
However, rectal absorption can be erratic, and many 
drugs irritate the rectal mucosa. 
 Transdermal drug administration can provide 
prolonged continuous administration for some 
drugs. However, the stratum corneum is an eff ec-
tive barrier to all but small, lipid-soluble drugs (eg, 
clonidine, nitroglycerin, scopolamine, fentanyl, and 
free-base local anesthetics [EMLA]). 
 Parenteral routes of drug administration 
include subcutaneous, intramuscular, and intrave-
nous injection. Subcutaneous and intramuscular 
absorption depend on drug diff usion from the site 
of injection to the bloodstream. Th e rate at which a 
drug enters the bloodstream depends on both blood 
fl ow to the injected tissue and the injectate formu-
lation. Drugs dissolved in solution are absorbed 
faster than those present in suspensions. Irritating 
preparations can cause pain and tissue necrosis (eg, 
intramuscular diazepam). Intravenous injections 
completely bypass the process of absorption. 
 Distribution 
 Once absorbed, a drug is distributed by the blood-
stream throughout the body. Highly perfused organs 
(the so-called vessel-rich group) receive a dispro-
portionate fraction of the cardiac output ( Table 7–1 ). 
Th erefore, these tissues receive a disproportionate 
amount of drug in the fi rst minutes following drug 
administration. Th ese tissues approach equilibration 
with the plasma concentration more quickly than 
less well perfused tissues due to the diff erences in 
 
CHAPTER 7 Pharmacological Principles
145
by other drugs, then the relative solubility of the 
drugs in blood is decreased, increasing tissue uptake. 
Kidney disease, liver disease, chronic congestive heart 
failure, and malignancies decrease albumin produc-
tion. Trauma (including surgery), infection, myocar-
dial infarction, and chronic pain increase AAG levels. 
Pregnancy is associated with reduced AAG concen-
trations. Note that these changes will have very little 
eff ect on propofol, which is administered with its 
own binding molecules (the lipid in the emulsion). 
 Lipophilic molecules can readily transfer 
between the blood and organs. Charged molecules 
are able to pass in small quantities into most organs. 
However, the blood–brain barrier is a special case. 
Permeation of the central nervous system by ionized 
drugs is limited by pericapillary glial cells and endo-
thelial cell tight junctions.  Most drugs that 
readily cross the blood–brain barrier (eg, lipo-
philic drugs like hypnotics and opioids) are avidly 
taken up in body fat. 
 Th e time course of distribution of drugs into 
peripheral tissues is complex and can only be 
assessed with computer models. Following intra-
venous bolus administration, rapid distribution 
of drug from the plasma into peripheral tissues 
accounts for the profound decrease in plasma con-
centration observed in the fi rst few minutes. For 
each tissue, there is a point in time at which the 
apparent concentration in the tissue is the same as 
the concentration in the plasma. Th e redistribu-
tion phase (for each tissue) follows this moment of 
equilibration. During redistribution, drug returns 
from peripheral tissues back into the plasma. Th is 
return of drug back to the plasma slows the rate of 
decline in plasma drug concentration. 
 Distribution generally contributes to rapid 
emergence by removing drug from the plasma for 
many minutes following administration of a bolus 
infusion. Following prolonged infusions,  re distri-
bution generally delays emergence as drug returns 
from tissue reservoirs to the plasma for many hours. 
 Th e complex process of drug distribution 
into and out of tissues is one reason that half-lives 
are clinically useless. Th e off set of a drug’s clinical 
actions are best predicted by computer models using 
the context-sensitive half-time or decrement times. 
Th e  context-sensitive half-time is the time required 
2
blood fl ow. However, less well perfused tissues such 
as fat and skin may have enormous capacity to 
absorb lipophilic drugs, resulting in a large reservoir 
of drug following long infusions. 
 Drug molecules obey the law of mass action. 
When the plasma concentration exceeds the 
concentration in tissue, the drug moves from the 
plasma into tissue. When the plasma concentra-
tion is less than the concentration in tissue, the drug 
moves from the tissue back to plasma. 
 Distribution is a major determinant of end-
organ drug concentration. Th e rate of rise in drug 
concentration in an organ is determined by that 
organ’s perfusion and the relative drug solubility 
in the organ compared with blood. Th e equilib-
rium concentration in an organ relative to blood 
depends only on the relative solubility of the drug 
in the organ relative to blood, unless the organ is 
capable of metabolizing the drug. 
 Molecules in blood are either free or bound to 
plasma proteins and lipids. Th e free concentration 
equilibrates between organs and tissues. However, 
the equilibration between bound and unbound mol-
ecules is instantaneous. As unbound molecules of 
drug diff use into tissue, they are instantly replaced by 
previously bound molecules. Plasma protein bind-
ing does not aff ect the rate of transfer directly, but 
it does aff ect relative solubility of the drug in blood 
and tissue. If the drug is highly bound in tissues, 
and unbound in plasma, then the relative solubility 
favors drug transfer into tissue. Put another way, a 
drug that is highly bound in tissue, but not in blood, 
will have a very large free drug concentration gradi-
ent driving drug into the tissue. Conversely, if the 
drug is highly bound in plasma and has few binding 
sites in the tissue, then transfer of a small amount of 
drug may be enough to bring the free drug concen-
tration into equilibrium between blood and tissue. 
Th us, high levels of binding in blood relative to tis-
sues increase the rate of onset of drug eff ect, because 
fewer molecules need to transfer into the tissue to 
produce an eff ective free drug concentration. 
 Albumin binds many acidic drugs (eg, barbi-
turates), whereas α 1 -acid glycoprotein (AAG) binds 
basic drugs (local anesthetics). If the concentrations 
of these proteins are diminished or (typically less 
important) if the protein-binding sites are occupied 
1
146 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
pancuronium is about 15 L in a 70-kg person, indi-
cating that pancuronium is mostly present in body 
water, with little distribution into fat. However, the 
typical anesthetic drug is lipophilic, resulting in a 
V dss that exceeds total body water (approximately 
40 L). For example, the  V dss for fentanyl is about 350 
L in adults, and the  V dss for propofol may exceed 
5000 L.  V dss does not represent a real volume but 
rather refl ects the volume into which the drug would 
need to distribute to account for the observed plasma 
concentration given the dose that was administered. 
 Biotransformation 
 Biotransformation is the chemical process 
by which the drug molecule is altered in the 
body. Th e liver is the primary organ of metabolism 
for drugs. Th e exception is esters, which undergo 
hydrolysis in the plasma or tissues. Th e end products 
of biotransformation are oft en (but not necessarily) 
inactive and water soluble. Water solubility allows 
excretion by the kidneys. 
 Metabolic biotransformation is frequently 
divided into phase I and phase II reactions. Phase 
I reactions convert a parent compound into more 
polar metabolites through oxidation, reduction, or 
hydrolysis. Phase II reactions couple (conjugate) a 
parent drug or a phase I metabolite with an endog-
enous substrate (eg, glucuronic acid) to form water-
soluble metabolites that can be eliminated in the 
urine or stool. Although this is usually a sequential 
process, phase I metabolites may be excreted with-
out undergoing phase II biotransformation, and 
a phase II reaction can precede or occur without a 
phase I reaction. 
 Hepatic clearance is the volume of blood or 
plasma (whichever was measured in the assay) 
cleared of drug per unit of time. Th e units of clearance 
are units of fl ow: volume per unit time. Clearance 
may be expressed in milliliters per minute, liters per 
hour, or any other convenient unit of fl ow. 
 If every molecule of drug that enters the liver 
is metabolized, then hepatic clearance will equal 
liver blood fl ow. Th is is true for very few drugs, 
although it is very nearly the case for propofol. For 
most drugs, only a fraction of the drug that enters 
the liver is removed. Th e fraction removed is called 
the  extraction ratio . Th e hepatic clearance can there-
fore be expressed as the liver blood fl ow times the 
3
for a 50% decrease in plasma drug concentration to 
occur following a pseudo steady-state infusion (in 
other words, an infusion that has continued long 
enough to yield nearly steady-state concentrations). 
Here the “context” is the duration of the infusion. 
Th e  context-sensitive decrement time is a more gen-
eralized concept referring to any clinically relevant 
decreased concentration in any tissue, particularly 
the brain or eff ect site. 
 Th e volume of distribution,  V d , is the  appar-
ent volume into which a drug has “distributed” (ie, 
mixed). Th is volume is calculated by dividing a 
bolus dose of drug by the plasma concentration at 
time 0. In practice, the concentration used to defi ne 
the  V d is oft en obtained by extrapolating subsequent 
concentrations back to “0 time” when the drug was 
injected, as follows: 
 
V
Bolus dose
Concentration
d
time0
=
 
 Th e concept of a single  V d does not apply to 
any intravenous drugs used in anesthesia. All intra-
venous anesthetic drugs are better modeled with 
at least two compartments: a central compartment 
and a peripheral compartment. Th e behavior of 
many of these drugs is best described using three 
compartments: a central compartment, a rapidly 
equilibrating peripheral compartment, and a slowly 
equilibrating peripheral compartment. Th e central 
compartment may be thought of as including the 
blood and any ultra-rapidly equilibrating tissues 
such as the lungs. Th e peripheral compartment is 
composed of the other body tissues. For drugs with 
two peripheral compartments, the rapidly equilibrat-
ing compartment comprises the organs and muscles, 
while the slowly equilibrating compartment roughly 
represents distribution of the drug into fat and skin. 
Th ese compartments are designated  V 1 (central), 
 V 2 (rapid distribution), and  V 3 (slow distribution). 
Th e volume of distribution at steady state,  V dss is the 
algebraic sum of these compartment volumes.  V 1 is 
calculated by the above equation showing the rela-
tionship between volume, dose, and concentration. 
Th e other volumes are calculated through pharma-
cokinetic modeling. 
 A small  V dss implies that the drug has high 
aqueous solubility and will remain largely within 
the intravascular space. For example, the  V dss of 
 
CHAPTER 7 Pharmacological Principles
147
drugs excreted into the bile are then reabsorbed in 
the intestine, a process called  enterohepatic recircu-
lation . Occasionally metabolites excreted in bile are 
subsequently converted back to the parent drug. For 
example, lorazepam is converted by the liver to loraz-
epam glucuronide. In the intestine, β-glucuronidase 
breaks the ester linkage, converting lorazepam gluc-
uronide back to lorazepam. 
 Compartment Models 
 Multicompartment models provide a mathemati-
cal framework that can be used to relate drug 
dose to changes in drug concentrations over time. 
Conceptually, the compartments in these models are 
tissues with a similar distribution time course. For 
example, the plasma and lungs are components of 
the central compartment. Th e organs and muscles, 
sometimes called the vessel-rich group, could be 
the second, or rapidly equilibrating, compartment. 
Fat and skin have the capacity to bind large quan-
tities of lipophilic drug but are poorly perfused. 
Th ese could represent the third, or slowly equili-
brating, compartment. Th is is an intuitive defi nition 
of compartments, and it is important to recognize 
that the compartments of a pharmacokinetic model 
are mathematical abstractions that relate dose to 
observed concentration. A one-to-one relationship 
does not exist between any compartment and any 
organ or tissue in the body. 
 Many drugs used in anesthesia are well 
described by a two-compartment model. Th is is 
generally the case if the studies used to characterize 
the pharmacokinetics do not include rapid arterial 
sampling over the fi rst few minutes ( Figure 7–1 ). 
Without rapid arterial sampling the ultra-rapid ini-
tial drop in plasma concentration immediately aft er 
a bolus injection is missed, and the central compart-
ment volume is blended into the rapidly equilibrat-
ing compartment. When rapid arterial sampling is 
used in pharmacokinetic experiments, the results 
are generally a three-compartment model. In these 
cases the number of identifi able compartments is a 
function of the experimental design and not a char-
acteristic of the drug. 
 In compartmental models the instantaneous 
concentration at the time of a bolus injection is 
assumed to be the amount of the bolus divided 
by the central compartment volume. Th is is not 
extraction ratio. If the extraction ratio is 50%, then 
hepatic clearance is 50% of liver blood fl ow. Th e 
clearance of drugs effi  ciently removed by the liver 
(ie, having a high hepatic extraction ratio) is propor-
tional to hepatic blood fl ow. For example, because 
the liver removes almost all of the propofol that 
goes through it, if the hepatic blood fl ow doubles, 
then the clearance of propofol doubles. Induction 
of liver enzymes has no eff ect on propofol clear-
ance, because the liver so effi  ciently removes all of 
the propofol that goes through it. Even severe loss 
of liver tissue, as occurs in cirrhosis, has little eff ect 
on propofol clearance. Drugs such as propofol have 
fl ow-dependent clearance. 
 Many drugs have low hepatic extraction ratios 
and are slowly cleared by the liver. For these drugs, 
the rate-limiting step is not the fl ow of blood to the 
liver, but rather the metabolic capacity of the liver 
itself. Changes in liver blood fl ow have little eff ect 
on the clearance of such drugs. However, if liver 
enzymes are induced, then clearance will increase 
because the liver has more capacity to metabolize 
the drug. Conversely, if the liver is damaged, then 
less capacity is available for metabolism and clear-
ance is reduced. Drugs with low hepatic extraction 
ratios thus have capacity-dependent clearance. Th e 
extraction ratios of methadone and alfentanil are 
10% and 15% respectively, making these capacity-
dependent drugs. 
 Excretion 
 Some drugs and many drug metabolites are excreted 
by the kidneys. Renal clearance is the rate of elimi-
nation of a drug from the body by kidney excretion. 
Th is concept is analogous to hepatic clearance, and 
similarly, renal clearance can be expressed as the 
renal blood fl ow times the renal extraction ratio. 
 Small unbound drugs freely pass from plasma 
into the glomerular fi ltrate. Th e nonionized 
(uncharged) fraction of drug is reabsorbed in the 
renal tubules, whereas the ionized (charged) portion 
is excreted in urine. Th e fraction of drug ionized 
depends on the pH; thus renal elimination of drugs 
that exist in ionized and nonionized forms depends 
in part on urinary pH. Th e kidney actively secretes 
some drugs into the renal tubules. 
 Many drugs and drug metabolites pass from the 
liver into the intestine via the biliary system. Some 
4
148 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
equilibrating compartment is no longer removing 
drug from the plasma. Instead, drug returns to the 
plasma from the rapidly equilibrating compartment. 
Th e reversed role of the rapidly equilibrating tissues 
from extracting drug to returning drug accounts for 
the slower rate of decline in plasma concentration in 
this intermediate phase. Eventually there is an even 
slower rate of decrease in plasma concentration, 
which is log-linear until the drug is completely elim-
inated from the body. Th is terminal log-linear phase 
occurs aft er the slowly equilibrating compartment 
shift s from net removal of drug from the plasma to 
net return of drug to the plasma. During this ter-
minal phase the organ of elimination (typically the 
liver) is exposed to the body’s entire body drug load, 
which accounts for the very slow rate of decrease in 
plasma drug concentration during this fi nal phase. 
 Th e mathematical models used to describe 
a drug with two or three compartments are, 
respectively: 
 Cp(t) = Ae
+ Be
t
−
t
−β
α
 
 and 
 Cp(t) = Ae
+ Be
+ Ce
t
−
t
−β
t
−γ
α
 
 where  Cp ( t ) equals plasma concentration at time  t , 
and α, β, and γ are the exponents that character-
ize the very rapid (ie, very steep), intermediate, and 
slow (ie, log-linear) portions of the plasma concen-
tration over time, respectively. Drugs described by 
two-compartment and three-compartment models 
will have two or three half-lives. Each half-life is cal-
culated as the natural log of 2 (0.693), divided by the 
exponent. Th e coeffi  cients  A ,  B , and  C represent the 
contribution of each of the exponents to the overall 
decrease in concentration over time. 
 Th e two-compartment model is described by a 
curve with two exponents and two coeffi  cients, 
whereas the three-compartment model is described 
by a curve with three exponents and three coeffi  -
cients. Th e mathematical relationships among com-
partments, clearances, coeffi  cients, and exponents 
are complex. Every coeffi  cient and every exponent is 
a function of every volume and every clearance. 
 Elimination half-life is the time required for the 
drug concentration to fall by 50%. For drugs 
described by multicompartment pharmacokinetics 
5
correct. If the bolus is given over a few seconds, the 
instantaneous concentration is 0, because the drug 
is all in the vein, still fl owing to the heart. It takes 
only a minute or two for the drug to mix in the cen-
tral compartment volume. Th is misspecifi cation is 
common to conventional pharmacokinetic mod-
els. More physiologically based models, sometimes 
called  front-end kinetic models , can characterize 
the initial delay in concentration. Th ese models are 
useful only if the concentrations over the fi rst few 
minutes are clinically important. Aft er the fi rst few 
minutes, front-end models resemble conventional 
compartmental models. 
 In the fi rst few minutes following initial bolus 
administration of a drug, the concentration drops 
very rapidly as the drug quickly diff uses into periph-
eral compartments. Th e decline is typically an order 
of magnitude over 10 minutes. For drugs with very 
rapid hepatic clearance (eg, propofol) or those that 
are metabolized in the blood (eg, remifentanil), 
metabolism contributes signifi cantly to the rapid ini-
tial drop in concentration. Following this very rapid 
drop there is a period of slower decrease in plasma 
concentration. During this period, the rapidly 
 
Distribution
phase
Elimination
phase
Time after dose
IV
bolus
Plasma concentration
 FIGURE 71  Two-compartment model demonstrates 
the distribution phase (α phase) and the elimination 
phase (β phase). During the distribution phase, the drug 
moves from the central compartment to the peripheral 
compartment. The elimination phase consists of 
metabolism and excretion. 
 
CHAPTER 7 Pharmacological Principles
149
scale ( Figure 7–2B ), while the response is typi-
cally plotted either as the actual measured response 
(Figure 7–2A) or as a fraction of the baseline or max-
imum physiological measurement (Figure 7–2B). 
For our purposes here, basic pharmacodynamic 
properties are described in terms of concentration, 
but any metric of drug exposure (dose, area under 
the curve, etc) could be used. 
 Th e shape of the relationship is typically sig-
moidal, as shown in Figure 7–2. Th e sigmoidal 
(eg, all drugs used in anesthesia), there are multiple 
elimination half-lives, in other words the elimination 
half-time is context dependent.  Th e off set of a 
drug’s eff ect cannot be predicted from half-
lives. Moreover, one cannot easily determine how 
rapidly a drug eff ect will disappear simply by looking 
at coeffi  cients, exponents, and half-lives. For example, 
the terminal half-life of sufentanil is about 10 h, 
whereas that of alfentanil is 2 h. Th is does not mean 
that recovery from alfentanil will be faster, because 
clinical recovery from clinical dosing will be infl u-
enced by all half-lives, not just the terminal one. 
Computer models readily demonstrate that recovery 
from an infusion lasting several hours will be faster 
when the drug administered is sufentanil than it will 
be when the infused drug is alfentanil. Th e time 
required for a 50% decrease in concentration depends 
on the duration or “context” of the infusion. Th e con-
text-sensitive half-time, discussed earlier, captures 
this concept and should be used instead of half-lives 
to compare the pharmacokinetic properties of intra-
venous drugs used in anesthesia. 
 PHARMACODYNAMICS 
 Pharmacodynamics, the study of how drugs aff ect 
the body, involves the concepts of potency, effi  cacy, 
and therapeutic window. Pharmacokinetic mod-
els can range from entirely empirical dose versus 
response relationships to mechanistic models of 
ligand–receptor binding. Th e fundamental pharma-
codynamic concepts are captured in the relation-
ship between exposure to a drug and physiological 
response to the drug, oft en called the  dose–response
or  concentration–response relationship . 
 Exposure–Response Relationships 
 As the body is exposed to an increasing amount of 
a drug, the response to the drug similarly increases, 
typically up to a maximal value. Th is fundamental 
concept in the exposure versus response relationship 
is captured graphically by plotting exposure (usually 
dose or concentration) on the  x axis as the indepen-
dent variable, and the body’s response on the  y axis 
as the dependent variable. Depending on the cir-
cumstances, the dose or concentration may be plot-
ted on a linear scale ( Figure 7–2A ) or a logarithmic 
6
B
A
20
15
10
10
1
10
100
100
75
50
25
1000
20
30
40
Dose (mg)
Dose (mg)
Drop in MAP (mm Hg)
% of maximal response
5
 FIGURE 72  The shape of the dose–response curve 
depends on whether the dose or steady-state plasma 
concentration ( C cpss ) is plotted on a linear  A: or logarithmic 
 B: scale. MAP, mean arterial pressure. 
150 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
γ value greater than 4 suggests that once drug eff ect 
is observed, small increases in drug concentration 
produce large increases in drug eff ect until the maxi-
mum eff ect is reached. 
 Th e curve described above represents the rela-
tionship of drug concentration to a continuous 
physiological response. Th e same relationship can 
be used to characterize the probability of a binary 
(yes/no) response to a drug dose: 
 
+ (P
P
max
0
−
)
Probability = P0
C
γ
+
50
C
γ
C
γ
 
 In this case, the probability ( P ) ranges from 0 (no 
chance) to 1 (certainty).  P 0 is the probability of a “yes” 
response in the absence of drug.  P max is the maximum 
probability, necessarily less than or equal to 1. As 
before,  C is the concentration,  C 50 is the concentration 
associated with half-maximal eff ect, and γ describes 
the steepness of the concentration versus response 
relationship. Half-maximal eff ect is the same as 50% 
probability of a response when  P 0 is 0 and  P max is 1. 
 Th e  therapeutic window for a drug is the range 
between the concentration associated with a desired 
therapeutic eff ect and the concentration associated 
with a toxic drug response. Th is range can be mea-
sured either between two diff erent points on the 
same concentration versus response curve, or the 
distance between two distinct curves. For a drug 
such as sodium nitroprusside, a single concentra-
tion versus response curve defi nes the relationship 
between concentration and decrease in blood pres-
sure. Th e therapeutic window might be the diff er-
ence in the concentration producing a desired 20% 
decrease in blood pressure and a toxic concentration 
that produces a 60% decrease in blood pressure. 
However, for a drug such as lidocaine, the thera-
peutic window might be the diff erence between the 
 C 50 for local anesthesia and the  C 50 for lidocaine-
induced seizures, the latter being a separate concen-
tration versus response relationship. Th e therapeutic 
index is the  C 50 for toxicity divided by the  C 50 for 
the desired therapeutic eff ect. Because of the risk of 
ventilatory and cardiovascular depression (even at 
concentrations only slightly greater than those pro-
ducing anesthesia), most inhaled and intravenous 
hypnotics are considered to have very low therapeu-
tic indices relative to other drugs. 
shape refl ects the observation that oft en a certain 
amount of drug must be present before there is any 
measurable physiological response. Th us, the left 
side of the curve is fl at until the drug concentration 
reaches a minimum threshold. Th e right side is also 
fl at, refl ecting the maximum physiological response 
of the body, beyond which the body simply cannot 
respond to additional drug (with the possible excep-
tion of eating and weight). Th us, the curve is fl at on 
both the left  and right sides. A sigmoidal curve is 
required to connect the baseline to the asymptote, 
which is why sigmoidal curves are ubiquitous when 
modeling pharmacodynamics 
 Th e sigmoidal relationship between exposure 
and response is defi ned by one of two interchange-
able relationships: 
 
Effect = E + Emax
0
C
γ
+
50
C
γ
C
γ
 
 or 
 
+ (E
E
max
0
−
)
Effect = E0
C
γ
+
50
C
γ
C
γ
 
 In both cases,  E 0 is the baseline eff ect in the 
absence of drug,  C is drug concentration,  C 50 is the 
concentration associated with half-maximal eff ect, 
and γ describes the steepness of the concentration ver-
sus response relationship. For the fi rst equation,  E max 
is the maximum change from baseline. In the second 
equation,  E max is the maximum physiological mea-
surement, not the maximum change from baseline. 
 Once defi ned in this fashion, each parameter 
of the pharmacodynamic model speaks to the spe-
cifi c concepts mentioned earlier.  E max is related to 
the intrinsic effi  cacy of a drug. Highly effi  cacious 
drugs have a large maximum physiological eff ect, 
characterized by a large  E max . For drugs that lack 
effi  cacy,  E max will equal  E 0 .  C 50 is a measure of drug 
potency. Highly potent drugs have a low  C 50 ; thus 
small amounts produce the drug eff ect. Drugs lack-
ing potency have a high C 50 , indicating that a large 
amount of drug is required to achieve the drug 
eff ect. Th e parameter γ indicates steepness of the 
relationship between concentration and eff ect. A γ 
value less than 1 indicates a very gradual increase 
in drug eff ect with increasing concentration. A 
 
CHAPTER 7 Pharmacological Principles 
151 
 then we can solve for receptor occupancy as: 
 
f =
[D]
kd + [D] 
 Th e receptors are half occupied when [ D ] =  k  d  . 
Th us,  k  d  is the concentration of drug associated with 
50% receptor occupancy. 
 Receptor occupancy is only the fi rst step in 
mediating drug eff ect. Binding of the drug to the 
receptor can trigger a myriad of subsequent steps, 
including opening or closing of an ion channel, 
 activation of a G protein, activation of an intracel-
lular kinase, direct interaction with a cellular struc-
ture, or direct binding to DNA. 
 Like the concentration versus response curve, 
the shape of the curve relating fractional receptor 
occupancy to drug concentration is intrinsically 
sigmoidal. However, the concentration associated 
with 50% receptor occupancy and the concentra-
tion associated with 50% of maximal drug eff ect 
are not necessarily the same. Maximal drug eff ect 
could occur at very low receptor occupancy, or 
(for partial agonists) at greater than 100% receptor 
occupancy. 
 Prolonged binding and activation of a receptor 
by an agonist may lead to hyporeactivity (“desensi-
tization”) and tolerance. If the binding of an endog-
enous ligand is chronically blocked, then receptors 
may proliferate resulting in hyperreactivity and 
increased sensitivity. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Bauer LA (Ed):  Applied Clinical Pharmacokinetics , 2nd 
ed. McGraw-Hill, 2008: Chaps 1, 2. 
 Brunton LL, Chabner BA, Knollman BC (Eds):  Goodman 
& Gilman’s Th e Pharmacological Basis of Th erapeutics , 
12th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2010: Chap 2. 
 Keifer J, Glass P: Context-sensitive half-time and anes-
thesia: How does theory match reality? Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 1999;12:443. 
 Shargel L, Yu AB, Wu-Pong S (Eds):  Applied 
Biopharmaceutics & Pharmacokinetics , 6th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2012. 
 Drug Receptors 
 Drug receptors are macromolecules, typically pro-
teins, that bind a drug (agonist) and mediate the drug 
response. Pharmacological antagonists reverse the 
eff ects of the agonist but do not otherwise exert an 
eff ect of their own. Competitive antagonism occurs 
when the antagonist competes with the agonist for 
the binding site, each potentially displacing the other. 
Noncompetitive antagonism occurs when the antag-
onist, through covalent binding or another process, 
permanently impairs the drug’s access to the receptor. 
 Th e drug eff ect is governed by the fraction of 
receptors that are occupied by an agonist. Th at frac-
tion is based on the concentration of the drug, the 
concentration of the receptor, and the strength of 
binding between the drug and the receptor. Th is 
binding is described by the law of mass action, 
which states that the reaction rate is proportional to 
the concentrations of the reactants: 
 
[D][RU]
k
[DR]
on
koff
 
 where [ D ] is the concentration of the drug, [ RU ] is 
the concentration of unbound receptor, and [ DR ] is 
the concentration of bound receptor. Th e rate con-
stant  k on defi nes the rate of ligand binding to the 
receptor. Th e rate constant  k off  defi nes the rate of 
ligand unbinding from the receptor. According to 
the law of mass action, the rate of receptor binding, 
 d [ DR ]/ dt is: 
 
d[DR]
dt
= [D][RU] k
[DR]k
on
off
−
 
 Steady state occurs almost instantly. Because the 
rate of formation at steady state is 0, it follows that: 
 [D][RU] k
= [DR]k
on
off 
 In this equation,  k  d  is the dissociation rate con-
stant, defi ned as  k on / k off  . If we defi ne  f , fractional 
receptor occupancy, as: 
 
[DR]
[DR] + [RU] 
This page intentionally left blank 
 153 
8
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Inhalation Anesthetics 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 The greater the uptake of anesthetic agent, 
the greater the diﬀ erence between inspired 
and alveolar concentrations, and the slower 
the rate of induction. 
 Three factors aﬀ ect anesthetic uptake: 
solubility in the blood, alveolar blood 
ﬂ ow, and the diﬀ erence in partial pressure 
between alveolar gas and venous blood . 
 Low-output states predispose patients to 
overdosage with soluble agents, as the rate 
of rise in alveolar concentrations will be 
markedly increased . 
 Many of the factors that speed induction 
also speed recovery: elimination of 
rebreathing, high fresh gas ﬂ ows, low 
anesthetic-circuit volume, low absorption 
by the anesthetic circuit, decreased 
solubility, high cerebral blood ﬂ ow, and 
increased ventilation . 
 The unitary hypothesis proposes that 
all inhalation agents share a common 
mechanism of action at the molecular 
level. This is supported by the observation 
that the anesthetic potency of inhalation 
agents correlates directly with their 
lipid solubility (Meyer–Overton rule). 
There is an ongoing debate as to 
the mechanism of anesthetic action. 
Anesthetic interactions at speciﬁ c protein 
ion channels, as well as more nonspeciﬁ c 
membrane eﬀ ects, may combine to 
produce the anesthetized state . 
1
2
3
4
5
 The minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC) is the alveolar concentration of 
an inhaled anesthetic that prevents 
movement in 50% of patients in response 
to a standardized stimulus (eg, surgical 
incision) . 
 Prolonged exposure to anesthetic 
concentrations of nitrous oxide can result 
in bone marrow depression (megaloblastic 
anemia) and even neurological deﬁ ciencies 
(peripheral neuropathies) . 
 Halothane hepatitis is extremely rare (1 per 
35,000 cases). Patients exposed to multiple 
halothane anesthetics at short intervals, 
middle-aged obese women, and persons with 
a familial predisposition to halothane toxicity 
or a personal history of toxicity are considered 
to be at increased risk. Desﬂ urane and 
isoﬂ urane undergo much less metabolism 
than halothane, resulting in fewer of the 
metabolite protein adducts that lead to 
immunologically mediated hepatic injury . 
 Isoﬂ urane dilates coronary arteries, 
but is not nearly as potent a dilator as 
nitroglycerin or adenosine. Dilation of 
normal coronary arteries could theoretically 
divert blood away from ﬁ xed stenotic 
lesions . 
 The low solubility of desﬂ urane in blood and 
body tissues causes a very rapid induction 
of and emergence from anesthesia . 
6
7
8
9
10
—Continued next page
154 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Nonpungency and rapid increases in 
alveolar anesthetic concentration make 
sevoﬂ urane an excellent choice for smooth 
and rapid inhalation inductions in pediatric 
and adult patients . 
12
 Rapid increases in desﬂ urane concentration 
lead to transient but sometimes worrisome 
elevations in heart rate, blood pressure, 
and catecholamine levels that are more 
pronounced than occur with isoﬂ urane, 
particularly in patients with cardiovascular 
disease . 
11
Continued—
make inhalation induction practical for them as 
well. Regardless of the patient’s age, anesthesia is 
oft en maintained with inhalation agents. Emergence 
depends primarily upon redistribution from the 
brain and pulmonary elimination of these agents. 
 Because of their unique route of administration, 
inhalation anesthetics have useful pharmacological 
properties not shared by other anesthetic agents. For 
instance, administration via the pulmonary circula-
tion allows a more rapid appearance of the drug in 
arterial blood than intravenous administration. 
 Pharmacokinetics of 
Inhalation Anesthetics 
 Although the mechanism of action of inhalation 
anesthetics is complex, likely involving numerous 
membrane proteins and ion channels, it is clear 
that producing their ultimate eff ect depends on 
attainment of a therapeutic tissue concentration in 
the central nervous system (CNS). Th ere are many 
steps in between the anesthetic vaporizer and the 
anesthetic’s deposition in the brain ( Figure 8–1 ). 
 FACTORS AFFECTING 
INSPIRATORY 
CONCENTRATION F I  
 Th e fresh gas leaving the anesthesia machine mixes 
with gases in the breathing circuit before being 
inspired by the patient. Th erefore, the patient is not 
necessarily receiving the concentration set on the 
 Nitrous oxide, chloroform, and ether were the fi rst 
universally accepted general anesthetics. Methoxy-
fl urane and enfl urane, two potent halogenated 
agents, were used for many years in North American 
anesthesia practice. Methoxyfl urane was the most 
potent inhalation agent, but its high solubility and 
low vapor pressure yielded longer inductions and 
emergences. Up to 50% of it was metabolized by 
cytochrome P-450 (CYP) enzymes to free fl uoride 
(F − ), oxalic acid, and other nephrotoxic compounds. 
Prolonged anesthesia with methoxyfl urane was as-
sociated with a vasopressin-resistant, high-output, 
renal failure that was most commonly seen when 
F − levels increased to greater than 50 µmol/L. En-
fl urane has a nonpungent odor and is nonfl ammable 
at clinical concentrations. It depresses myocardial 
contractility. It also increases the secretion of ce-
rebrospinal fl uid (CSF) and the resistance to CSF 
outfl ow. During deep anesthesia with hypocarbia 
electroencephalographic changes can progress to a 
spike-and-wave pattern producing tonic–clonic sei-
zures. Because of these concerns, methoxyfl urane 
and enfl urane are no longer used. 
 Five inhalation agents continue to be used in 
clinical anesthesiology: nitrous oxide, halothane, 
isofl urane, desfl urane, and sevofl urane. 
 Th e course of a general anesthetic can be divid-
ed into three phases: (1) induction, (2) maintenance, 
and (3) emergence. Inhalation anesthetics, such as 
halothane and sevofl urane, are particularly useful in 
the induction of pediatric patients in whom it may 
be diffi  cult to start an intravenous line. Although 
adults are usually induced with intravenous agents, 
the nonpungency and rapid onset of sevofl urane 
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics
155
rapidly approach the inspired gas concentration 
(F i ). Because anesthetic agents are taken up by the 
pulmonary circulation during induction, alveolar 
concentrations lag behind inspired concentrations 
(F a /F i <1.0). Th e greater the uptake, the slower the 
rate of rise of the alveolar concentration and the 
lower the F a :F i ratio. 
 Because the concentration of a gas is directly 
proportional to its partial pressure, the alveolar par-
tial pressure will also be slow to rise. Th e alveolar 
partial pressure is important because it determines 
the partial pressure of anesthetic in the blood and, 
ultimately, in the brain. Similarly, the partial pres-
sure of the anesthetic in the brain is directly propor-
tional to its brain tissue concentration, which 
determines clinical eff ect. 
 Th erefore, the greater the uptake of anesthetic 
agent, the greater the diff erence between 
inspired and alveolar concentrations, and the slower 
the rate of induction. 
1
vaporizer. Th e actual composition of the inspired 
gas mixture depends mainly on the fresh gas fl ow 
rate, the volume of the breathing system, and any 
absorption by the machine or breathing circuit. Th e 
higher the fresh gas fl ow rate, the smaller the breath-
ing system volume, and the lower the circuit absorp-
tion, the closer the inspired gas concentration will 
be to the fresh gas concentration. Clinically, these 
attributes translate into faster induction and recov-
ery times. 
 FACTORS AFFECTING 
ALVEOLAR 
CONCENTRATION F A  
 Uptake 
 If there were no uptake of anesthetic agent by the 
body, the alveolar gas concentration (F a ) would 
 
FGF
FGF (fresh gas flow) is determined by the vaporizer and flowmeter settings.
(inspired gas concentration) is determined by (1) FGF rate; (2) breathing-
circuit volume; and (3) circuit absorption.
(arterial gas concentration) is affected by ventilation/perfusion
mismatching.
(aveolar gas concentration) is determined by (1) uptake (uptake =
λb/g x C(A-V) x Q); (2) ventilation; and (3) the concentration effect
and second gas effect:
       a) concentrating effect
       b) augmented inflow effect
FI
FI
FA
Fa
Fa
FA
FA
Anesthesia machine
Breathing
circuit
Lungs
Brain
Venous
blood
Arterial
blood
 
 FIGURE 81  Inhalation anesthetic agents must pass through many barriers between the anesthesia machine and 
the brain. 
156 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
increased by postprandial lipidemia and is decreased 
by anemia. 
 Th e second factor that aff ects uptake is alveolar 
blood fl ow, which—in the absence of pulmonary 
shunting—is essentially equal to cardiac output. If 
the cardiac output drops to zero, so will anesthetic 
uptake. As cardiac output increases, anesthetic 
uptake increases, the rise in alveolar partial pressure 
slows, and induction is delayed. Th e eff ect of chang-
ing cardiac output is less pronounced for insoluble 
anesthetics, as so little is taken up regardless of alve-
olar blood fl ow.  Low-output states predispose 
patients to overdosage with soluble agents, as 
the rate of rise in alveolar concentrations will be 
markedly increased. 
 Th e fi nal factor aff ecting uptake of anesthetic by 
the pulmonary circulation is the partial pressure dif-
ference between alveolar gas and venous blood. Th is 
gradient depends on tissue uptake. If anesthetics did 
not pass into organs such as the brain, venous and 
alveolar partial pressures would become identical, 
and there would be no pulmonary uptake. Th e trans-
fer of anesthetic from blood to tissues is determined 
by three factors analogous to systemic uptake: tissue 
solubility of the agent (tissue/blood partition coeffi  -
cient), tissue blood fl ow, and the diff erence in partial 
pressure between arterial blood and the tissue. 
 To better understand inhaled anesthetic uptake 
and distribution, tissues have been classifi ed into 
four groups based on their solubility and blood fl ow 
( Table 8–2 ). Th e highly perfused vessel-rich group 
(brain, heart, liver, kidney, and endocrine organs) is 
3
 2
Th ree factors aff ect anesthetic uptake: solubil-
ity in the blood, alveolar blood fl ow, and the 
diff erence in partial pressure between alveolar gas 
and venous blood. 
 Relatively soluble agents, such as nitrous oxide, 
are taken up by the blood less avidly than more solu-
ble agents, such as halothane. As a consequence, the 
alveolar concentration of nitrous oxide rises faster 
than that of halothane, and induction is faster. Th e 
relative solubilities of an anesthetic in air, blood, 
and tissues are expressed as partition coeffi  cients 
( Table 8–1 ). Each coeffi  cient is the ratio of the 
concentrations of the anesthetic gas in each of two 
phases at steady state. Steady state is defi ned as equal 
partial pressures in the two phases. For instance, 
the blood/gas partition coeffi  cient (λ b/g ) of nitrous 
oxide at 37°C is 0.47. In other words, at steady state, 
1 mL of blood contains 0.47 as much nitrous oxide 
as does 1 mL of alveolar gas, even though the partial 
pressures are the same. Stated another way, blood 
has 47% of the capacity for nitrous oxide as alveolar 
gas. Nitrous oxide is much less soluble in blood than 
is halothane, which has a blood/gas partition coef-
fi cient at 37°C of 2.4. Th us, almost fi ve times more 
halothane than nitrous oxide must be dissolved to 
raise the partial pressure of blood. Th e higher the 
blood/gas coeffi  cient, the greater the anesthetic’s sol-
ubility and the greater its uptake by the pulmonary 
circulation. As a consequence of this increased solu-
bility, alveolar partial pressure rises more slowly, and 
induction is prolonged. Because fat/blood partition 
coeffi  cients are greater than 1, blood/gas solubility is 
 TABLE 81 Partition coeﬃ  cients of volatile 
anesthetics at 37°C. 1 
Agent
Blood/
Gas
Brain/
Blood
Muscle/
Blood
Fat/
Blood
Nitrous oxide
0.47
1.1
1.2
2.3
Halothane
2.4
2.9
3.5
60
Isoﬂ urane
1.4
2.6
4.0
45
Desﬂ urane
0.42
1.3
2.0
27
Sevoﬂ urane
0.65
1.7
3.1
48
 1 These values are averages derived from multiple studies and should 
be used for comparison purposes, not as exact numbers.
 TABLE 82 Tissue groups based on perfusion 
and solubilities. 
Characteristic
Vessel 
Rich
Muscle
Fat
Vessel 
Poor
Percentage of 
body weight
10
50
20
20
Percentage of 
cardiac output
75
19
6
0
Perfusion (mL/
min/100 g)
75
3
3
0
Relative solubility
1
1
20
0
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 
157 
groups ( Figure 8–3 ). Th e initial steep rate of uptake 
is due to unopposed fi lling of the alveoli by ventila-
tion. Th e rate of rise slows as the vessel-rich group—
and eventually the muscle group—approach steady 
state levels of saturation. 
 Ventilation 
 Th e lowering of alveolar partial pressure by uptake 
can be countered by increasing alveolar ventila-
tion. In other words, constantly replacing anesthetic 
taken up by the pulmonary bloodstream results in 
better maintenance of alveolar concentration. Th e 
eff ect of increasing ventilation will be most obvious 
in raising the F a /F i for soluble anesthetics, as they 
are more subject to uptake. Because the F a /F i very 
rapidly approaches 1.0 for insoluble agents, increas-
ing ventilation has minimal eff ect. In contrast to the 
eff ect of anesthetics on cardiac output, anesthetics 
that depress spontaneous ventilation (eg, ether or 
the fi rst to encounter appreciable amounts of anes-
thetic. Moderate solubility and small volume limit 
the capacity of this group, so it is also the fi rst to reach 
steady state (ie, arterial and tissue partial pressures 
are equal). Th e muscle group (skin and muscle) is 
not as well perfused, so uptake is slower. In addition, 
it has a greater capacity due to a larger volume, and 
uptake will be sustained for hours. Perfusion of the 
fat group nearly equals that of the muscle group, but 
the tremendous solubility of anesthetic in fat leads to 
a total capacity (tissue/blood solubility × tissue vol-
ume) that would take days to approach steady state. 
Th e minimal perfusion of the vessel-poor group 
(bones, ligaments, teeth, hair, and cartilage) results 
in insignifi cant uptake. 
 Anesthetic uptake produces a characteristic 
curve that relates the rise in alveolar concentra-
tion to time ( Figure 8–2 ). Th e shape of this graph 
is determined by the uptakes of individual tissue 
 
Nitrous oxide
Desflurane
Sevoflurane
Isoflurane
Halothane
FA/FI
Minutes
10
20
30
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 
 FIGURE 82  F A rises toward F I faster with nitrous oxide (an insoluble agent) than with halothane (a soluble agent). See 
 Figure 8–1 for an explanation of F A and F I . 
158 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
(100 parts of 100), which, despite a 50% uptake, will 
result in an alveolar concentration of 100% (50 parts 
of anesthetic remaining in a total volume of 50 parts 
of gas). 
 Th e second phenomenon responsible for the 
concentration eff ect is the augmented infl ow eff ect. 
Using the example above, the 10 parts of absorbed 
gas must be replaced by an equal volume of the 20% 
mixture to prevent alveolar collapse. Th us, the alveo-
lar concentration becomes 12% (10 plus 2 parts of 
anesthetic in a total of 100 parts of gas). In contrast, 
aft er absorption of 50% of the anesthetic in the 80% 
gas mixture, 40 parts of 80% gas must be inspired. 
Th is further increases the alveolar concentration 
from 67% to 72% (40 plus 32 parts of anesthetic in a 
volume of 100 parts of gas). 
 Th e concentration eff ect is more signifi cant 
with nitrous oxide, than with the volatile anes-
thetics, as the former can be used in much higher 
concentrations. Nonetheless, a high concentration 
of nitrous oxide will augment (by the same mech-
anism) not only its own uptake, but theoretically 
that of a concurrently administered volatile anes-
thetic. Th e concentration eff ect of one gas upon 
another is called the second gas eff ect, which is 
probably insignifi cant in the clinical practice of 
anesthesiology. 
halothane) will decrease the rate of rise in alveolar 
concentration and create a negative feedback loop. 
 Concentration 
 Th e slowing of induction due to uptake from alve-
olar gas can be reduced by increasing the inspired 
concentration. Interestingly, increasing the inspired 
concentration not only increases the alveolar con-
centration, but also increases its rate of rise (ie, 
increases F a /F i ), because of two phenomena (see 
 Figure 8–1 ) that produce a so-called “concentrating 
eff ect.” First, if 50% of an anesthetic is taken up by 
the pulmonary circulation, an inspired concentra-
tion of 20% (20 parts of anesthetic per 100 parts of 
gas) will result in an alveolar concentration of 11% 
(10 parts of anesthetic remaining in a total volume 
of 90 parts of gas). On the other hand, if the inspired 
concentration is raised to 80% (80 parts of anesthetic 
per 100 parts of gas), the alveolar concentration will 
be 67% (40 parts of anesthetic remaining in a total 
volume of 60 parts of gas). Th us, even though 50% of 
the anesthetic is taken up in both examples, a higher 
inspired concentration results in a disproportion-
ately higher alveolar concentration. In this example, 
increasing the inspired concentration 4-fold results 
in a 6-fold increase in alveolar concentration. Th e 
extreme case is an inspired concentration of 100% 
 
Minutes
Vessel-rich group
Alveolar
Gas tension in various tissues
(as % off inspired tension)
Muscle group
Fat group
0
0
30
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
20
10
60
90
 
 FIGURE 83  The rise and fall in alveolar partial pressure precedes that of other tissues. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with per-
mission, from Cowles AL et al: Uptake and distribution of inhalation anesthetic agents in clinical practice. Anesth Analg 1968;4:404.) 
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics
159
fl ows, low anesthetic-circuit volume, low absorption 
by the anesthetic circuit, decreased solubility, high 
cerebral blood fl ow (CBF), and increased ventilation. 
Elimination of nitrous oxide is so rapid that alveolar 
oxygen and CO 2 are diluted. Th e resulting  diff usion 
hypoxia is prevented by administering 100% oxygen 
for 5–10 min aft er discontinuing nitrous oxide. Th e 
rate of recovery is usually faster than induction 
because tissues that have not reached equilibrium 
will continue to take up anesthetic until the alveolar 
partial pressure falls below the tissue partial pressure. 
For instance, fat will continue to take up anesthetic 
and hasten recovery until the partial pressure exceeds 
the alveolar partial pressure. Th is redistribution is 
not as useful aft er prolonged anesthesia (fat partial 
pressures of anesthetic will have come “closer” to 
arterial partial pressures at the time the anesthetic 
was removed from fresh gas)—thus, the speed of 
recovery also depends on the length of time the anes-
thetic has been administered. 
 Pharmacodynamics of 
Inhalation Anesthetics 
 THEORIES OF 
ANESTHETIC ACTION 
 General anesthesia is an altered physiological state 
characterized by reversible loss of consciousness, 
analgesia, amnesia, and some degree of muscle 
relaxation. Th e multitude of substances capable of 
producing general anesthesia is remarkable: inert 
elements (xenon), simple inorganic compounds 
(nitrous oxide), halogenated hydrocarbons (halo-
thane), ethers (isofl urane, sevofl urane, desfl urane), 
and complex organic structures (propofol). A unify-
ing theory explaining anesthetic action would have 
to accommodate this diversity of structure. In fact, 
the various agents probably produce anesthesia by 
diff ering sets of molecular mechanisms. Inhalational 
agents interact with numerous ion channels present 
in the CNS and peripheral nervous system. Nitrous 
oxide and xenon are believed to inhibit  N -methyl-
 D -aspartate (NMDA) receptors. NMDA recep-
tors are excitatory receptors in the brain. Other 
inhalational agents may interact at other receptors 
 FACTORS 
AFFECTING ARTERIAL 
CONCENTRATION Fa 
 Ventilation/Perfusion Mismatch 
 Normally, alveolar and arterial anesthetic partial 
pressures are assumed to be equal, but in fact, the 
arterial partial pressure is consistently less than end-
expiratory gas would predict. Reasons for this may 
include venous admixture, alveolar dead space, and 
nonuniform alveolar gas distribution. Furthermore, 
the existence of ventilation/perfusion mismatch-
ing will increase the alveolar–arterial diff erence. 
Mismatch acts as a restriction to fl ow: It raises the 
pressure in front of the restriction, lowers the pres-
sure beyond the restriction, and reduces the fl ow 
through the restriction. Th e overall eff ect is an 
increase in the alveolar partial pressure (particularly 
for highly soluble agents) and a decrease in the arte-
rial partial pressure (particularly for poorly soluble 
agents). Th us, a bronchial intubation or a right-to-
left  intracardiac shunt will slow the rate of induction 
with nitrous oxide more than with halothane. 
 FACTORS AFFECTING 
ELIMINATION 
 Recovery from anesthesia depends on lowering 
the concentration of anesthetic in brain  tissue. 
Anesthetics can be eliminated by biotransformation, 
transcutaneous loss, or exhalation. Biotransformation 
usually accounts for a minimal increase in the rate 
of decline of alveolar partial  pressure. Its greatest 
impact is on the elimination of soluble anesthetics 
that undergo extensive metabolism (eg, methoxyfl u-
rane). Th e greater biotransformation of halothane 
compared with isofl urane accounts for halothane’s 
faster elimination, even though it is more soluble. 
Th e CYP group of isozymes (specifi cally CYP 2EI) 
seems to be important in the metabolism of some 
volatile anesthetics. Diff usion of anesthetic through 
the skin is insignifi cant. 
 Th e most important route for elimination of 
inhalation anesthetics is the alveolus.  Many of 
the factors that speed induction also speed 
recovery: elimination of rebreathing, high fresh gas 
4
160 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Neuronal membranes contain a multitude of 
hydrophobic sites in their phospholipid bilayer. 
Anesthetic binding to these sites could expand the 
bilayer beyond a critical amount, altering membrane 
function (critical volume hypothesis). Although this 
theory is almost certainly an oversimplifi cation, it 
explains an interesting phenomenon: the reversal of 
anesthesia by increased pressure. Laboratory animals 
exposed to elevated hydrostatic pressure develop 
a resistance to anesthetic eff ects. Perhaps the pres-
sure is displacing a number of molecules from the 
membrane or distorting the anesthetic binding sites 
in the membrane, increasing anesthetic require-
ments. However, studies in the 1980s demonstrated 
the ability of anesthetics to inhibit protein actions, 
shift ing attention to the numerous ion channels that 
might aff ect neuronal transmission and away from 
the critical volume hypothesis. 
 General anesthetic action could be due to alter-
ations in any one (or a combination) of several cel-
lular systems, including voltage-gated ion channels, 
ligand-gated ion channels, second messenger func-
tions, or neurotransmitter receptors. For example, 
many anesthetics enhance GABA inhibition of the 
CNS. Furthermore, GABA receptor agonists seem 
to enhance anesthesia, whereas GABA antagonists 
reverse some anesthetic eff ects. Th ere seems to be 
a strong correlation between anesthetic potency 
and potentiation of GABA receptor activity. Th us, 
anesthetic action may relate to binding in relatively 
hydrophobic domains in channel proteins (GABA 
receptors). Modulation of GABA function may 
prove to be a principal mechanism of action for 
many anesthetic drugs. 
 Th e glycine receptor α 1 -subunit, whose func-
tion is enhanced by inhalation anesthetics, is another 
potential anesthetic site of action. 
 Th e tertiary and quaternary structure of amino 
acids within an anesthetic-binding pocket could 
be modifi ed by inhalation agents, perturbing the 
receptor itself, or indirectly producing an eff ect at a 
 distant site. 
 Other ligand-gated ion channels whose modula-
tion may play a role in anesthetic action include nico-
tinic acetylcholine receptors and NMDA receptors. 
 Investigations into mechanisms of anesthetic 
action are likely to remain ongoing for many years, 
(eg, gamma-aminobutyric acid [GABA]-activated 
chloride channel conductance) leading to anesthetic 
eff ects. Additionally, some studies suggest that inha-
lational agents continue to act in a nonspecifi c man-
ner, thereby aff ecting the membrane bilayer. It is 
possible that inhalational anesthetics act on multiple 
protein receptors that block excitatory channels and 
promote the activity of inhibitory channels aff ect-
ing neuronal activity, as well as by some nonspecifi c 
membrane eff ects. 
 Th ere does not seem to be a single macroscopic 
site of action that is shared by all inhalation agents. 
Specifi c brain areas aff ected by various anesthetics 
include the reticular activating system, the cerebral 
cortex, the cuneate nucleus, the olfactory cortex, and 
the hippocampus; however, to be clear, general anes-
thetics bind throughout the CNS. Anesthetics have 
also been shown to depress excitatory transmission 
in the spinal cord, particularly at the level of the dor-
sal horn interneurons that are involved in pain trans-
mission. Diff ering aspects of anesthesia may be 
related to diff erent sites of anesthetic action. For 
example, unconsciousness and amnesia are probably 
mediated by cortical anesthetic action, whereas the 
suppression of purposeful withdrawal from pain may 
be related to subcortical structures, such as the spinal 
cord or brain stem. One study in rats revealed that 
removal of the cerebral cortex did not alter the 
potency of the anesthetic! Indeed, measures of mini-
mal alveolar concentration (MAC), the anesthetic 
concentration that prevents movement in 50% of 
subjects or animals, are dependent upon anesthetic 
eff ects at the spinal cord and not at the cortex. 
 Past understanding of anesthetic action 
attempted to identify a unitary hypothesis of 
anesthetic eff ects. Th is hypothesis proposes that all 
inhalation agents share a common mechanism of 
action at the molecular level. Th is was previously 
supported by the observation that the anesthetic 
potency of inhalation agents correlates directly with 
their lipid solubility (Meyer–Overton rule). Th e 
implication is that anesthesia results from molecules 
dissolving at specifi c lipophilic sites. Of course, not 
all lipid-soluble molecules are anesthetics (some are 
actually convulsants), and the correlation between 
anesthetic potency and lipid solubility is only 
approximate ( Figure 8–4 ). 
5
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 
161 
 ANESTHETIC NEUROTOXICITY 
 In recent years, there has been ongoing concern that 
general anesthetics damage the developing brain. It 
has been suggested that early exposure to anesthet-
ics can promote cognitive impairment in later life. 
Concern has been raised that anesthetic exposure 
as many protein channels may be aff ected by indi-
vidual anesthetic agents, and no obligatory site 
has yet been identifi ed. Selecting among so many 
molecular targets for the one(s) that provide opti-
mum eff ects with minimal adverse actions will be 
the challenge in designing better inhalational 
agents. 
Log partition coefficient
Methoxyflurane
Trichloroethylene
0.1
1
1.0
10
10
100
1000
100
Halothane
Chloroform
Log MAC
(White matter)
(Olive oil)
Nitrous oxide
Ethylene
Cyclopropane
Fluroxene
Diethylether
Enflurane
Isoflurane
 FIGURE 84  There is a good but not perfect correlation between anesthetic potency and lipid solubility. MAC, 
minimum alveolar concentration. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from Lowe HJ, Hagler K:  Gas Chromatography in Biology and 
Medicine . Churchill, 1969.) 
162 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
through the use of inhalational anesthetics. In the 
heart, preconditioning in part arises from actions at 
ATP-sensitive potassium (K ATP ) channels. 
 Th e exact mechanism of anesthetic precondi-
tioning is likely to be multifocal and includes the 
opening of K ATP channels, resulting in less mitochon-
drial calcium ion concentration and reduction of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. ROS are 
associated with cellular injury. For example, excit-
atory NMDA receptors are linked to the development 
of neuronal injury. NMDA antagonists, such as the 
noble anesthetic gas Xenon, have been shown to be 
neuroprotective. Xenon has an anti-apoptotic eff ect 
that may be secondary to its inhibition of calcium ion 
infl ux following cell injury. Other inhalational agents, 
such as sevofl urane, have been shown to reduce 
markers of myocardial cell injury (eg, troponin T), 
compared with intravenous anesthetic techniques. 
 As with neurotoxicity, the role of inhalational 
anesthetics in tissue protection is the subject of 
ongoing investigation. 
 MINIMUM ALVEOLAR 
CONCENTRATION 
 Th e minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 
of an inhaled anesthetic is the alveolar concen-
tration that prevents movement in 50% of patients 
in response to a standardized stimulus (eg, surgical 
incision). MAC is a useful measure because it mir-
rors brain partial pressure, allows comparisons of 
potency between agents, and provides a standard for 
experimental evaluations ( Table 8–3 ). Nonetheless, 
it should be remembered that this is a median value 
with limited usefulness in managing individual 
patients, particularly during times of rapidly chang-
ing alveolar concentrations (eg, induction). 
 Th e MAC values for diff erent anesthetics are 
roughly additive. For example, a mixture of 0.5 MAC 
of nitrous oxide (53%) and 0.5 MAC of halothane 
(0.37%) produces the same likelihood that move-
ment in response to surgical incision will be sup-
pressed as 1.0 MAC of isofl urane (1.7%) or 1.0 MAC 
of any other single agent. In contrast to CNS depres-
sion, the degree of myocardial depression may not be 
equivalent at the same MAC: 0.5 MAC of halothane 
causes more myocardial depression than 0.5 MAC 
6
aff ects the development and the elimination of 
synapses in the infant brain. For example, animal 
studies have demonstrated that isofl urane exposure 
promotes neuronal apoptosis and subsequent learn-
ing disability. Volatile anesthetics have been shown 
to promote apoptosis by altering cellular calcium 
homeostatic mechanisms. 
 Human studies exploring whether anesthesia is 
harmful in children are diffi  cult, as conducting a ran-
domized controlled trial for that purpose only would 
be unethical. Studies that compare populations of 
children who have had anesthetics with those who 
have not are also complicated by the reality that the 
former population is likewise having surgery and 
receiving the attention of the medical community. 
Consequently, children receiving anesthetics may be 
more likely to be diagnosed with learning diffi  culties 
in the fi rst place. Data from one large study dem-
onstrated that children who underwent surgery and 
anesthesia had a greater likelihood of carrying the 
diagnosis of a developmental disorder; however, the 
fi nding was not supported in twins (ie, the incidence 
of developmental disability was not greater in a twin 
who was exposed to anesthesia and surgery than in 
one who was not). 
 Human, animal, and laboratory trials demon-
strating or refuting that anesthetic neurotoxicity 
leads to developmental disability in children are 
underway. As of this writing, there is insuffi  cient 
and confl icting evidence to warrant changes in anes-
thetic practice (see: www.smarttots.org). 
 ANESTHETIC 
NEUROPROTECTION AND 
CARDIAC PRECONDITIONING 
 Although inhalational agents have been suggested 
as contributing to neurotoxicity, they have also 
been shown to provide both neurologic and car-
diac protective eff ects against ischemia-reperfusion 
injury. Ischemic preconditioning implies that a brief 
ischemic episode protects a cell from future, more 
pronounced ischemic events. Various molecular 
mechanisms have been suggested to protect cells 
preconditioned either through ischemic events or 
secondary to pharmacologic mechanisms, such as 
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 
163 
MAC is relatively unaff ected by species, sex, or dura-
tion of anesthesia. Surprisingly, MAC is not altered 
aft er spinal cord transection in rats, leading to the 
hypothesis that the site of anesthetic inhibition of 
motor responses lies in the spinal cord. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
of Inhalation Anesthetics 
 NITROUS OXIDE 
 Physical Properties 
 Nitrous oxide (N 2 O; laughing gas) is colorless and 
essentially odorless. Although nonexplosive and 
nonfl ammable, nitrous oxide is as capable as oxygen 
of supporting combustion. Unlike the potent volatile 
of nitrous oxide. MAC represents only one point 
on the dose–response curve—it is the equivalent 
of a median eff ective dose (ED 50 ). MAC multiples 
are clinically useful if the concentration–response 
curves of the anesthetics being compared are paral-
lel, nearly linear, and continuous for the eff ect being 
predicted. Roughly 1.3 MAC of any of the volatile 
anesthetics (eg, for halothane: 1.3 × 0.74% = 0.96%) 
has been found to prevent movement in about 95% 
of patients (an approximation of the ED 95 ); 0.3–0.4 
MAC is associated with awakening from anesthe-
sia (MAC awake) when the inhaled drug is the only 
agent maintaining anesthetic (a rare circumstance). 
 MAC can be altered by several physiological 
and pharmacological variables ( Table 8–4 ).  One of 
the most striking is the 6% decrease in MAC per 
decade of age, regardless of volatile anesthetic . 
 TABLE 83  Properties of modern inhalation anesthetics . 
Agent
Structure
MAC% 1 
Vapor Pressure 
(mm Hg at 20°C)
Nitrous oxide
 
105 2 
—
Halothane (Fluothane)
 
0.75
243
Isoﬂ urane (Forane)
 
1.2
240
Desﬂ urane (Suprane)
6.0
681
Sevoﬂ urane (Ultane)
2.0
160
 1 These minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) values are for 30- to 55-year old human subjects and are expressed as a 
percentage of 1 atmosphere. High altitude requires a higher inspired concentration of anesthetic to achieve the same 
partial pressure.
 2 A concentration greater than 100% means that hyperbaric conditions are required to achieve 1.0 MAC.
164 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
agents, nitrous oxide is a gas at room temperature 
and ambient pressure. It can be kept as a liquid under 
pressure because its critical temperature lies above 
room temperature. Nitrous oxide is a relatively inex-
pensive anesthetic; however, concerns regarding its 
safety have led to continued interest in alternatives 
such as  xenon ( Table 8–5 ). As noted earlier, nitrous 
oxide, like xenon, is an NMDA receptor antagonist. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Nitrous oxide has a tendency to stimulate the sym-
pathetic nervous system. Th us, even though nitrous 
oxide directly depresses myocardial contractility in 
 TABLE 84 Factors aﬀ ecting MAC. 1 
Variable
Eﬀ ect 
on MAC
Comments
Variable
Eﬀ ect 
on MAC
Comments
Temperature
Hypothermia
Hyperthermia
↓
↓
↑ if > 42°C
Electrolytes
Hypercalcemia
Hypernatremia
Hyponatremia
↓
↑
↓
Caused by altered CSF2
Caused by altered CSF
Age
Young
Elderly
↑
↓
Pregnancy
↓
MAC decreased by 
one-third at 8 weeks’ 
gestation; normal by 
72 h postpartum
Alcohol
Acute intoxication
Chronic abuse
↓
↑
Drugs
Local anesthetics
Opioids
Ketamine
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Verapamil
Lithium
Sympatholytics
Methyldopa
Clonidine
Dexmedetomidine
Sympathomimetics
Amphetamine
Chronic
Acute
Cocaine
Ephedrine
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
Except cocaine
Anemia
Hematocrit < 10%
↓
Pa O 2 
<40 mm Hg
↓
Pa CO 2 
>95 mm Hg
↓
Caused by < pH in 
CSF
Thyroid
Hyperthyroid
Hypothyroid
No change
No change
Blood pressure
Mean arterial pressure 
<40 mm Hg
↓
 1 These conclusions are based on human and animal studies.
 2 CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂ uid.
 TABLE 85 Advantages and disadvantages 
of xenon (Xe) anesthesia. 
 Advantages 
Inert (probably nontoxic with no metabolism)
Minimal cardiovascular effects
Low blood solubility
Rapid induction and recovery
Does not trigger malignant hyperthermia
Environmentally friendly
Nonexplosive
 Disadvantages 
High cost
Low potency (MAC = 70%)1
 1 MAC, minimum alveolar concentration.
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 
165 
stimulation and, perhaps, activation of pulmonary 
stretch receptors. Th e net eff ect is a minimal change 
in minute ventilation and resting arterial CO 2 levels. 
Hypoxic drive, the ventilatory response to arterial 
hypoxia that is mediated by peripheral chemorecep-
tors in the carotid bodies, is markedly depressed by 
even small amounts of nitrous oxide. Th is is a con-
cern in the recovery room. 
 C. Cerebral 
 By increasing CBF and cerebral blood volume, 
nitrous oxide produces a mild elevation of intracra-
nial pressure. Nitrous oxide also increases cerebral 
oxygen consumption (CMRO 2 ). Th ese two eff ects 
make nitrous oxide theoretically less attractive than 
vitro, arterial blood pressure, cardiac output, and 
heart rate are essentially unchanged or slightly ele-
vated in vivo because of its stimulation of catechol-
amines ( Table 8–6 ). Myocardial depression may be 
unmasked in patients with coronary artery disease 
or severe hypovolemia. Constriction of pulmonary 
vascular smooth muscle increases pulmonary vas-
cular resistance, which results in a generally modest 
elevation of right ventricular end-diastolic pressure. 
Despite vasoconstriction of cutaneous vessels, periph-
eral vascular resistance is not signifi cantly altered. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Nitrous oxide increases respiratory rate (tachy-
pnea) and decreases tidal volume as a result of CNS 
 TABLE 86 Clinical pharmacology of inhalational anesthetics. 
Nitrous Oxide
Halothane
Isoﬂ urane
Desﬂ urane
Sevoﬂ urane
Cardiovascular
Blood pressure
Heart rate
Systemic vascular resistance
Cardiac output 2 
N/C 1 
N/C
N/C
N/C
↓↓
↓
N/C
↓
↓↓
↑
↓↓
N/C
↓↓
N/C or ↑
↓↓
N/C or ↓
↓
N/C
↓
↓
Respiratory
Tidal volume
Respiratory rate
↓
↑
↓↓
↑↑
↓↓
↑
↓
↑
↓
↑
Pa CO 2 
Resting
Challenge
N/C
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑
↑
Cerebral
Blood flow
Intracranial pressure
Cerebral metabolic rate
Seizures
↑
↑
↑
↓
↑↑
↑↑
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓↓
↓
↑
↑
↓↓
↓
↑
↑
↓↓
↓
Neuromuscular
Nondepolarizing blockade 3 
↑
↑↑
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
↑↑
Renal
Renal blood flow
Glomerular filtration rate
Urinary output
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
Hepatic
Blood flow
↓
↓↓
↓
↓
↓
Metabolism 4 
0.004%
15% to 20%
0.2%
<0.1%
5%
 1 N/C, no change.
 2 Controlled ventilation.
 3 Depolarizing blockage is probably also prolonged by these agents, but this is usually not clinically signiﬁ cant.
 4 Percentage of absorbed anesthetic undergoing metabolism.
166 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
seem to aff ect the viability of bone marrow mono-
nuclear cells. Because of possible teratogenic eff ects, 
nitrous oxide is oft en avoided in pregnant patients 
who are not yet in the third trimester. Nitrous oxide 
may also alter the immunological response to infec-
tion by aff ecting chemotaxis and motility of poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes. 
 Contraindications 
 Although nitrous oxide is insoluble in comparison 
with other inhalation agents, it is 35 times more 
soluble than nitrogen in blood. Th us, it tends to 
diff use into air-containing cavities more rapidly 
than nitrogen is absorbed by the bloodstream. For 
instance, if a patient with a 100-mL pneumothorax 
inhales 50% nitrous oxide, the gas content of the 
pneumothorax will tend to approach that of the 
bloodstream. Because nitrous oxide will diff use 
into the cavity more rapidly than the air (princi-
pally nitrogen) diff uses out, the pneumothorax 
expands until it contains 100 mL of air and 100 
mL of nitrous oxide. If the walls surrounding the 
cavity are rigid, pressure rises instead of volume. 
Examples of conditions in which nitrous oxide 
might be hazardous include venous or arterial 
air embolism, pneumothorax, acute intestinal 
obstruction with bowel distention, intracranial 
air (pneumocephalus following dural closure or 
pneumoencephalography), pulmonary air cysts, 
intraocular air bubbles, and tympanic mem-
brane graft ing . Nitrous oxide will even diff use into 
tracheal tube cuff s, increasing the pressure against 
the tracheal mucosa. Obviously, nitrous oxide is of 
limited value in patients requiring high inspired 
oxygen concentrations. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Because the high MAC of nitrous oxide prevents its 
use as a complete general anesthetic, it is frequently 
used in combination with the more potent volatile 
agents. Th e addition of nitrous oxide decreases the 
requirements of these other agents (65% nitrous 
oxide decreases the MAC of the volatile anesthet-
ics by approximately 50%). Although nitrous oxide 
should not be considered a benign carrier gas, 
it does attenuate the circulatory and respiratory 
eff ects of volatile anesthetics in adults. Nitrous oxide 
other agents for neuroanesthesia. Concentrations of 
nitrous oxide below MAC may provide analgesia in 
dental surgery, labor, traumatic injury, and minor 
surgical procedures. 
 D. Neuromuscular 
 In contrast to other inhalation agents, nitrous oxide 
does not provide signifi cant muscle relaxation. In 
fact, at high concentrations in hyperbaric cham-
bers, nitrous oxide causes skeletal muscle rigidity. 
Nitrous oxide is not a triggering agent of malignant 
hyperthermia. 
 E. Renal 
 Nitrous oxide seems to decrease renal blood fl ow 
by increasing renal vascular resistance. Th is leads 
to a drop in glomerular fi ltration rate and urinary 
output. 
 F. Hepatic 
 Hepatic blood fl ow probably falls during nitrous 
oxide anesthesia, but to a lesser extent than with the 
volatile agents. 
 G. Gastrointestinal 
 Use of nitrous oxide in adults increases the risk of 
postoperative nausea and vomiting, presumably as 
a result of activation of the chemoreceptor trigger 
zone and the vomiting center in the medulla. 
 Biotransformation & Toxicity 
 During emergence, almost all nitrous oxide is 
eliminated by exhalation. A small amount diff uses 
out through the skin. Biotransformation is limited 
to the less than 0.01% that undergoes reductive 
metabolism in the gastrointestinal tract by anaero-
bic bacteria. 
 By irreversibly oxidizing the cobalt atom in 
 vitamin B 12 , nitrous oxide inhibits enzymes that are 
vitamin B 12 dependent. Th ese enzymes include 
methionine synthetase, which is necessary for myelin 
formation, and thymidylate synthetase, which is 
 necessary for DNA synthesis.  Prolonged expo-
sure to anesthetic concentrations of nitrous 
oxide can result in bone marrow depression (mega-
loblastic anemia) and even neurological defi ciencies 
(peripheral neuropathies). However, administration 
of nitrous oxide for bone marrow harvest does not 
7
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 
167 
epinephrine, so that doses of epinephrine above 1.5 
mcg/kg should be avoided. Although organ blood 
fl ow is redistributed, systemic vascular resistance is 
unchanged. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Halothane typically causes rapid, shallow breath-
ing. Th e increased respiratory rate is not enough 
to counter the decreased tidal volume, so alveolar 
ventilation drops, and resting Paco 2 is elevated. 
 Apneic threshold , the highest Pa co 2 at which a 
patient remains apneic, also rises because the dif-
ference between it and resting Pa co 2 is not altered 
by general anesthesia. Similarly, halothane limits the 
increase in minute ventilation that normally accom-
panies a rise in Pa co 2 . Halothane’s ventilatory eff ects 
are probably due to central (medullary depression) 
and peripheral (intercostal muscle dysfunction) 
mechanisms. Th ese changes are exaggerated by 
preexisting lung disease and attenuated by surgical 
stimulation. Th e increase in Pa co 2 and the decrease 
in intrathoracic pressure that accompany spontane-
ous ventilation with halothane partially reverse the 
depression in cardiac output, arterial blood pres-
sure, and heart rate described above. Hypoxic drive 
is severely depressed by even low concentrations of 
halothane (0.1 MAC). 
 Halothane is considered a potent bronchodila-
tor, as it oft en reverses asthma-induced broncho-
spasm. Th is action is not inhibited by β-adrenergic 
blocking agents. Halothane attenuates airway refl exes 
and relaxes bronchial smooth muscle by inhibiting 
intracellular calcium mobilization. Halothane also 
depresses clearance of mucus from the respiratory 
tract (mucociliary function), promoting postopera-
tive hypoxia and atelectasis. 
 C. Cerebral 
 By dilating cerebral vessels, halothane lowers 
cerebral vascular resistance and increases CBF. 
 Autoregulation , the maintenance of constant CBF 
during changes in arterial blood pressure, is blunted. 
Concomitant rises in intracranial pressure can be 
prevented by establishing hyperventilation  prior 
to administration of halothane. Cerebral activity is 
decreased, leading to electroencephalographic slow-
ing and modest reductions in metabolic oxygen 
requirements. 
potentiates neuromuscular blockade, but less so 
than the volatile agents. Th e concentration of nitrous 
oxide fl owing through a vaporizer can infl uence the 
concentration of volatile anesthetic delivered. For 
example, decreasing nitrous oxide concentration 
(ie, increasing oxygen concentration) increases the 
concentration of volatile agent despite a constant 
vaporizer setting. Th is disparity is due to the relative 
solubilities of nitrous oxide and oxygen in liquid vol-
atile anesthetics. Th e second gas eff ect was discussed 
earlier. Nitrous oxide is an ozone-depleting gas with 
greenhouse eff ects. 
 HALOTHANE 
 Physical Properties 
 Halothane is a halogenated alkane (see  Table 8–3 ). 
Th e carbon–fl uoride bonds are responsible for its 
nonfl ammable and nonexplosive nature. Th ymol 
preservative and amber-colored bottles retard spon-
taneous oxidative decomposition. It is rarely used in 
the United States. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 A dose-dependent reduction of arterial blood 
pressure is due to direct myocardial depression; 
2.0 MAC of halothane in patients not undergoing 
surgery results in a 50% decrease in blood pres-
sure and cardiac output. Cardiac depression—
from interference with sodium–calcium exchange 
and intracellular calcium utilization—causes an 
increase in right atrial pressure. Although halothane 
is a coronary artery vasodilator, coronary blood 
fl ow decreases, due to the drop in systemic arterial 
pressure. Adequate myocardial perfusion is usually 
maintained, as oxygen demand also drops. Normally, 
hypotension inhibits baroreceptors in the aortic arch 
and carotid bifurcation, causing a decrease in vagal 
stimulation and a compensatory rise in heart rate. 
Halothane blunts this refl ex. Slowing of sinoatrial 
node conduction may result in a junctional rhythm 
or bradycardia. In infants, halothane decreases car-
diac output by a combination of decreased heart rate 
and depressed myocardial contractility. Halothane 
sensitizes the heart to the arrhythmogenic eff ects of 
168 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
persons with a familial predisposition to halothane 
toxicity or a personal history of toxicity are considered 
to be at increased risk. Signs are mostly related to 
hepatic injury, such as increased serum alanine and 
aspartate transferase, elevated bilirubin (leading to 
jaundice), and encephalopathy. 
 Th e hepatic lesion seen in humans—centrilobular 
necrosis—also occurs in rats pretreated with an 
enzyme inducer (phenobarbital) and exposed to halo-
thane under hypoxic conditions (F io 2 < 14%). Th is 
halothane hypoxic model implies hepatic damage from 
reductive metabolites or hypoxia. 
 More likely evidence points to an immune 
mechanism. For instance, some signs of the dis-
ease indicate an allergic reaction (eg, eosinophilia, 
rash, fever) and do not appear until a few days aft er 
exposure. Furthermore, an antibody that binds to 
hepatocytes previously exposed to halothane has 
been isolated from patients with halothane-induced 
hepatic dysfunction. Th is antibody response may 
involve liver microsomal proteins that have been 
modifi ed by trifl uoroacetic acid as the triggering 
antigens (trifl uoroacetylated liver proteins such as 
microsomal carboxylesterase). As with halothane, 
other inhalational agents that undergo oxidative 
metabolism can likewise lead to hepatitis. However, 
newer agents undergo little to no metabolism, and 
therefore do not form trifl uroacetic acid protein 
adducts or produce the immune response leading to 
hepatitis. 
 Contraindications 
 It is prudent to withhold halothane from patients 
with unexplained liver dysfunction following previ-
ous anesthetic exposure. 
 Halothane, like all inhalational anesthetics, 
should be used with care in patients with intracranial 
mass lesions because of the possibility of intracranial 
hypertension secondary to increased cerebral blood 
volume and blood fl ow. 
 Hypovolemic patients and some patients with 
severe reductions in left  ventricular function may 
not tolerate halothane’s negative inotropic eff ects. 
Sensitization of the heart to catecholamines lim-
its the usefulness of halothane when exogenous 
epinephrine is administered or in patients with 
pheochromocytoma. 
 D. Neuromuscular 
 Halothane relaxes skeletal muscle and potentiates 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular-blocking agents 
(NMBA). Like the other potent volatile anesthetics, 
it is a triggering agent of malignant hyperthermia. 
 E. Renal 
 Halothane reduces renal blood fl ow, glomerular fi l-
tration rate, and urinary output. Part of this decrease 
can be explained by a fall in arterial blood pressure 
and cardiac output. Because the reduction in renal 
blood fl ow is greater than the reduction in glomeru-
lar fi ltration rate, the fi ltration fraction is increased. 
Preoperative hydration limits these changes. 
 F. Hepatic 
 Halothane causes hepatic blood fl ow to decrease 
in proportion to the depression of cardiac output. 
Hepatic artery vasospasm has been reported during 
halothane anesthesia. Th e metabolism and clearance 
of some drugs (eg, fentanyl, phenytoin, verapamil) 
seem to be impaired by halothane. Other evidence 
of hepatic cellular dysfunction includes sulfobro-
mophthalein (BSP) dye retention and minor liver 
transaminase elevations. 
 Biotransformation & Toxicity 
 Halothane is oxidized in the liver by a particular iso-
zyme of CYP (2EI) to its principal metabolite, tri-
fl uoroacetic acid. Th is metabolism can be inhibited 
by pretreatment with disulfi ram. Bromide, another 
oxidative metabolite, has been incriminated in (but 
is an improbable cause of) postanesthetic changes in 
mental status. In the absence of oxygen, reductive 
metabolism may result in a small amount of hepa-
totoxic end products that covalently bind to tissue 
macromolecules. Th is is more apt to occur following 
enzyme induction by phenobarbital. Elevated fl uo-
ride levels signal signifi cant anaerobic metabolism. 
 Postoperative hepatic dysfunction has several 
causes: viral hepatitis, impaired hepatic perfusion, 
preexisting liver disease, hepatocyte hypoxia, sepsis, 
hemolysis, benign postoperative intrahepatic cho-
lestasis, and drug-induced hepatitis.  “ Halothane 
hepatitis” is extremely rare (1 per 35,000 cases). 
Patients exposed to multiple halothane anesthetics at 
short intervals, middle-aged obese women, and 
8
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics
169
Despite a tendency to irritate upper airway refl exes, 
isofl urane is considered a good bronchodilator, but 
may not be as potent a bronchodilator as halothane. 
 C. Cerebral 
 At concentrations greater than 1 MAC, isofl urane 
increases CBF and intracranial pressure. Th ese 
eff ects are thought to be less pronounced than with 
halothane and are reversed by hyperventilation. In 
contrast to halothane, the hyperventilation does not 
have to be instituted prior to the use of isofl urane 
to prevent intracranial hypertension. Isofl urane 
reduces cerebral metabolic oxygen requirements, 
and at 2 MAC, it produces an electrically silent elec-
troencephalogram (EEG). 
 D. Neuromuscular 
 Isofl urane relaxes skeletal muscle. 
 E. Renal 
 Isofl urane decreases renal blood fl ow, glomerular fi l-
tration rate, and urinary output. 
 F. Hepatic 
 Total hepatic blood fl ow (hepatic artery and portal 
vein fl ow) may be reduced during isofl urane anes-
thesia. Hepatic oxygen supply is better maintained 
with isofl urane than with halothane, however, 
because hepatic artery perfusion is preserved. Liver 
function tests are usually not aff ected. 
 Biotransformation & Toxicity 
 Isofl urane is metabolized to trifl uoroacetic acid. 
Although serum fl uoride fl uid levels may rise, neph-
rotoxicity is extremely unlikely, even in the presence 
of enzyme inducers. Prolonged sedation (>24 h at 
0.1–0.6% isofl urane) of critically ill patients has 
resulted in elevated plasma fl uoride levels (15–50 
µmol/L) without evidence of renal impairment. 
Similarly, up to 20 MAC-hours of isofl urane may 
lead to fl uoride levels exceeding 50 µmol/L without 
detectable postoperative renal dysfunction. Its lim-
ited oxidative metabolism also minimizes any pos-
sible risk of signifi cant hepatic dysfunction. 
 Contraindications 
 Isofl urane presents no unique contraindications. 
Patients with severe hypovolemia may not tolerate 
 Drug Interactions 
 Th e myocardial depression seen with halothane is 
exacerbated by β-adrenergic-blocking agents and 
calcium channel-blocking agents. Tricyclic antide-
pressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors have 
been associated with fl uctuations in blood pres-
sure and arrhythmias, although neither represents 
an absolute contraindication. Th e combination of 
halothane and aminophylline has resulted in serious 
ventricular arrhythmias. 
 ISOFLURANE 
 Physical Properties 
 Isofl urane is a nonfl ammable volatile anesthetic with 
a pungent ethereal odor. Although it is a chemical 
isomer with the same molecular weight as enfl urane, 
it has diff erent physicochemical properties (see 
 Table 8–3 ). 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Isofl urane causes minimal left  ventricular depression 
in vivo. Cardiac output is maintained by a rise in 
heart rate due to partial preservation of carotid baro-
refl exes. Mild β-adrenergic stimulation increases 
skeletal muscle blood fl ow, decreases systemic vas-
cular resistance, and lowers arterial blood pressure. 
Rapid increases in isofl urane concentration lead to 
transient increases in heart rate, arterial blood pres-
sure, and plasma levels of norepinephrine. 
 Isofl urane dilates coronary arteries, but not 
nearly as potently as nitroglycerin or adenosine. 
Dilation of normal coronary arteries could theoreti-
cally divert blood away from fi xed stenotic lesions, 
which was the basis for concern about coronary 
“steal” with this agent, a concern that has largely 
been forgotten. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Respiratory depression during isofl urane anesthesia 
resembles that of other volatile anesthetics, except 
that tachypnea is less pronounced. Th e net eff ect is 
a more pronounced fall in minute ventilation. Even 
low levels of isofl urane (0.1 MAC) blunt the normal 
ventilatory response to hypoxia and hypercapnia. 
9
170 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
slightly depressed at 1–2 MAC. Th ere is a moderate 
rise in heart rate, central venous pressure, and pul-
monary artery pressure that oft en does not become 
apparent at low doses.  Rapid increases in des-
fl urane concentration lead to transient but 
sometimes worrisome elevations in heart rate, blood 
pressure, and catecholamine levels that are more 
pronounced than occur with isofl urane, particularly 
in patients with cardiovascular disease. Th ese car-
diovascular responses to rapidly increasing desfl u-
rane concentration can be attenuated by fentanyl, 
esmolol, or clonidine. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Desfl urane causes a decrease in tidal volume and 
an increase in respiratory rate. Th ere is an overall 
decrease in alveolar ventilation that causes a rise 
in resting Pa co 2 . Like other modern volatile anes-
thetic agents, desfl urane depresses the ventilatory 
response to increasing Pa co 2 . Pungency and airway 
irritation during desfl urane induction can be mani-
fested by salivation, breath-holding, coughing, and 
laryngospasm. Airway resistance may increase in 
children with reactive airway susceptibility. Th ese 
problems make desfl urane a poor choice for inhala-
tion induction. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Like the other volatile anesthetics, desfl urane 
directly vasodilates the cerebral vasculature, 
increasing CBF, cerebral blood volume, and intra-
cranial pressure at normotension and normocap-
nia. Countering the decrease in cerebral vascular 
resistance is a marked decline in the cerebral meta-
bolic rate of oxygen (CMRO 2 ) that tends to cause 
cerebral vasoconstriction and moderate any 
increase in CBF. Th e cerebral vasculature remains 
responsive to changes in Pa co 2 , however, so that 
intracranial pressure can be lowered by hyperven-
tilation. Cerebral oxygen consumption is decreased 
during desfl urane anesthesia. Th us, during periods 
of desfl urane-induced hypotension (mean arterial 
pressure = 60 mm Hg), CBF is adequate to maintain 
aerobic metabolism despite a low cerebral perfusion 
pressure. Th e eff ect on the EEG is similar to that of 
isofl urane. Initially, EEG frequency is increased, 
but as anesthetic depth is increased, EEG slowing 
11
its vasodilating eff ects. It can trigger malignant 
hyperthermia. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Epinephrine can be safely administered in doses up 
to 4.5 mcg/kg. Nondepolarizing NMBAs are poten-
tiated by isofl urane. 
 DESFLURANE 
 Physical Properties 
 Th e structure of desfl urane is very similar to that of 
isofl urane. In fact, the only diff erence is the substi-
tution of a fl uorine atom for isofl urane’s chlorine 
atom. Th at “minor” change has profound eff ects on 
the physical properties of the drug, however. For 
instance, because the vapor pressure of desfl urane 
at 20°C is 681 mm Hg, at high altitudes (eg, Denver, 
Colorado) it boils at room temperature. Th is prob-
lem necessitated the development of a special 
desfl urane vaporizer.  Furthermore, the low 
solubility of desfl urane in blood and body tis-
sues causes a very rapid induction and emergence 
of anesthesia. Th erefore, the alveolar concentration 
of desfl urane approaches the inspired concentration 
much more rapidly than the other volatile agents, 
giving the anesthesiologist tighter control over 
anesthetic levels.  Wakeup times are approximately 
50% less than those observed following isofl u-
rane . Th is is principally attributable to a blood/gas 
partition coeffi  cient (0.42) that is even lower than 
that of nitrous oxide (0.47). Although desfl urane is 
roughly one-fourth as potent as the other volatile 
agents, it is 17 times more potent than nitrous oxide. 
A high vapor pressure, an ultrashort duration of 
action, and moderate potency are the most charac-
teristic features of desfl urane. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Th e cardiovascular eff ects of desfl urane seem to be 
similar to those of isofl urane. Increasing the dose is 
associated with a decline in systemic vascular resis-
tance that leads to a fall in arterial blood pressure. 
Cardiac output remains relatively unchanged or 
10
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics
171
 Drug Interactions 
 Desfl urane potentiates nondepolarizing neuromus-
cular blocking agents to the same extent as isofl u-
rane. Epinephrine can be safely administered in 
doses up to 4.5 mcg/kg as desfl urane does not sensi-
tize the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic eff ects 
of epinephrine. Although emergence is more rapid 
following desfl urane anesthesia than aft er isofl urane 
anesthesia, switching from isofl urane to desfl urane 
toward the end of anesthesia does not signifi cantly 
accelerate recovery, nor does faster emergence 
translate into faster discharge times from the post-
anesthesia care unit. Desfl urane emergence has 
been associated with delirium in some pediatric 
patients. 
 SEVOFLURANE 
 Physical Properties 
 Like desfl urane, sevofl urane is halogenated with 
fl uorine. Sevofl urane’s solubility in blood is sligh-
tly greater than des fl urane (λ b/g 0.65 versus 0.42) 
(see  Table 8–3 ).  Nonpungency and rapid 
increases in alveolar anesthetic concentration 
make sevofl urane an excellent choice for smooth 
and rapid inhalation inductions in pediatric and 
adult patients. In fact, inhalation induction with 
4% to 8% sevofl urane in a 50% mixture of nitrous 
oxide and oxygen can be achieved within 1 min. 
Likewise, its low blood solubility results in a rapid 
fall in alveolar anesthetic concentration upon dis-
continuation and a more rapid emergence com-
pared with isofl urane (although not an earlier 
discharge from the post-anesthesia care unit). 
Sevofl urane’s modest vapor pressure permits the 
use of a conventional variable bypass vaporizer. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Sevofl urane mildly depresses myocardial contractil-
ity. Systemic vascular resistance and arterial blood 
pressure decline slightly less than with isofl urane or 
desfl urane. Because sevofl urane causes little, if any, 
rise in heart rate, cardiac output is not maintained 
as well as with isofl urane or desfl urane. Sevofl urane 
12
becomes manifest, leading to burst suppression at 
higher inhaled concentrations. 
 D. Neuromuscular 
 Desfl urane is associated with a dose-dependent 
decrease in the response to train-of-four and tetanic 
peripheral nerve stimulation. 
 E. Renal 
 Th ere is no evidence of any signifi cant nephrotoxic 
eff ects caused by exposure to desfl urane. However, 
as cardiac output declines, decreases in urine output 
and glomerular fi ltration should be expected with 
desfl urane and all other anesthetics. 
 F. Hepatic 
 Hepatic function tests are generally unaff ected 
by desfl urane, assuming that organ perfusion is 
maintained perioperatively. Desfl urane undergoes 
minimal metabolism, therefore the risk of anes-
thetic-induced hepatitis is likewise minimal. As with 
isofl urane and sevofl urane, hepatic oxygen delivery 
is generally maintained. 
 Biotransformation & Toxicity 
 Desfl urane undergoes minimal metabolism in 
humans. Serum and urine inorganic fl uoride lev-
els following desfl urane anesthesia are essentially 
unchanged from preanesthetic levels. Th ere is insig-
nifi cant percutaneous loss. Desfl urane, more than 
other volatile anesthetics, is degraded by desiccated 
CO 2 absorbent (particularly barium hydroxide lime, 
but also sodium and potassium hydroxide) into 
potentially clinically signifi cant levels of carbon mon-
oxide. Carbon monoxide poisoning is diffi  cult to 
diagnose under general anesthesia, but the presence 
of carboxyhemoglobin may be detectable by arterial 
blood gas analysis or lower than expected pulse oxim-
etry readings (although still falsely high). Disposing 
of dried out absorbent or use of calcium hydroxide 
can minimize the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning. 
 Contraindications 
 Desfl urane shares many of the contraindications 
of other modern volatile anesthetics: severe hypo-
volemia, malignant hyperthermia, and intracranial 
hypertension. 
172 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
rise in inorganic fl uoride (F − ) was discussed earlier. 
Serum fl uoride concentrations exceed 50 µmol/L in 
approximately 7% of patients who receive sevofl u-
rane, yet clinically signifi cant renal dysfunction has 
not been associated with sevofl urane anesthesia. 
Th e overall rate of sevofl urane metabolism is 5%, 
or 10 times that of isofl urane. Nonetheless, there 
has been no association with peak fl uoride levels 
following sevofl urane and any renal concentrating 
abnormality. 
 Alkali such as barium hydroxide lime or soda 
lime (but not calcium hydroxide) can degrade 
sevofl urane, producing another proven (at least in 
rats) nephrotoxic end product ( compound A , fl u-
oromethyl-2,2-difluoro-1-[trifluoromethyl]vinyl 
ether). Accumulation of compound A increases 
with increased respiratory gas temperature, low-
fl ow anesthesia, dry barium hydroxide absorbent 
(Baralyme), high sevofl urane concentrations, and 
anesthetics of long duration. 
 Most studies have not associated sevofl urane 
with any detectable postoperative impairment 
of renal function that would indicate toxicity or 
injury. Nonetheless, some clinicians recommend 
that fresh gas fl ows be at least 2 L/min for anesthet-
ics lasting more than a few hours and that sevofl u-
rane not be used in patients with preexisting renal 
dysfunction. 
 Sevofl urane can also be degraded into hydro-
gen fl uoride by metal and environmental impurities 
present in manufacturing equipment, glass bottle 
packaging, and anesthesia equipment. Hydrogen 
fl uoride can produce an acid burn on contact with 
respiratory mucosa. Th e risk of patient injury has 
been substantially reduced by inhibition of the deg-
radation process by adding water to sevofl urane 
during the manufacturing process and packaging it 
in a special plastic container. Th e manufacturer has 
also distributed a “Dear Provider” letter warning of 
isolated incidents of fi re in the respiratory circuits of 
anesthesia machines with desiccated CO 2 absorbent 
when sevofl urane was used. 
 Contraindications 
 Contraindications include severe hypovolemia, sus-
ceptibility to malignant hyperthermia, and intracra-
nial hypertension. 
may prolong the QT interval, the clinical signifi -
cance of which is unknown. QT prolongation may 
be manifest 60 min following anesthetic emergence 
in infants. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Sevofl urane depresses respiration and reverses 
bronchospasm to an extent similar to that of 
isofl urane. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Similar to isofl urane and desfl urane, sevofl urane 
causes slight increases in CBF and intracranial 
pressure at normocarbia, although some studies 
show a decrease in cerebral blood fl ow. High con-
centrations of sevofl urane (>1.5 MAC) may impair 
autoregulation of CBF, thus allowing a drop in CBF 
during hemorrhagic hypotension. Th is eff ect on 
CBF autoregulation seems to be less pronounced 
than with isofl urane. Cerebral metabolic oxygen 
requirements decrease, and seizure activity has not 
been reported. 
 D. Neuromuscular 
 Sevofl urane produces adequate muscle relaxation 
for intubation of children following an inhalation 
induction. 
 E. Renal 
 Sevofl urane slightly decreases renal blood fl ow. Its 
metabolism to substances associated with impaired 
renal tubule function (eg, decreased concentrating 
ability) is discussed below. 
 F. Hepatic 
 Sevofl urane decreases portal vein blood fl ow, but 
increases hepatic artery blood fl ow, thereby main-
taining total hepatic blood fl ow and oxygen delivery. 
It is generally not associated with immune-mediated 
anesthetic hepatotoxicity 
 Biotransformation & Toxicity 
 Th e liver microsomal enzyme P-450 (specifi cally the 
2E1 isoform) metabolizes sevofl urane at a rate one-
fourth that of halothane (5% versus 20%), but 10 to 
25 times that of isofl urane or desfl urane and may 
be induced with ethanol or phenobarbital pretreat-
ment. Th e potential nephrotoxicity of the resulting 
 
CHAPTER 8 Inhalation Anesthetics 
173 
surgery with sevofl urane and isofl urane. Anesth Analg 
1997;85:993. 
 Eger EI 2nd, Bowland T, Ionescu P, et al: Recovery 
and kinetic characteristics of desfl urane and 
sevofl urane in volunteers aft er 8-h exposure, including 
kinetics of degradation products. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:517. 
 Eger EI 2nd, Raines DE, Shafer SL, Hemmings HC Jr, 
Sonner JM: Is a new paradigm needed to explain 
how inhaled anesthetics produce immobility? Anesth 
Analg 2008;107: 832. 
 Ghatge S, Lee J, Smith I: Sevofl urane: an ideal agent for 
adult day-case anesthesia? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 
2003;47:917. 
 Ishizawa Y: General anesthetic gases and the global 
environment. Anesth Analg 2011; 112:213. 
 Jevtovic-Todorovic V: Pediatric anesthesia neurotoxicity: 
an overview of the 2011 Smart Tots panel. Anesth 
Analg 2011;113:965. 
 Jordan BD, Wright EL: Xenon as an anesthetic agent. 
AANA J 2010;78:387. 
 Loeckinger A, Kleinsasser A, Maier S, et.al: Sustained 
prolongation of the QTc interval aft er anesthesia with 
sevofl urane in infants during the fi rst 6 months of life. 
Anesthesiology 2003;98:639. 
 Njoku D, Laster MJ, Gong DH: Biotransformation of 
halothane, enfl urane, isofl urane, and desfl urane to 
trifl uoroacetylated liver proteins: association between 
protein acylation and hepatic injury. Anesth Analg 
1997;84:173. 
 Preckel B, Weber N, Sanders R, et al: Molecular 
mechanisms transducing the anesthetic analgesic and 
organ protective actions of Xenon. Anesthesiology 
2006;105:187. 
 Stratmann G: Neurotoxicity of anesthetic drugs in the 
developing brain. Anesth Analg 2011;113:1170. 
 Summors AC, Gupta AK, Matta BF: Dynamic cerebral 
autoregulation during sevofl urane anesthesia: 
a comparison with isofl urane. Anesth Analg 
1999;88:341. 
 Sun X, Su F, Shi Y, Lee C: Th e “second gas eff ect” is not a 
valid concept. Anesth Analg 1999;88:188. 
 Th omas J, Crosby G, Drummond J, et.al: Anesthetic 
neurotoxicity: a diffi  cult dragon to slay. Anesth Analg 
2011;113;969. 
 Torri G: Inhalational anesthetics: a review. Minerva 
Anestesiol 2010;76:215. 
 Wang L, Traystman R, Murphy S: Inhalational agents in 
ischemic brain. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2008;8:104. 
 Wei H: Th e role of calcium dysregulation in anesthetic 
mediated neurotoxicity. Anesth Analg 2011;113:972. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Like other volatile anesthetics, sevofl urane potenti-
ates NMBAs. It does not sensitize the heart to cate-
cholamine-induced arrhythmias. 
 XENON 
 Xenon is a “noble” gas that has long been known to 
have anesthetic properties. It is an inert element that 
does not form chemical bonds. Xenon is scavenged 
from the atmosphere through a costly distillation 
process. It is an odorless, nonexplosive, naturally 
occurring gas with a MAC of .71 and a blood/gas 
coeffi  cient of 0.115, giving it very fast onset and 
emergence parameters. As previously mentioned, 
xenon’s anesthetic eff ects seem to be mediated by 
NMDA inhibition by competing with glycine at the 
glycine binding site. Xenon seems to have little eff ect 
on cardiovascular, hepatic, or renal systems and has 
been found to be protective against neuronal isch-
emia. As a natural element, it has no eff ect upon the 
ozone layer compared with another NMDA antago-
nist, nitrous oxide. Cost and limited availability have 
prevented its widespread use. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Banks P, Franks N, Dickinson R: Competitive inhibition 
at the glycine site of the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
receptor mediates xenon neuroprotection against 
hypoxia ischemia. Anesthesiology 2010;112:614. 
 Bantel C, Maze M, Trapp S: Neuronal preconditioning by 
inhalational anesthetics. Anesthesiology 2009;11:986. 
 Cittanova M-L, Lelongt B, Verpont M-C: Fluoride 
ion toxicity in human kidney collecting duct cells. 
Anesthesiology 1996;84:428. 
 Coburn M, Maze M, Franks N: Th e neuroprotective 
eff ects of xenon and helium in an in vitro model of 
traumatic brain injury. Crit Care Med 2008;36:588. 
 De Hert S, Preckel B, Schlack W: Update on inhalational 
anaesthetics. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:491. 
 DiMaggio C, Sun L, Li G: Early childhood exposure to 
anesthesia and risk of developmental and behavioral 
disorders in a sibling birth cohort. Anesth Analg 
2011; 113:1143. 
 Ebert TJ: Myocardial ischemia and adverse cardiac 
outcomes in cardiac patients undergoing noncardiac 
This page intentionally left blank 
 175
9
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Intravenous Anesthetics 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Repetitive administration of barbiturates (eg, 
infusion of thiopental for “barbiturate coma” 
and brain protection) saturates the peripheral 
compartments, minimizing any eﬀ ect of 
redistribution, and rendering the duration 
of action more dependent on elimination. 
This is an example of context sensitivity. 
 Barbiturates constrict the cerebral 
vasculature, causing a decrease in cerebral 
blood ﬂ ow, cerebral blood volume, and 
intracranial pressure. 
 Although apnea may be relatively 
uncommon after benzodiazepine induction, 
even small intravenous doses of diazepam 
and midazolam have resulted in respiratory 
arrest. 
1
2
3
 In contrast to other anesthetic agents, 
ketamine increases arterial blood pressure, 
heart rate, and cardiac output, particularly 
after rapid bolus injections. 
 Induction doses of etomidate transiently 
inhibit enzymes involved in cortisol and 
aldosterone synthesis. Etomidate was 
often used in the past for ICU sedation 
before reports of its consistent ability to 
produce adrenocortical suppression in 
that circumstance appeared. 
 Propofol formulations can support the 
growth of bacteria, so sterile technique must 
be observed in preparation and handling. 
Propofol should be administered within 6 h 
of opening the ampule. 
4
5
6
 General anesthesia began with inhaled agents but 
now can be induced and maintained with drugs that 
enter the patient through a wide range of routes. 
Drug administration can be oral, rectal, transder-
mal, transmucosal, intramuscular, or intravenous 
for the purpose of producing or enhancing an anes-
thetic state. Preoperative sedation of adults is usu-
ally accomplished by way of oral or intravenous 
routes. Induction of general anesthesia in adults 
usually includes intravenous drug administration. 
Eff ective topical anesthesia with EMLA (eutectic 
mixture of local anesthetic) cream, LMX (plain 
lidocaine cream 4% and 5%), or 2% lidocaine jelly 
has increased the ease of intravenous inductions 
in children. Maintenance of general anesthesia is 
feasible with a total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 
technique. Th is chapter focuses on the intravenous 
agents used to produce hypnosis, including barbi-
turates, benzodiazepines, ketamine, etomidate, and 
propofol. 
 BARBITURATES 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Barbiturates depress the reticular activating sys-
tem in the brainstem, which controls multiple vital 
functions, including consciousness. In clinical con-
centrations, barbiturates more potently aff ect the 
function of nerve synapses than axons. Th eir primary 
176 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
2.5%  thiopental solution). Concentrations greater 
than recommended cause an unacceptable incidence 
of pain on injection and venous thrombosis. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 In clinical anesthesiology, thiopental, thiamylal, and 
methohexital were frequently administered intrave-
nously for induction of general anesthesia in adults 
and children (prior to the introduction of propofol). 
Rectal thiopental or, more oft en, methohexital has 
been used for induction in children, and intramus-
cular (or oral) pentobarbital was oft en used in the 
past for premedication of all age groups. 
 B. Distribution 
 Th e duration of sleep doses of the highly lipid-solu-
ble barbiturates (thiopental, thiamylal, and metho-
hexital) is determined by redistribution, not by 
metabolism or elimination. For example, although 
thiopental is highly protein bound (80%), its great 
lipid solubility and high nonionized fraction (60%) 
mechanism of action is believed to be through bind-
ing to the γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA A ) 
receptor. Barbiturates potentiate the action of GABA 
in increasing the duration of openings of a chloride-
specifi c ion channel. 
 Structure–Activity Relationships 
 Barbiturates are derived from barbituric acid 
( Figure 9–1 ). Substitution at carbon C 5 determines 
hypnotic potency and anticonvulsant activity. A long-
branched chain conveys more potency than does a 
short straight chain. Likewise, the phenyl group in 
 pheno barbital is anticonvulsive, whereas the methyl 
group in  metho hexital is not. Replacing the oxygen 
at C 2 ( oxy barbiturates) with a sulfur atom ( thio-
 barbiturates) increases lipid solubility. As a result, 
thiopental and thiamylal have a greater potency, 
more rapid onset of action, and shorter durations 
of action (aft er a single “sleep dose”) than pentobar-
bital. Th e sodium salts of the barbiturates are water 
soluble but markedly alkaline (pH of 2.5% thiopen-
tal >10) and relatively unstable (2-week shelf-life for 
N
N
CH3
CH2CH
CH2
CHCH2CH2CH3
H
H
S
O
O
Thiamylal
N
N
CH3
CH2CH3
CHCH2CH2CH3
H
H
S
O
O
Thiopental
N
N
CH3
CH2CH
CH2
CHCH2CH2CH3
H
H
O
O
O
Secobarbital
N
N
CH3
CH2CH
CH2
CHC
CCH2CH3
H
O
O
O
Methohexital
CH3
N
N
CH2CH3
H
H
O
O
O
Phenobarbital
CH3
CH2CH3
CHCH2CH2CH3
N
N
H
H
O
O
O
Pentobarbital
N
C
N
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
O
Barbituric acid
1
6
2
5
3
4
O
O
 FIGURE 91  Barbiturates share the structure of barbituric acid and diﬀ er in the C 2 , C 3 , and N 1 substitutions. 
 
CHAPTER 9 Intravenous Anesthetics
177
minimizing any eff ect of redistribution, and render-
ing the duration of action more dependent on elimi-
nation. Th is is an example of context sensitivity. 
 C. Biotransformation 
 Barbiturates are principally biotransformed via 
hepatic oxidation to inactive water-soluble metabo-
lites. Because of greater hepatic extraction, metho-
hexital is cleared by the liver more rapidly than 
thiopental. Although redistribution is responsible 
for the awakening from a single sleep dose of any of 
these lipid-soluble barbiturates, full recovery of psy-
chomotor function is more rapid following metho-
hexital due to its enhanced metabolism. 
 D. Excretion 
 Increased protein binding decreases barbiturate glo-
merular fi ltration, whereas increased lipid solubility 
tends to increase renal tubular reabsorption. Except 
for the less protein-bound and less lipid-soluble 
agents such as phenobarbital, renal excretion is lim-
ited to water-soluble end products of hepatic bio-
transformation. Methohexital is excreted in the feces. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Intravenous bolus induction doses of barbiturates 
cause a decrease in blood pressure and an increase in 
heart rate. Hemodynamic responses to barbiturates 
are reduced by slower rates of induction. Depression 
of the medullary vasomotor center produces vaso-
dilation of peripheral capacitance vessels, which 
increases peripheral pooling of blood, mimicking 
a reduced blood volume. Tachycardia following 
administration is probably due to a central vagolytic 
eff ect and refl ex responses to decreases in blood 
pressure. Cardiac output is oft en maintained by an 
increased heart rate and increased myocardial con-
tractility from compensatory baroreceptor refl exes. 
Sympathetically induced vasoconstriction of resis-
tance vessels (particularly with intubation under 
light planes of general anesthesia) may actually 
increase peripheral vascular resistance. However, in 
situations where the baroreceptor response will be 
blunted or absent (eg, hypovolemia, congestive heart 
failure, β-adrenergic blockade),  cardiac output and 
arterial blood pressure may fall dramatically due 
account for rapid brain uptake (within 30 s). If the 
central compartment is contracted (eg, hypovolemic 
shock), if the serum albumin is low (eg, severe liver 
disease or malnutrition), or if the nonionized frac-
tion is increased (eg, acidosis), larger brain and heart 
concentrations will be achieved for a given dose. 
Redistribution to the peripheral compartment—
specifi cally, the muscle group—lowers plasma and 
brain concentration to 10% of peak levels within 
20–30 min ( Figure 9–2 ). Th is pharmacokinetic 
profi le correlates with clinical experience—patients 
typically lose consciousness within 30 s and awaken 
within 20 min. 
 Th e minimal induction dose of thiopental will 
depend on body weight and age. Reduced induction 
doses are required for elderly patients primarily due 
to slower redistribution. In contrast to the rapid initial 
distribution half-life of a few minutes, elimination of 
thiopental is prolonged (elimination half-life ranges 
of 10–12 h). Th iamylal and methohexital have similar 
distribution patterns, whereas less lipid-soluble barbi-
turates have much longer distribution half-lives and 
durations of action aft er a sleep dose.  Repetitive 
administration of barbiturates (eg, infusion of 
thiopental for “barbiturate coma” and brain 
protection) saturates the peripheral compartments, 
1
 FIGURE 92  Distribution of thiopental from plasma 
to the vessel-rich group (VRG; brain, heart, liver, kidney, 
endocrine glands), to the muscle group (MG), and 
ﬁ nally to the fat group (FG). (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with 
permission, from Price HL et al: The uptake of thiopental by body 
tissues and its relation to the duration of narcosis. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther 1960;1:16.) 
100
75
50
25
% of dose
Time (min)
0.1
1.0
10
100
VRG
Plasma
FG
MG
178 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
equals cerebral artery pressure minus the greater of 
jugular venous pressure or intracranial pressure.) 
Barbiturates induce a greater decline in cerebral 
oxygen consumption (up to 50% of normal) than in 
cerebral blood fl ow; therefore the decline in cerebral 
blood fl ow is not detrimental. Barbiturate-induced 
reductions in oxygen requirements and cerebral 
metabolic activity are mirrored by changes in the 
electroencephalogram (EEG), which progress from 
low-voltage fast activity with small doses to high-
voltage slow activity, burst suppression, and electrical 
silence with larger doses. Barbiturates may protect 
the brain from transient episodes of focal ischemia 
(eg, cerebral embolism) but probably do not protect 
from global ischemia (eg, cardiac arrest). Abundant 
animal data document these eff ects but the clinical 
data are sparse and inconsistent. Furthermore, thio-
pental doses required to maintain EEG suppression 
(most oft en burst suppression or fl at line) are associ-
ated with prolonged awakening, delayed extubation, 
and the need for inotropic support. 
 Th e degree of central nervous system depres-
sion induced by barbiturates ranges from mild seda-
tion to unconsciousness, depending on the dose 
administered ( Table 9–1 ). Some patients relate 
a taste sensation of garlic, onions, or pizza dur-
ing induction with thiopental. Barbiturates do not 
impair the perception of pain. In fact, they some-
times appear to lower the pain threshold. Small 
doses occasionally cause a state of excitement and 
disorientation that can be disconcerting when seda-
tion is the objective. Barbiturates do not produce 
to uncompensated peripheral pooling of blood 
and direct myocardial depression . Patients with 
poorly controlled hypertension are particularly 
prone to wide swings in blood pressure during 
anesthesia induction. Th e cardiovascular eff ects of 
barbiturates therefore vary markedly, depending on 
rate of administration, dose, volume status, baseline 
autonomic tone, and preexisting cardiovascular dis-
ease. A slow rate of injection and adequate preopera-
tive hydration attenuates or eliminates these changes 
in most patients. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Barbiturates depress the medullary ventilatory cen-
ter, decreasing the ventilatory response to hypercap-
nia and hypoxia. Deep barbiturate sedation oft en 
leads to upper airway obstruction; apnea oft en fol-
lows an induction dose. During awakening, tidal 
volume and respiratory rate are decreased follow-
ing barbiturate induction. Barbiturates incompletely 
depress airway refl ex responses to laryngoscopy and 
intubation, and airway instrumentation may lead to 
bronchospasm (in asthmatic patients) or laryngo-
spasm in lightly anesthetized patients. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Barbiturates constrict the cerebral vascula-
ture, causing a decrease in cerebral blood 
fl ow, cerebral blood volume, and intracranial pres-
sure. Intracranial pressure decreases to a greater 
extent than arterial blood pressure, so cerebral 
perfusion pressure (CPP) usually increases. (CPP 
2
 TABLE 91 Uses and dosages of common barbiturates. 
Agent
Use
Route 1 
Concentration (%)
Dose (mg/kg)
Thiopental, 
thiamylal
Induction
IV
2.5
3–6
Methohexital
Induction
Sedation
Induction
IV
IV
Rectal (children)
1
1
10
1–2
0.2–0.4
25
Secobarbital, 
pentobarbital
Premedication
Oral
IM
Rectal suppository
5
2–4 2 
2–4 2 
3
 1 IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular.
 2 Maximum dose is 150 mg.
 
CHAPTER 9 Intravenous Anesthetics 
179
impression that chronic alcohol abuse is associ-
ated with increased thiopental requirements during 
induction lacks scientifi c proof. 
 BENZODIAZEPINES 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Benzodiazepines bind the same set of receptors in 
the central nervous system as barbiturates but bind 
to a diff erent site on the receptors. Benzodiazepine 
binding to the GABA A receptor increases the fre-
quency of openings of the associated chloride ion 
channel. For example, benzodiazepine-receptor 
binding facilitates binding of GABA to its receptor. 
 Flumazenil (an imidazobenzodiazepine) is a spe-
cifi c benzodiazepine–receptor antagonist that eff ec-
tively reverses most of the central nervous system 
eff ects of benzodiazepines (see Chapter 17). 
 Structure–Activity Relationships 
 Th e chemical structure of benzodiazepines includes 
a benzene ring and a seven-member diazepine ring 
( Figure 9–3 ). Substitutions at various positions on 
these rings aff ect potency and biotransformation. 
Th e imidazole ring of midazolam contributes to its 
water solubility at low pH. Diazepam and lorazepam 
are insoluble in water so parenteral preparations 
contain propylene glycol, which can produce venous 
irritation. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 Benzodiazepines are commonly administered orally, 
intramuscularly, and intravenously to provide seda-
tion or, less commonly, to induce general anesthe-
sia ( Table 9–2 ). Diazepam and lorazepam are well 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, with peak 
plasma levels usually achieved in 1 and 2 h, respec-
tively. Oral midazolam has not been approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, nevertheless 
this route of administration has been popular for 
pediatric premedication. Likewise, intranasal (0.2–
0.3 mg/kg), buccal (0.07 mg/kg), and sublingual (0.1 
mg/kg) midazolam provide eff ective  preoperative 
sedation. 
muscle relaxation, and some induce involuntary 
skeletal muscle contractions (eg, methohexital). 
Relatively small doses of thiopental (50–100 mg 
intravenously) rapidly (but temporarily) control 
most grand mal seizures. Unfortunately, acute toler-
ance and physiological dependence on the sedative 
eff ect of barbiturates develop quickly. 
 D. Renal 
 Barbiturates reduce renal blood fl ow and glomeru-
lar fi ltration rate in proportion to the fall in blood 
pressure. 
 E. Hepatic 
 Hepatic blood fl ow is decreased. Chronic expo-
sure to barbiturates has opposing eff ects on drug 
biotransformation. Induction of hepatic enzymes 
increases the rate of metabolism of some drugs, 
whereas binding of barbiturates to the cytochrome 
P-450 enzyme system interferes with the biotrans-
formation of other drugs (eg, tricyclic antidepres-
sants). Barbiturates promote aminolevulinic acid 
synthetase, which stimulates the formation of 
 porphyrin (an intermediary in heme synthesis). 
Th is may precipitate acute intermittent porphyria or 
variegate porphyria in susceptible individuals. 
 F. Immunological 
 Anaphylactic or anaphylactoid allergic reactions 
are rare. Sulfur-containing thiobarbiturates evoke 
mast cell histamine release in vitro, whereas oxyba-
rbiturates do not. For this reason, some anesthesiol-
ogists prefer induction agents other than thiopental 
or thiamylal in asthmatic or atopic patients, but 
the evidence for this choice is sparse. Th ere is no 
question that airway instrumentation with light 
anesthesia is troublesome in patients with reactive 
airways. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Contrast media, sulfonamides, and other drugs that 
occupy the same protein-binding sites as thiopental 
may displace the barbiturate, increasing the amount 
of free drug available and potentiating the organ sys-
tem eff ects of a given dose. 
 Ethanol, opioids, antihistamines, and other 
central nervous system depressants potentiate the 
sedative eff ects of barbiturates. Th e common clinical 
180 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 B. Distribution 
 Diazepam is relatively lipid soluble and readily 
penetrates the blood–brain barrier. Although mid-
azolam is water soluble at reduced pH, its imidaz-
ole ring closes at physiological pH, increasing its 
lipid solubility (see  Figure 9–3 ). Th e moderate lipid 
solubility of lorazepam accounts for its slower brain 
uptake and onset of action. Redistribution is fairly 
rapid for the benzodiazepines (the initial distribu-
tion half-life is 3–10 min) and, like the barbiturates, 
is responsible for awakening. Although midazolam 
has been used as an induction agent, neither mid-
azolam nor any other of the benzodiazepines can 
match the rapid onset and short duration of action 
of propofol or even thiopental. All three benzodiaz-
epines are highly protein bound (90–98%). 
 C. Biotransformation 
 Th e benzodiazepines rely on the liver for biotrans-
formation into water-soluble glucuronidated end 
products. Th e phase I metabolites of diazepam are 
pharmacologically active. 
 Intramuscular injections of diazepam are pain-
ful and unreliably absorbed. In contrast, midazolam 
and lorazepam are well absorbed aft er intramuscu-
lar injection, with peak levels achieved in 30 and 
90 min, respectively. Induction of general anesthesia 
with midazolam is convenient only with intravenous 
administration. 
Diazepam
CH3
N
N
O
Cl
Lorazepam
N
N
O
Cl
Cl
OH
Flumazenil
N
COOC2H5
N
N
F
CH3
O
Midazolam
(lipid-soluble)
CH3
F
N
N
N
Cl
(water-soluble)
CH3
CH2NH2
F
O
Cl
N
C
N
pH < 6.0
pH > 6.0
 FIGURE 93  The structures of commonly used 
benzodiazepines and their antagonist, ﬂ umazenil, share 
a seven-member diazepine ring. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, 
with permission, from White PF: Pharmacologic and clinical aspects of 
preoperative medication. Anesth Analg 1986;65:963. With permission 
from the International Anesthesia Research Society.) 
 TABLE 92 Uses and doses of commonly 
used benzodiazepines. 
Agent
Use
Route 1 
Dose (mg/kg)
Diazepam
Premedication
Sedation
Oral
IV
0.2–0.5 2 
0.04–0.2
Midazolam
Premedication
Sedation
Induction
IM
IV
IV
0.07–0.15
0.01–0.1
0.1–0.4
Lorazepam
Premedication
Oral
0.05
 1 IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular.
 2 Maximum dose is 15 mg.
 
CHAPTER 9 Intravenous Anesthetics
181
doses of diazepam and midazolam have resulted in 
respiratory arrest. Th e steep dose–response curve, 
slightly prolonged onset (compared with propofol or 
thiopental), and potency of midazolam necessitate 
careful titration to avoid overdosage and apnea. 
Ventilation must be monitored in all patients receiv-
ing intravenous benzodiazepines, and resuscitation 
equipment must be immediately available. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Benzodiazepines reduce cerebral oxygen consump-
tion, cerebral blood fl ow, and intracranial pressure 
but not to the extent the barbiturates do. Th ey are 
eff ective in preventing and controlling grand mal 
seizures. Oral sedative doses oft en produce ante-
grade amnesia, a useful premedication property. 
Th e mild muscle-relaxing property of these drugs 
is mediated at the spinal cord level, not at the neu-
romuscular junction. Th e antianxiety, amnestic, 
and sedative eff ects seen at lower doses progress 
to stupor and unconsciousness at induction doses. 
Compared with propofol or thiopental, induction 
with benzodiazepines is associated with a slower 
rate of loss of consciousness and a longer recovery. 
Benzodiazepines have no direct analgesic properties. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Cimetidine binds to cytochrome P-450 and reduces 
the metabolism of diazepam. Erythromycin inhib-
its metabolism of midazolam and causes a two- to 
threefold prolongation and intensifi cation of its 
eff ects. Heparin displaces diazepam from pro-
tein-binding sites and increases the free drug 
concentration. 
 As previously mentioned, the combination 
of opioids and benzodiazepines markedly reduces 
arterial blood pressure and peripheral vascular resis-
tance. Th is synergistic interaction has oft en been 
observed in patients with ischemic or valvular heart 
disease who oft en receive benzodiazepines for pre-
medication and during induction of anesthesia with 
opioids. 
 Benzodiazepines reduce the minimum alveolar 
concentration of volatile anesthetics as much as 30%. 
 Ethanol, barbiturates, and other central nervous 
system depressants potentiate the sedative eff ects of 
the benzodiazepines. 
 Slow hepatic extraction and a large volume 
of distribution ( V d ) result in a long elimination 
half-life for diazepam (30 h). Although lorazepam 
also has a low hepatic extraction ratio, its lower 
lipid solubility limits its  V d , resulting in a shorter 
elimination half-life (15 h). Nonetheless, the clini-
cal duration of lorazepam is oft en quite prolonged 
due to increased receptor affi  nity. Th ese diff er-
ences between lorazepam and diazepam illustrate 
the low utility of individual pharmacokinetic half-
lives in guiding clinical practice. Midazolam shares 
diazepam’s  V d , but its elimination half-life (2 h) is 
the shortest of the group because of its increased 
hepatic extraction ratio. 
 D. Excretion 
 Th e metabolites of benzodiazepine biotransforma-
tion are excreted chiefl y in the urine. Enterohepatic 
circulation produces a secondary peak in diazepam 
plasma concentration 6–12 h following administra-
tion. Kidney failure may lead to prolonged seda-
tion in patients receiving larger doses of midazolam 
due to the accumulation of a conjugated metabolite 
(α-hydroxymidazolam). 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Th e benzodiazepines display minimal cardiovascular 
depressant eff ects even at general anesthetic doses, 
except when they are coadministered with opioids 
(these agents interact to produce myocardial depres-
sion and arterial hypotension). Benzodiazepines 
given alone decrease arterial blood pressure, cardiac 
output, and peripheral vascular resistance slightly, 
and sometimes increase heart rate. Intravenous mid-
azolam tends to reduce blood pressure and peripheral 
vascular resistance more than diazepam. Changes in 
heart rate variability during midazolam sedation sug-
gest decreased vagal tone (ie, drug-induced vagolysis). 
 B. Respiratory 
 Benzodiazepines depress the ventilatory response to 
CO 2 . Th is depression is usually insignifi cant unless 
the drugs are administered intravenously or in asso-
ciation with other respiratory depressants.  Although 
apnea may be relatively uncommon aft er ben-
zodiazepine induction, even small intravenous 
3
182 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
of phencyclidine’s psychotomimetic eff ects. Ket-
amine is used for intravenous induction of anes-
thesia, particularly in settings where its tendency 
to produce sympathetic stimulation are useful 
(hypovolemia, trauma). When intravenous access 
is lacking, ketamine is useful for intramuscular 
induction of general anesthesia in children and 
uncooperative adults. Ketamine can be combined 
with other agents (eg, propofol or midazolam) in 
small bolus doses or infusions for deep conscious 
sedation during nerve blocks, endoscopy, etc. Even 
subanesthetic doses of ketamine may cause hallu-
cinogenic eff ects but usually do not do so in clinical 
practice, where many patients will have received 
at least a small dose of midazolam (or a related 
agent) for amnesia and sedation. Th e increased 
anesthetic potency and decreased psychotomi-
metic side eff ects of one isomer (S[+] versus R[–]) 
are the result of stereospecifi c receptors. Th e single 
S(+) stereoisomer preparation is not available in 
the United States (but widely available throughout 
the world), and it has considerably greater affi  nity 
than the racemic mixture for the NMDA receptor 
as well as several-fold greater potency as a general 
anesthetic. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 Ketamine has been administered orally, nasally, rec-
tally, subcutaneously, and epidurally, but in usual 
clinical practice it is given intravenously or intra-
muscularly ( Table 9–3 ). Peak plasma levels are usu-
ally achieved within 10–15 min aft er intramuscular 
injection. 
 B. Distribution 
 Ketamine is more lipid soluble and less protein 
bound than thiopental. Th ese characteristics, 
along  with ketamine-induced increase in cere-
bral blood fl ow and cardiac output, lead to rapid 
brain uptake and subsequent redistribution (the 
distribution half-life is 10–15 min). Awakening 
is due to redistribution from brain to peripheral 
compartments. 
 C. Biotransformation 
 Ketamine is biotransformed in the liver to several 
metabolites, one of which (norketamine) retains 
 KETAMINE 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Ketamine has multiple eff ects throughout the cen-
tral nervous system, inhibiting polysynaptic refl exes 
in the spinal cord as well as excitatory neurotrans-
mitter eff ects in selected areas of the brain. In con-
trast to the depression of the reticular activating 
system induced by the barbiturates, ketamine func-
tionally “dissociates” the thalamus (which relays 
sensory impulses from the reticular activating sys-
tem to the cerebral cortex) from the limbic cortex 
(which is involved with the awareness of sensation). 
Clinically, this state of dissociative anesthesia may 
cause the patient to appear conscious (eg, eye open-
ing, swallowing, muscle contracture) but unable to 
process or respond to sensory input. Ketamine has 
been demonstrated to be an  N -methyl- d -aspartate 
(NMDA) receptor (a subtype of the glutamate recep-
tor) antagonist. 
 Structure–Activity Relationships 
 Ketamine ( Figure 9–4 ) is a structural ana-
logue of  phencyclidine (an anesthetic that has 
been used in veterinary medicine, and a drug of 
abuse). It is one-tenth as potent, yet retains many 
Ketamine
Etomidate
Phencyclidine
Propofol
N
CH3CH2OC
O
NHCH3
CH3CH
N
N
OH
(CH3)2HC
CH(CH3)2
O
Cl
 FIGURE 94  The structures of ketamine, etomidate, 
and propofol. Note the similarities between ketamine and 
phencyclidine. 
 
CHAPTER 9 Intravenous Anesthetics
183
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 In contrast to other anesthetic agents, ket-
amine increases arterial blood pressure, heart 
rate, and cardiac output ( Table 9–4 ), particularly 
aft er rapid bolus injections. Th ese indirect cardio-
vascular eff ects are due to central stimulation of 
the sympathetic nervous system and inhibition 
of the reuptake of norepinephrine aft er release 
at nerve terminals. Accompanying these changes 
are increases in pulmonary artery pressure and 
myocardial work. For these reasons, large bolus 
injections of ketamine should be administered 
cautiously in patients with coronary artery dis-
ease, uncontrolled hypertension, congestive heart 
failure, or arterial aneurysms. Th e  direct myocar-
dial depressant eff ects of large doses of ketamine, 
probably due to inhibition of calcium transients, 
are unmasked by sympathetic blockade (eg, spinal 
cord transection) or exhaustion of catecholamine 
stores (eg, severe end-stage shock). On the other 
hand, ketamine’s  indirect stimulatory eff ects may 
be benefi cial to patients with acute shock. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Ventilatory drive is minimally aff ected by induction 
doses of ketamine, although rapid intravenous bolus 
4
anesthetic activity. Induction of hepatic enzymes 
only partially explains the tolerance that patients 
who receive multiple doses of ketamine will develop. 
Extensive hepatic uptake (hepatic extraction ratio of 
0.9) explains ketamine’s relatively short elimination 
half-life (2 h). 
 D. Excretion 
 End products of ketamine biotransformation are 
excreted renally. 
 TABLE 93 Uses and doses of ketamine, 
etomidate, and propofol. 
Agent
Use
Route 1 
Dose
Ketamine
Induction
Sedation 2 
IV
IM
IV
1–2 mg/kg
3–5 mg/kg
2.5–15 mcg/kg/min
Etomidate Induction
IV
0.2–0.5 mg/kg
Propofol
Induction
Maintenance 
infusion
IV
IV
1–2.5 mg/kg
50–200 mcg/kg/min
Sedation 
infusion
IV
25–100 mcg/kg/min
1 IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular.
2 Almost always in combination with propofol.
 TABLE 94 Summary of nonvolatile anesthetic eﬀ ects on organ systems. 1 
Agent
Cardiovascular
Respiratory
Cerebral
HR
MAP
Vent
B’dil
CBF
CMRO 2 
ICP
Barbiturates
 Thiopental
 Thiamylal
 Methohexital
↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓
↓
0
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
Benzodiazepines
 Diazepam
 Lorazepam
 Midazolam
0/↑
0/↑
↑
↓
↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
0
0
0
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
↓↓
Ketamine
↑↑
↑↑
↓
↑↑↑
↑↑ 2 
↑
↑↑ 2 
Etomidate
0
↓
↓
0
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
Propofol
0
↓↓
↓↓↓
0
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
1 HR, heart rate; MAP, mean arterial pressure; Vent, ventilatory drive; B’dil, bronchodilation; CBF, cerebral blood ﬂ ow; CMRO 2 , cerebral oxygen 
consumption; ICP, intracranial pressure; 0, no eﬀ ect; 0/↑, no change or mild increase; ↓, decrease (mild, moderate, marked); ↑, increase (mild, 
moderate, marked).
2 Minimal change in CBF and ICP when coadministered with other agents (see text).
184 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 α-Adrenergic and β-adrenergic antagonists 
(and other agents and techniques that diminish 
sympathetic stimulation) unmask the direct myo-
cardial depressant eff ects of ketamine, which are 
normally overwhelmed by sympathetic stimulation. 
Concurrent infusion of ketamine and propofol, oft en 
in a fi xed infusion rate ratio of 1:10, has achieved 
great popularity for sedation with local and regional 
anesthesia, particularly in offi  ce-based settings. 
 ETOMIDATE 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Etomidate depresses the reticular activating system 
and mimics the inhibitory eff ects of GABA. Specifi -
cally, etomidate—particularly the R(+) isomer—
appears to bind to a subunit of the GABA A receptor, 
increasing the receptor’s affi  nity for GABA. Unlike 
barbiturates, etomidate may have disinhibitory 
eff ects on the parts of the nervous system that 
control extrapyramidal motor activity. Th is disinhi-
bition off ers a potential explanation for the 30–60% 
incidence of myoclonus with etomidate induction 
of anesthesia. 
 Structure–Activity Relationships 
 Etomidate contains a carboxylated imidazole and 
is structurally unrelated to other anesthetic agents 
(see  Figure 9–4 ). Th e imidazole ring provides water 
solubility in acidic solutions and lipid solubility at 
physiological pH. Th erefore etomidate is dissolved 
in propylene glycol for injection. Th is solution oft en 
causes pain on injection that can be lessened by a 
prior intravenous injection of lidocaine. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 Etomidate is available only for intravenous admin-
istration and is used primarily for induction of gen-
eral anesthesia (see Table 9–3). It is sometimes used 
for brief production of deep (unconscious) sedation 
such as prior to placement of retrobulbar blocks. 
 B. Distribution 
 Although it is highly protein bound, etomidate is 
characterized by a very rapid onset of action due to 
its great lipid solubility and large nonionized fraction 
administration or combinations of ketamine with 
opioids occasionally produce apnea. Racemic ket-
amine is a potent bronchodilator, making it a good 
induction agent for asthmatic patients; however, 
S(+) ketamine produces minimal bronchodilation. 
Upper airway refl exes remain largely intact, but par-
tial airway obstruction may occur, and patients at 
increased risk for aspiration pneumonia (“full stom-
achs”) should be intubated during ketamine general 
anesthesia (see Case Discussion, Chapter 17). Th e 
increased salivation associated with ketamine can be 
attenuated by premedication with an anticholinergic 
agent such as glycopyrrolate 
 C. Cerebral 
 Th e received dogma about ketamine is that it 
increases cerebral oxygen consumption, cerebral 
blood fl ow, and intracranial pressure. Th ese eff ects 
would seem to preclude its use in patients with 
space-occupying intracranial lesions such as occur 
with head trauma; however, recent 12s 
off er convincing evidence that when combined 
with a benzodiazepine (or another agent acting on 
the same GABA receptor system) and controlled 
ventilation, but not with nitrous oxide, ketamine 
is  not associated with increased intracranial pres-
sure. Myoclonic activity is associated with increased 
subcortical electrical activity, which is not apparent 
on surface EEG. Undesirable psychotomimetic side 
eff ects (eg, disturbing dreams and delirium) dur-
ing emergence and recovery are less common in 
children and in patients premedicated with benzo-
diazepines or those in whom ketamine is combined 
with propofol in a TIVA technique. Of the nonvola-
tile agents, ketamine comes closest to being a “com-
plete” anesthetic as it induces analgesia, amnesia, 
and unconsciousness. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Ketamine interacts synergistically (more than addi-
tive) with volatile anesthetics but in an additive 
way with propofol, benzodiazepines, and other 
GABA-receptor–mediated agents. In animal experi-
ments nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
agents are minimally potentiated by ketamine (see 
Chapter 11). Diazepam and midazolam attenuate 
ketamine’s cardiostimulatory eff ects and diazepam 
prolongs ketamine’s elimination half-life. 
 
CHAPTER 9 Intravenous Anesthetics
185
in the intensive care unit (ICU) before reports of 
its consistent ability to produce adrenocortical 
suppression in that circumstance appeared. Long-
term infusion and  adrenocortical suppression 
were associated with an increased mortality rate in 
critically ill (particularly septic) patients. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Fentanyl increases the plasma level and prolongs 
the elimination half-life of etomidate. Opioids 
decrease the myoclonus characteristic of an etomi-
date induction. 
 PROPOFOL 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Propofol induction of general anesthesia may 
involve facilitation of inhibitory neurotransmission 
mediated by GABA A receptor binding. Propofol allo-
sterically increases binding affi  nity of GABA for the 
GABA A receptor. Th is receptor, as previously noted, 
is coupled to a chloride channel, and activation of 
the receptor leads to hyperpolarization of the nerve 
membrane. Propofol (like most general anesthetics) 
binds multiple ion channels and receptors. Propofol 
actions are not reversed by the specifi c benzodiaz-
epine antagonist fl umazenil. 
 Structure–Activity Relationships 
 Propofol consists of a phenol ring substituted with 
two isopropyl groups (see  Figure 9–4 ). Propofol is 
not water soluble, but a 1% aqueous solution (10 
mg/mL) is available for intravenous administration 
as an oil-in-water emulsion containing soybean oil, 
glycerol, and egg lecithin. A history of egg allergy 
does not necessarily contraindicate the use of pro-
pofol because most egg allergies involve a reaction 
to egg white (egg albumin), whereas egg lecithin 
is  extracted from egg yolk. Th is formulation will 
oft en cause pain during injection that can be 
decreased by prior injection of lidocaine or less 
eff ectively by mixing lidocaine with propofol prior 
to injection (2 mL of 1% lidocaine in 18 mL propo-
fol).  Propofol formulations can support the 
growth of bacteria, so sterile technique must 
be observed in preparation and handling. Propofol 
should be administered within 6 h of opening the 
6
at physiological pH. Redistribution is responsible for 
decreasing the plasma concentration to awakening 
levels. Etomidate plasma kinetics are well explained 
by a two-compartment model. 
 C. Biotransformation 
 Hepatic microsomal enzymes and plasma esterases 
rapidly hydrolyze etomidate to an inactive metabolite. 
 D. Excretion 
 Th e end products of etomidate hydrolysis are pri-
marily excreted in the urine. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Etomidate has minimal eff ects on the cardiovascu-
lar system. A mild reduction in peripheral vascular 
resistance is responsible for a slight decline in arterial 
blood pressure. Myocardial contractility and cardiac 
output are usually unchanged. Etomidate does not 
release histamine. However, etomidate by itself, even 
in large doses, produces relatively light anesthesia 
for laryngoscopy, and marked increases in heart rate 
and blood pressure may be recorded when etomidate 
provides the only anesthetic depth for intubation. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Ventilation is aff ected less with etomidate than with 
barbiturates or benzodiazepines. Even induction 
doses usually do not result in apnea unless opioids 
have also been administered. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Etomidate decreases cerebral metabolic rate, cere-
bral blood fl ow, and intracranial pressure. Because 
of minimal cardiovascular eff ects, CPP is well main-
tained. Although changes on EEG resemble those 
associated with barbiturates, etomidate increases 
the amplitude of somatosensory evoked potentials. 
Postoperative nausea and vomiting are more com-
mon following etomidate than following propofol 
or barbiturate induction. Etomidate lacks analgesic 
properties. 
 D. Endocrine 
 Induction doses of etomidate transiently 
inhibit enzymes involved in cortisol and aldo-
sterone synthesis. It was used in the past for sedation 
5
186 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
neurosurgical patients has been associated with spo-
radic cases of lipemia, metabolic acidosis, and death, 
the so-termed propofol infusion syndrome. 
 D. Excretion 
 Although metabolites of propofol are primarily 
excreted in the urine, chronic kidney failure does 
not aff ect clearance of the parent drug. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Th e major cardiovascular eff ect of propofol is a 
decrease in arterial blood pressure due to a drop in 
systemic vascular resistance (inhibition of sympathetic 
vasoconstrictor activity), preload, and cardiac con-
tractility. Hypotension following induction is usually 
reversed by the stimulation accompanying laryngos-
copy and intubation. Factors associated with propo-
fol-induced hypotension include large doses, rapid 
injection, and old age. Propofol markedly impairs the 
normal arterial barorefl ex response to hypotension. 
Rarely, a marked drop in preload may lead to a vagally 
mediated refl ex bradycardia. Changes in heart rate and 
cardiac output are usually transient and insignifi cant 
in healthy patients but may be severe in patients at the 
extremes of age, those receiving β-adrenergic blockers, 
or those with impaired ventricular function. Although 
myocardial oxygen consumption and coronary blood 
fl ow usually decrease comparably, coronary sinus lac-
tate production increases in some patients, indicating 
some mismatch between myocardial oxygen supply 
and demand. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Propofol is a profound respiratory depressant that 
usually causes apnea following an induction dose. 
Even when used for conscious sedation in sub-
anesthetic doses, propofol inhibits hypoxic venti-
latory drive and depresses the normal response to 
hypercarbia. As a result, only properly educated and 
qualifi ed personnel should administer propofol for 
sedation. Propofol-induced depression of upper 
airway refl exes exceeds that of thiopental, allowing 
intubation, endoscopy, or laryngeal mask placement 
in the absence of neuromuscular blockade. Although 
propofol can cause histamine release, induction with 
propofol is accompanied by a lower incidence of 
ampule. Sepsis and death have been linked to con-
taminated propofol preparations. Current formula-
tions of propofol contain 0.005% disodium edetate 
or 0.025% sodium metabisulfi te to help retard the 
rate of growth of microorganisms; however, these 
additives do not render the product “antimicrobi-
ally preserved” under United States Pharmacopeia 
standards. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 Propofol is available only for intravenous adminis-
tration for the induction of general anesthesia and 
for moderate to deep sedation (see Table 9–3). 
 B. Distribution 
 Propofol has a rapid onset of action. Awakening 
from a single bolus dose is also rapid due to a very 
short initial distribution half-life (2–8 min). Most 
investigators believe that recovery from propofol is 
more rapid and is accompanied by less “hangover” 
than recovery from methohexital, thiopental, ket-
amine, or etomidate. Th is makes it a good agent for 
outpatient anesthesia. A smaller induction dose is 
recommended in elderly patients because of their 
smaller  V d . Age is also a key factor determining 
required propofol infusion rates for TIVA. In coun-
tries other than the United States, a device called 
the Diprifusor is oft en used to provide target (con-
centration) controlled infusion of propofol. Th e 
user must enter the patient’s age and weight and 
the desired target concentration. Th e device uses 
these data, a microcomputer, and standard phar-
macokinetic parameters to continuously adjust the 
infusion rate. 
 C. Biotransformation 
 Th e clearance of propofol exceeds hepatic blood 
fl ow, implying the existence of extrahepatic metabo-
lism. Th is exceptionally high clearance rate probably 
contributes to relatively rapid recovery aft er con-
tinuous infusions. Conjugation in the liver results 
in inactive metabolites that are eliminated by renal 
clearance. Th e pharmacokinetics of propofol do not 
appear to be aff ected by obesity, cirrhosis, or kidney 
failure. Use of propofol infusion for long-term seda-
tion of children who are critically ill or young adult 
 
CHAPTER 9 Intravenous Anesthetics 
187
slower recovery than propofol, off ering little reason 
for anesthesiologists to use fospropofol in place of 
propofol. Th e place (if any) of fospropofol relative to 
other competing agents has not yet been established 
in clinical practice. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Premedication of the Surgical Patient 
 An extremely anxious 17-year-old woman pres-
ents for dilation and curettage. She demands to 
be asleep before going to the operating room 
and does not want to remember anything . 
 What are the goals of administering 
preoperative medication? 
 Anxiety is a normal response to impending sur-
gery. Diminishing anxiety is usually the major goal 
of preoperative medication. For many patients, the 
preoperative interview with the anesthesiologist 
allays fears more eﬀ ectively than sedative drugs. 
Preoperative medication may also provide relief of 
preoperative pain or perioperative amnesia . 
 There may also be speciﬁ c medical indications 
for preoperative medication: prophylaxis against 
postoperative nausea and vomiting (5-HT 3 s) and 
against aspiration pneumonia (eg, antacids), pre-
vention of allergic reactions (eg, antihistamines), 
or decreasing upper airway secretions (eg, anticho-
linergics). The goals of preoperative medication 
depend on many factors, including the health and 
emotional status of the patient, the proposed sur-
gical procedure, and the anesthetic plan. For this 
reason, the choice of anesthetic premedication 
must be individualized and must follow a thorough 
preoperative evaluation . 
 Do all patients require preoperative medication? 
 No—customary levels of preoperative anxiety 
do not harm most patients. Some patients dread 
intramuscular injections, and others ﬁ nd altered 
states of consciousness more unpleasant than 
nervousness. If the surgical procedure is brief, the 
eﬀ ects of some sedatives may extend into the post-
operative period and prolong recovery time. This is 
particularly troublesome for patients undergoing 
wheezing in asthmatic and nonasthmatic patients 
compared with barbiturates or etomidate. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Propofol decreases cerebral blood fl ow and intracra-
nial pressure. In patients with elevated intracranial 
pressure, propofol can cause a critical reduction in 
CPP (<50 mm Hg) unless steps are taken to support 
mean arterial blood pressure. Propofol and thiopen-
tal probably provide a similar degree of cerebral pro-
tection during experimental focal ischemia. Unique 
to propofol are its antipruritic properties. Its anti-
emetic eff ects (requiring a blood propofol concen-
tration of 200 ng/mL) provide yet another reason for 
it to be a preferred drug for outpatient anesthesia. 
Induction is occasionally accompanied by excitatory 
phenomena such as muscle twitching, spontaneous 
movement, opisthotonus, or hiccupping. Although 
these reactions may occasionally mimic tonic–clonic 
seizures, propofol has anticonvulsant properties and 
has been used successfully to terminate status epi-
lepticus. Propofol may be safely administered to 
epileptic patients. Propofol decreases intraocular 
pressure. Tolerance does not develop aft er long-term 
propofol infusions. Propofol is an uncommon agent 
of physical dependence or addiction; however, both 
anesthesia personnel and medically untrained indi-
viduals have died while using propofol inappropri-
ately to induce sleep in nonsurgical settings. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Fentanyl and alfentanil concentrations may be 
increased with concomitant administration of pro-
pofol. Many clinicians administer a small amount of 
midazolam (eg, 30 mcg/kg) prior to induction with 
propofol; midazolam can reduce the required pro-
pofol dose by more than 10%. 
 FOSPROPOFOL 
 Fospropofol is a water-soluble prodrug that is 
metabolized in vivo to propofol, phosphate, and 
formaldehyde. It has been released in the United 
States and other countries based on studies show-
ing that it produces more complete amnesia and 
better conscious sedation for endoscopy than mid-
azolam plus fentanyl. It has a slower onset and 
188 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
ambulatory surgery. Speciﬁ c contraindications for 
sedative premedication include severe lung dis-
ease, hypovolemia, impending airway obstruction, 
increased intracranial pressure, and depressed 
baseline mental status. Premedication with sedative 
drugs should never be given before informed con-
sent has been obtained . 
 Which patients are most likely to beneﬁ t 
from preoperative medication? 
 Some patients are quite anxious despite the 
preoperative interview. Separation of young chil-
dren from their parents is often a traumatic ordeal, 
particularly if they have endured multiple prior sur-
geries. Medical conditions such as coronary artery 
disease or hypertension may be aggravated by 
psychological stress . 
 How does preoperative medication inﬂ uence
the induction of general anesthesia? 
 Some medications often given preoperatively 
(eg, opioids) decrease anesthetic requirements 
and can smooth induction. However, intravenous 
administration of these medications just prior to 
induction is a more reliable method of achieving 
the same beneﬁ ts . 
 What governs the choice among the preoperative 
medications commonly administered? 
 After the goals of premedication have been 
determined, the clinical eﬀ ects of the agents dic-
tate choice. For instance, in a patient experiencing 
preoperative pain from a femoral fracture, the anal-
gesic eﬀ ects of an opioid (eg, fentanyl, morphine, 
hydromorphone) will decrease the discomfort 
associated with transportation to the operating 
room and positioning on the operating room table. 
On the other hand, respiratory depression, ortho-
static hypotension, and nausea and vomiting may 
result from opioid premedication . 
 Benzodiazepines relieve anxiety, often pro-
vide amnesia, and are relatively free of side eﬀ ects; 
however, they are not analgesics. Diazepam and 
lorazepam are available orally. Intramuscular mid-
azolam has a rapid onset (30 min) and short dura-
tion (90 min), but intravenous midazolam has an 
even better pharmacokinetic proﬁ le . 
 Which factors must be considered in selecting 
the anesthetic premedication for this patient? 
 First, it must be made clear to the patient that 
in most centers, lack of necessary equipment and 
concern for patient safety preclude anesthesia 
being induced in the preoperative holding room. 
Long-acting agents such as morphine or loraz-
epam are poor choices for an outpatient proce-
dure. Diazepam can also aﬀ ect mental function 
for several hours. One alternative is to establish an 
intravenous line in the preoperative holding area 
and titrate small doses of midazolam using slurred 
speech as an end point. At that time, the patient 
can be taken to the operating room. Vital signs—
particularly respiratory rate—must be continu-
ously monitored . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Domino EF: Taming the ketamine tiger. Anesthesiology 
2010;113:678. 
 Garnock-Jones KP, Scott LJ: Fospropofol. Drugs 
2010;70:469. 
 Jensen LS, Merry AF, Webster CS, et al: Evidence-based 
strategies for preventing drug administration errors 
during anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 2004;59:493. 
 Leslie K, Clavisi O, Hargrove J: Target-controlled infusion 
versus manually-controlled infusion of propofol for 
general anaesthesia or sedation in adults. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2008;(3):CD006059. 
 Raeder J: Ketamine, revival of a versatile intravenous 
anaesthetic. Adv Exp Med Biol 2003;523:269. 
 Short TG, Young R: Toxicity of intravenous anaesthetics. 
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2003;17:77. 
 Vanlersberghe C, Camu F: Etomidate and other non-
barbiturates. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2008;(182):267. 
 Vanlersberghe C, Camu F: Propofol. Handb Exp 
Pharmacol 2008;(182):227. 
 189
 OPIOIDS 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Opioids bind to specifi c receptors located through-
out the central nervous system and other tissues. 
Four major opioid receptor types have been identi-
fi ed ( Table 10–1 ): mu (µ, with subtypes µ 1 and µ 2 ), 
kappa (κ), delta (δ), and sigma (σ). All opioid recep-
tors couple to G proteins; binding of an agonist to 
an opioid receptor causes membrane hyperpolariza-
tion. Acute opioid eff ects are mediated by inhibition 
of adenylyl cyclase (reductions in intracellular cyclic 
 Analgesic Agents 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
The accumulation of morphine metabolites 
(morphine 3-glucuronide and morphine 
6-glucuronide) in patients with kidney 
failure has been associated with narcosis and 
ventilatory depression lasting several days. 
Rapid administration of larger doses of 
opioids (particularly fentanyl, sufentanil, 
remifentanil, and alfentanil) can induce 
chest wall rigidity severe enough to prevent 
adequate bag-and-mask ventilation. 
Prolonged dosing of opioids can produce 
“opioid-induced hyperalgesia,” in which 
patients become more sensitive to painful 
stimuli. Infusion of large doses of (in 
particular) remifentanil during general 
anesthesia can produce acute tolerance, 
in which much larger than usual doses 
1
2
3
of opioids are required for postoperative 
analgesia. 
 The neuroendocrine stress response to 
surgical stimulation is measured in terms of 
the secretion of speciﬁ c hormones, including 
catecholamines, antidiuretic hormone, 
and cortisol. Large doses of opioids block 
the release of these hormones in response 
to surgery more completely than volatile 
anesthetics. 
 Aspirin is unique in that it irreversibly inhibits 
COX-1 by acetylating a serine residue in 
the enzyme. The irreversible nature of its 
inhibition underlies the nearly 1-week 
duration of its clinical eﬀ ects (eg, return of 
platelet aggregation to normal) after drug 
discontinuation. 
4
5
 Regardless of how expertly surgical and anesthetic 
procedures are performed, appropriate prescrip-
tion of analgesic drugs, especially opioids and 
cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors, can make the 
diff erence between a satisfi ed and an unsatisfi ed 
postoperative patient. Studies have shown that out-
comes can be improved when analgesia is provided 
in a “multimodal” format (typically emphasizing 
COX inhibitors and local anesthetic techniques 
while minimizing opioid use) as one part of a well-
defi ned and well-organized plan for postoperative 
care (see Chapter 48). 
10
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
190 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
 Th e opioid drugs mimic endogenous com-
pounds. Endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins 
are endogenous peptides that bind to opioid recep-
tors. Th ese three families of opioid peptides diff er in 
their amino acid sequences, anatomic distributions, 
and receptor affi  nities. 
 Opioid receptor activation inhibits the pre-
synaptic release and postsynaptic response to 
excitatory neurotransmitters (eg, acetylcholine, 
substance P) from nociceptive neurons . Th e cel-
lular mechanism for this action was described at 
the beginning of this chapter. Transmission of pain 
impulses can be  selectively modifi ed at the level of 
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord with intrathe-
cal or epidural administration of opioids. Opioid 
receptors also respond to systemically adminis-
tered opioids. Modulation through a descending 
inhibitory pathway from the periaqueductal gray 
matter to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord may 
also play a role in opioid analgesia. Although opi-
oids exert their greatest eff ect within the central 
nervous system, opiate receptors have also been 
identifi ed on somatic and sympathetic peripheral 
nerves. Certain opioid side eff ects (eg, depression 
of gastrointestinal motility) are the result of opi-
oid binding to receptors in peripheral tissues (eg, 
the wall of the gastrointestinal tract), and there are 
now selective antagonists for opioid actions out-
side the central nervous system (alvimopan and 
oral naltrexone). Th e distribution of opioid recep-
tors on axons of primary sensory nerves and the 
clinical importance of these receptors (if present) 
remains speculative, despite the persisting prac-
tice of compounding of opioids in local anesthetic 
solutions applied to peripheral nerves. 
 Structure–Activity 
Relationships 
 Opioid receptor binding is a property shared by a 
chemically diverse group of compounds. Nonethe-
less, there are common structural characteristics, 
which are shown in  Figure 10–1 . As is true for most 
classes of drugs, small molecular changes can convert 
an agonist into an antagonist. Th e levorotatory iso-
mers are generally more potent than the dextrorota-
tory opioid isomers. 
adenosine monophosphate concentrations) and 
activation of phospholipase C. Opioids inhibit volt-
age-gated calcium channels and activate inwardly 
rectifying potassium channels. Opioid eff ects vary 
based on the duration of exposure, and opioid toler-
ance leads to changes in opioid responses. 
 Although opioids provide some degree of seda-
tion and (in many species) can produce general 
anesthesia when given in large doses, they are prin-
cipally used to provide analgesia. Th e properties of 
specifi c opioids depend on which receptor is bound 
(and in the case of spinal and epidural administra-
tion of opioids, the location in the neuraxis where 
the receptor is located) and the binding affi  nity of 
the drug. Agonist–antagonists (eg, nalbuphine, 
nalorphine, butorphanol, and pentazocine) have less 
effi  cacy than so-called full agonists (eg, fentanyl) 
and under some circumstances will antagonize the 
actions of full agonists. Th e pure opioid antagonists 
are discussed in Chapter 17. 
 TABLE 101 Classiﬁ cation of opioid 
receptors. 1 
Receptor
Clinical Eﬀ ect
Agonists
µ
Supraspinal 
analgesia (µ 1 )
Respiratory 
depression (µ 2 )
Physical dependence
Muscle rigidity
Morphine
Met-enkephalin 2 
β-Endorphin 2 
Fentanyl
κ
Sedation
Spinal analgesia
Morphine
Nalbuphine
Butorphanol
Dynorphin 2 
Oxycodone
δ
Analgesia
Behavioral
Epileptogenic
Leu-enkephalin 2 
β-Endorphin 2 
σ
Dysphoria
Hallucinations
Respiratory 
stimulation
Pentazocine
Nalorphine
Ketamine
 1 Note: The relationships among receptor, clinical eﬀ ect, and agonist are 
more complex than indicated in this table. For example, pentazocine 
is an antagonist at µ receptors, a partial agonist at κ receptors, and an 
agonist at σ receptors.
 2 Endogenous opioid.
 
CHAPTER 10 Analgesic Agents 
191 
Sufentanil
Fentanyl
Alfentanil
CH2CH2
NCCH2CH3
CH2OCH3
N
S
O
Meperidine
Morphine
Naloxone
CH3CH2OC
HO
O
OH
CH2
CH2
CH3
N
CH2CH2
CH3CH2
NCCH2CH3
CH2OCH3
N
N
N
N
N
O
HO
O
O
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
N
HO
CH2
Remifentanil
O
CH3
N
O
CH2CH2
CH3CH2C
N
N
O
C
H3C
N
N
O
C
CH3
Site of
ester hydrolysis
O
O
O
C
CH3
O
 FIGURE 101  Opioid agonists and antagonists share part of their chemical structure, which is outlined in cyan. 
192 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
epidural morphine (DepoDur) is administered as a 
single epidural dose (5–15 mg), the eff ects of which 
persist for 48 h. 
 B. Distribution 
 Table 10–2 summarizes the physical characteris-
tics that determine distribution and tissue binding 
of opioid analgesics. Aft er intravenous administra-
tion, the distribution half-lives of all of the opioids 
are fairly rapid (5–20 min). Th e low fat solubility of 
morphine slows passage across the blood–brain bar-
rier, however, so that its onset of action is slow and 
its duration of action is prolonged. Th is contrasts 
with the increased lipid solubility of fentanyl and 
sufentanil, which are associated with a faster onset 
and shorter duration of action  when administered 
in small doses . Interestingly, alfentanil has a more 
rapid onset of action and shorter duration of action 
than fentanyl following a bolus injection, even 
though it is less lipid soluble than fentanyl. Th e high 
nonionized fraction of alfentanil at physiological pH 
and its small volume of distribution ( V d ) increase 
the amount of drug (as a percentage of the adminis-
tered dose) available for binding in the brain. 
 Signifi cant amounts of lipid-soluble opioids 
can be retained by the lungs (fi rst-pass uptake); as 
systemic concentrations fall they will return to the 
bloodstream. Th e amount of pulmonary uptake 
is reduced by prior accumulation of other drugs, 
increased by a history of tobacco use, and decreased 
by concurrent inhalation anesthetic administration. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 Rapid and complete absorption follows the intra-
muscular injection of hydromorphone, morphine, or 
meperidine, with peak plasma levels usually reached 
aft er 20–60 min. Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate 
absorption (fentanyl “lollipop”) provides rapid onset 
of analgesia and sedation in patients who are not 
good candidates for conventional oral, intravenous, 
or intramuscular dosing of opioids. 
 Th e low molecular weight and high lipid solu-
bility of fentanyl also favor transdermal absorption 
(the transdermal fentanyl “patch”). Th e amount of 
fentanyl absorbed per unit of time depends on the 
surface area of skin covered by the patch and also 
on local skin conditions (eg, blood fl ow). Th e time 
required to establish a reservoir of drug in the upper 
dermis delays by several hours the achievement of 
eff ective blood concentrations. Serum concentra-
tions of fentanyl reach a plateau within 14–24 h of 
application (with peak levels occurring aft er a lon-
ger delay in elderly than in younger patients) and 
remain constant for up to 72 h. Continued absorp-
tion from the dermal reservoir accounts for persist-
ing measurable serum levels many hours aft er patch 
removal. Fentanyl patches are most oft en used for 
outpatient management of chronic pain and are par-
ticularly appropriate for patients who require con-
tinuous opioid dosing but cannot take the much less 
expensive, but equally effi  cacious, oral agents such 
as methadone. 
 A wide variety of opioids are eff ective by oral 
administration, including oxycodone, hydrocodone 
(most oft en in combination with acetaminophen), 
codeine, tramadol, morphine, hydromorphone, and 
methadone. Th ese agents are much used for outpa-
tient pain management. 
 Fentanyl is oft en administered in small doses 
(10–25 mcg) with local anesthetics for spinal anes-
thesia, and adds to the analgesia when included with 
local anesthetics in epidural infusions. Morphine in 
doses between 0.1 and 0.5 mg and hydromorphone 
in doses between 0.05 and 0.2 mg provide 12–18 
hours of analgesia aft er intrathecal administra tion. 
Morphine and hydromorphone are commonly 
included in local anesthetic solutions infused for 
postoperative epidural analgesia. Extended-release 
 TABLE 102 Physical characteristics 
of opioids that determine distribution. 1 
Agent
Nonionized 
Fraction
Protein 
Binding
Lipid 
Solubility
Morphine
+ +
+ +
+
Meperidine
+
+ + + 
+ +
Fentanyl
+
+ + + 
+ + + +
Sufentanil
+ +
+ + + +
+ + + +
Alfentanil
+ + + +
+ + + +
+ + +
Remifentanil
+ + +
+ + +
+ +
 1 +, very low; + +, low; + + +, high; + + + +, very high.
 
CHAPTER 10 Analgesic Agents
193
remifentanil infusion has little eff ect on wake-up 
time ( Figure 10–2 ). Th e context-sensitive half-
time of remifentanil remains approximately 3 min 
regardless of the dose or duration of infusion. In 
its lack of accumulation remifentanil diff ers from 
other currently available opioids. Hepatic dysfunc-
tion requires no adjustment in remifentanil dos-
ing. Finally, patients with pseudocholinesterase 
defi ciency have a normal response to remifentanil 
(as also appears true for esmolol). 
 D. Excretion 
 Th e end products of morphine and meperidine bio-
transformation are eliminated by the kidneys, with 
less than 10% undergoing biliary excretion. Because 
5–10% of morphine is excreted unchanged in the 
urine, kidney failure prolongs morphine duration of 
action.  Th e accumulation of morphine metab-
olites (morphine 3-glucuronide and morphine 
6-glucuronide) in patients with kidney failure has 
been associated with prolonged narcosis and venti-
latory depression. In fact, morphine 6-glucuronide 
is a more potent and longer-lasting opioid agonist 
than morphine. As previously noted, normeperi-
dine at increased concentrations may produce sei-
zures; these are not reversed by naloxone. Renal 
dysfunction increases the likelihood of toxic eff ects 
1
Unbinding of opioid receptors and redistribu-
tion (of drug from eff ect sites) terminate the clini-
cal eff ects of all opioids. Aft er smaller doses of the 
lipid- soluble  drugs (eg, fentanyl or sufentanil), 
redistribution alone is the driver for reducing blood 
concentrations, whereas aft er larger doses biotrans-
formation becomes an important driver in reducing 
plasma levels below those that have clinical eff ects. 
Th us, the time required for fentanyl or sufentanil 
concentrations to decrease by half is context sensi-
tive; in other words, the half-time depends on the 
total dose of drug and duration of exposure (see 
Chapter 7). 
 C. Biotransformation 
 With the exception of remifentanil, all opioids 
depend primarily on the liver for biotransformation 
and are metabolized by the cytochrome P (CYP) 
system, conjugated in the liver, or both. Because of 
the high hepatic extraction ratio of opioids, their 
clearance depends on liver blood fl ow. Th e small 
V d of alfentanil contributes to a short elimination 
half-life (1.5 h). Morphine and hydromorphone 
undergo conjugation with glucuronic acid to form, 
in the former case, morphine 3-glucuronide and 
morphine 6-glucuronide, and in the latter case, 
hydromorphone 3-glucuronide. Meperidine is 
N -demethylated to normeperidine, an active metab-
olite associated with seizure activity, particularly 
aft er very large meperidine doses. Th e end products 
of fentanyl, sufentanil, and alfentanil are inactive. 
Norfentanyl, the metabolite of fentanyl, can be mea-
sured in urine long aft er the native compound is no 
longer detectable in blood to determine chronic fen-
tanyl ingestion. Th is has its greatest importance in 
diagnosing fentanyl abuse. 
 Codeine is a prodrug that becomes active aft er 
it is metabolized by CYP to morphine. Trama-
dol similarly must be metabolized by CYP to 
O -desmethyltramadol to be active. Oxycodone is 
metabolized by CYP to series of active compounds 
that are less potent than the parent one. 
 Th e ester structure of remifentanil makes it sus-
ceptible to hydrolysis (in a manner similar to esmo-
lol) by nonspecifi c esterases in red blood cells and 
tissue (see Figure 10–1), yielding a terminal elimi-
nation half-life of less than 10 min. Remifentanil 
biotransformation is rapid and the duration of a 
 FIGURE 102  In contrast to other opioids, the 
time necessary to achieve a 50% decrease in the plasma 
concentration of remifentanil (its  context-sensitive 
half-time ) is very short and is not inﬂ uenced by the 
duration of the infusion. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Egan TD: The pharmacokinetics of the new short-acting opioid 
remifentanil [GI87084B] in healthy adult male volunteers. 
Anesthesiology 1993;79:881.) 
Infusion duration (min)
Fentanyl
Alfentanil
Sufentanil
Remifentanil
100
200
300
400
500
600
100
75
50
25
0
Time to 50% drop (min)
194 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
stability provided by opioids is greatly diminished in 
actual practice when other anesthetic drugs, includ-
ing nitrous oxide, benzodiazepines, propofol, or 
volatile agents, are typically added. Th e end result of 
polypharmacy can include myocardial depression. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Opioids depress ventilation, particularly respiratory 
rate. Th us, monitoring of respiratory rate provides a 
convenient, simple way of detecting early respiratory 
depression in patients receiving opioid analgesia. 
Opioids increase the partial pressure of carbon diox-
ide (Pa co 2 ) and blunt the response to a CO 2 chal-
lenge, resulting in a shift  of the CO 2 response curve 
downward and to the right ( Figure 10–3 ). Th ese 
eff ects result from opioid binding to neurons in the 
respiratory centers of the brainstem.  Th e apneic 
threshold—the greatest Pa co 2 at which a patient 
remains apneic—rises, and hypoxic drive is 
decreased . Morphine and meperidine can cause 
histamine-induced bronchospasm in susceptible 
patients.  Rapid administration of larger 
doses of opioids (particularly fentanyl, suf-
entanil, remifentanil, and alfentanil) can induce 
chest wall rigidity severe enough to prevent ade-
quate bag-and-mask ventilation . Th is centrally 
2
from normeperidine accumulation. However, both 
morphine and meperidine have been used safely 
and successfully in patients with kidney failure. 
Metabolites of sufentanil are excreted in urine and 
bile. Th e main metabolite of remifentanil is elimi-
nated in urine, is several thousand times less potent 
than its parent compound, and thus is unlikely to 
produce any clinical opioid eff ects. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 In general, opioids have few direct eff ects on the heart. 
Meperidine tends to increase heart rate (it is structur-
ally similar to atropine and was originally synthe-
sized as an atropine replacement), whereas larger 
doses of morphine, fentanyl, sufentanil, remifentanil, 
and alfentanil are associated with a vagus nerve– 
mediated bradycardia. With the exception of meperi-
dine (and only then at very large doses), the opioids 
do not depress cardiac contractility provided they are 
administered alone (which is almost never the circum-
stance in surgical anesthetic settings). Nonetheless, 
arterial blood pressure oft en falls as a result of bra-
dycardia, venodilation, and decreased sympathetic 
refl exes, sometimes requiring vasopressor support. 
Th ese eff ects are more pronounced when opioids are 
administered in combination with benzodiazepines, 
in which case drugs such as sufentanil and fentanyl 
can be associated with reduced cardiac output. Bolus 
doses of meperidine, hydromorphone, and morphine 
evoke histamine release in some individuals that can 
lead to profound drops in systemic vascular resistance 
and arterial blood pressure. Th e potential hazards of 
histamine release can be minimized in susceptible 
patients by infusing opioids slowly or by pretreatment 
with H 1 and H 2 antagonists, or both. Th e end eff ects of 
histamine release can be reversed by infusion of intra-
venous fl uid and vasopressors. 
 Intraoperative hypertension during large-
dose opioid anesthesia or nitrous oxide–opioid 
anesthesia is common. Such hypertension is oft en 
attributed to inadequate anesthetic depth, thus it is 
conventionally treated by the addition of other anes-
thetic agents (benzodiazepines, propofol, or potent 
inhaled agents). If depth of anesthesia is adequate 
and hypertension persists, vasodilators or other 
antihypertensives may be used. Th e inherent cardiac 
PaCO2
Before morphine sulfate
After morphine sulfate
Alveolar ventilation (L/min)
40
50
60
70
10
15
20
25
30
5
 FIGURE 103  Opioids depress ventilation. This 
is graphically displayed by a shift of the CO 2 curve 
downward and to the right. 
 
CHAPTER 10 Analgesic Agents
195
dosing of opioids or infusion of large doses of remi-
fentanil during general anesthesia can produce the 
phenomenon of opioid-induced tolerance. Repeated 
dosing of opioids will reliably produce tolerance, a 
phenomenon in which larger doses are required to 
produce the same response. Th is is not the same as 
physical dependence or addiction, which may also 
be associated with repeated opioid administration. 
 Prolonged dosing of opioids can also produce 
“opioid-induced 
hyperalgesia,” 
in 
which 
patients become more sensitive to painful stimuli. 
Infusion of large doses of (in particular) remifent-
anil during general anesthesia can produce acute 
tolerance, in which much larger than usual doses of 
opioids will be required for postoperative analgesia. 
Relatively large doses of opioids are required to ren-
der patients unconscious ( Table 10–3 ). Regardless 
of the dose, however, opioids will not reliably pro-
duce amnesia. Parenteral opioids have been the 
mainstay of pain control for more than a century. 
Th e relatively recent use of opioids in epidural and 
intrathecal spaces has revolutionized acute and 
chronic pain management (see Chapters 47 and 48). 
 Unique among the commonly used opioids, 
meperidine has minor local anesthetic qualities, par-
ticularly when administered into the subarachnoid 
space. Meperidine’s clinical use as a local anesthetic 
has been limited by its relatively low potency and 
propensity to cause typical opioid side eff ects (nau-
sea, sedation, and pruritus) at the doses required to 
induce local anesthesia.  Intravenous meperidine 
(10–25 mg) is more eff ective than morphine or 
fentanyl for decreasing shivering in the postanes-
thetic care unit and meperidine appears to be the 
best agent for this indication . 
 D. Gastrointestinal 
 Opioids slow gastrointestinal motility by binding to 
opioid receptors in the gut and reducing peristalsis. 
Biliary colic may result from opioid-induced con-
traction of the sphincter of Oddi. Biliary spasm, 
which can mimic a common bile duct stone on 
cholangiography, is reversed with the opioid 
antagonist naloxone or glucagon. Patients receiv-
ing long-term opioid therapy (eg, for cancer pain) 
usually become tolerant to many of the side eff ects 
but rarely to constipation. Th is is the basis for 
3
mediated muscle contraction is eff ectively treated 
with neuromuscular blocking agents. Th is problem 
is rarely seen now that large-dose opioid anesthesia 
is less oft en used in cardiovascular anesthesia prac-
tice. Opioids can eff ectively blunt the bronchocon-
strictive response to airway stimulation such as 
occurs during tracheal intubation. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Th e eff ects of opioids on cerebral perfusion and 
intracranial pressure must be separated from any 
eff ects of opioids on Pa co 2 . In general, opioids reduce 
cerebral oxygen consumption, cerebral blood fl ow, 
cerebral blood volume, and intracranial pressure, 
but to a much lesser extent than barbiturates, pro-
pofol, or benzodiazepines. Th ese eff ects will occur 
during maintenance of normocarbia by artifi cial 
ventilation; however, there are some reports of mild—
but transient and almost certainly unimportant—
increases in cerebral artery blood fl ow velocity and 
intracranial pressure following opioid boluses in 
patients with brain tumors or head trauma. If com-
bined with hypotension, the resulting fall in cerebral 
perfusion pressure  could be deleterious to patients 
with abnormal intracranial pressure–volume rela-
tionships. Nevertheless, the important clinical 
message is that any trivial opioid-induced increase 
in intracranial pressure would likely be much less 
important than the much more likely large increases 
in intracranial pressure associated with intubation 
that might be observed in an inadequately anesthe-
tized patient (from whom opioids were withheld). 
Opioids usually have almost no eff ects on the elec-
troencephalogram (EEG), although large doses are 
associated with slow δ-wave activity. Th ere are curi-
ous sporadic case reports that large doses of fentanyl 
may rarely cause seizure activity; however, some of 
these apparent seizures have been retrospectively 
diagnosed as severe opioid-induced muscle rigidity. 
EEG activation and seizures have been associated 
with the meperidine metabolite normeperidine, as 
previously noted. 
 Stimulation of the medullary chemoreceptor 
trigger zone is responsible for opioid-induced nausea 
and vomiting. Curiously, nausea and vomiting are 
more common following smaller (analgesic) than very 
large (anesthetic) doses of opioids. Prolonged oral 
196 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
in hypertension, hypotension, hyperpyrexia, coma, 
or respiratory arrest. Th e cause of this catastrophic 
interaction is incompletely understood. (Th e results 
of failure to appreciate this drug interaction in the 
celebrated Libby Zion case led to changes in work 
rules for house offi  cers in the United States.) 
 Propofol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and 
other central nervous system depressants can have 
synergistic cardiovascular, respiratory, and sedative 
eff ects with opioids. 
 Th e biotransformation of alfentanil may be 
impaired following treatment with erythromy-
cin, leading to prolonged sedation and respiratory 
depression. 
 CYCLOOXYGENASE 
INHIBITORS 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Many over-the-counter nonsteroidal antiinfl amma-
tory agents (NSAIDs) work through inhibition of 
cyclooxygenase (COX), the key step in prostaglan-
din synthesis. COX catalyzes the production of pros-
taglandin H 1 from arachidonic acid. Th e two forms 
the recent development of the peripheral opioid 
antagonists methylnaltrexone and alvimopan, and 
for their salutary eff ects in promoting motility in 
patients with opioid bowel syndrome, those receiv-
ing chronic opioid treatment of cancer pain, and 
those receiving intravenous opioids aft er abdomi-
nal surgery. 
 E. Endocrine 
 Th e neuroendocrine stress response to surgi-
cal stimulation is measured in terms of the 
secretion of specifi c hormones, including catechol-
amines, antidiuretic hormone, and cortisol. Large 
doses of opioids (typically fentanyl or sufentanil) 
block the release of these hormones in response to 
surgery more completely than volatile anesthetics. 
Although much discussed, the actual clinical out-
come benefi t produced by attenuating the stress 
response, even in high-risk cardiac patients, remains 
speculative (and possibly nonexistent). 
 Drug Interactions 
 Th e combination of meperidine and monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors should be avoided as it may result 
4
 TABLE 103 Uses and doses of common opioids. 
Agent
Use
Route 1 
Dose 2 
Morphine
Postoperative analgesia
IM
IV
0.05–0.2 mg/kg
0.03–0.15 mg/kg
Hydromorphone
Postoperative analgesia
IM
IV
0.02–0.04 mg/kg
0.01–0.02 mg/kg
Fentanyl
Intraoperative anesthesia
Postoperative analgesia
IV
IV
2–50 mcg/kg
0.5–1.5 mcg/kg
Sufentanil
Intraoperative anesthesia
IV
0.25–20 mcg/kg
Alfentanil
Intraoperative anesthesia
Loading dose
Maintenance infusion
IV
IV
8–100 mcg/kg
0.5–3 mcg/kg/min
Remifentanil
Intraoperative anesthesia
Loading dose
Maintenance infusion
Postoperative analgesia/sedation
IV
IV
IV
1.0 mcg/kg
0.5–20 mcg/kg/min
0.05–0.3 mcg/kg/min
 1 IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
 2 Note: The wide range of opioid doses reﬂ ects a large therapeutic index and depends upon which other anesthetics are simultaneously adminis-
tered. For obese patients, dose should be based on ideal body weight or lean body mass, not total body weight. Tolerance can develop rapidly (ie, 
within 2 h) during IV infusion of opioids, necessitating higher infusion rates. Dose correlates with other variables besides body weight that need to 
be considered (eg, age). The relative potencies of fentanyl, sufentanil, and alfentanil are estimated to be 1:9:1/7.
 
CHAPTER 10 Analgesic Agents
197
into salicylic acids (eg, aspirin), acetic acid deriva-
tives (eg, ketorolac), propionic acid derivatives (eg, 
ibuprofen), heterocyclics (eg, celecoxib), and oth-
ers. Th us a conventional discussion of structure to 
potency (and other factors) is not useful for these 
chemicals, other than to note that the heterocyclics 
tend to be the compounds with the greatest selectiv-
ity for the COX-2 rather than COX-1 form of the 
enzyme. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption 
 All COX inhibitors (save for ketorolac) are well 
absorbed aft er oral administration and all will typi-
cally achieve their peak blood concentrations in less 
than 3 hours. Some COX inhibitors are formulated 
for topical application (eg, as a gel to be applied over 
joints or as liquid drops to be instilled on the eye). 
 B. Distribution 
 Aft er absorption, COX inhibitors are highly bound 
by plasma proteins, chiefl y albumin. Th eir lipid sol-
ubility allows them to readily permeate the blood–
brain barrier to produce a central analgesia and 
antipyresis, and to penetrate joint spaces to produce 
(with the exception of acetaminophen) an antiin-
fl ammatory eff ect. 
 C. Biotransformation 
 Most COX inhibitors undergo hepatic biotransfor-
mation. Th e agent with the most notable metabolite 
is acetaminophen which at toxic, increased doses 
yields suffi  ciently large concentrations of  N -acetyl-
p -benzoquinone imine to produce hepatic failure. 
 D. Excretion 
 Nearly all COX inhibitors are excreted in urine aft er 
biotransformation. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 COX inhibitors do not act directly on the cardio-
vascular system. Any cardiovascular eff ects result 
from the actions of these agents on coagulation. 
Prostaglandins maintain the patency of the ductus 
arteriosus, thus prostaglandin inhibitors have been 
administered to neonates to promote closure of a 
persistently patent ductus arteriosus. 
of the enzyme, COX-1 and COX-2, have diff ering 
distribution in tissue. COX-1 receptors are widely 
distributed throughout the body, including the gut 
and platelets. COX-2 is produced in response to 
infl ammation. 
 COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes diff er further in 
the size of their binding sites: the COX-2 site can 
accommodate larger molecules that are restricted 
from binding at the COX-1 site. Th is distinction is 
in part responsible for selective COX-2 inhibition. 
Agents that inhibit COX nonselectively (eg, aspirin) 
will control fever, infl ammation, pain, and throm-
bosis. COX-2 selective agents (eg, acetaminophen 
[paracetamol], celecoxib, etoricoxib) can be used 
perioperatively without concerns about platelet 
inhibition or gastrointestinal upset. Curiously, while 
COX-1 inhibition decreases thrombosis, selective 
COX-2 inhibition increases the risk of heart attack, 
thrombosis, and stroke. 
 Aspirin, the fi rst of the so-called NSAIDs, for-
merly was used as an antipyretic and analgesic. 
Now it is used almost exclusively for prevention of 
thrombosis in susceptible individuals or for treat-
ment of acute myocardial infarction.  Aspirin is 
unique in that it irreversibly inhibits COX-1 
by acetylating a serine residue in the enzyme. Th e 
irreversible nature of its inhibition underlies the 
nearly 1-week duration of its clinical eff ects (eg, 
return of platelet aggregation to normal) aft er drug 
discontinuation. 
 Th e fi rst relatively selective COX-2 agent to 
be developed was acetaminophen (paracetamol). 
Curiously, this agent, while eff ective for analge-
sia, produces almost no eff ects on infl ammation 
relative to other COX-2 selective agents. With few 
exceptions, the COX inhibitors are oral agents. 
Acetaminophen and ketorolac are available in an 
intravenous form for perioperative use. 
 Multimodal analgesia typically includes the use 
of COX inhibitors, regional or local anesthesia tech-
niques, and other approaches aimed at reducing the 
requirement for opioids in postoperative patients. 
Th e hope is that reduced exposure to opioids will has-
ten and improve recovery from surgical procedures. 
 Structure–Activity Relationships 
 Th e COX enzyme is inhibited by an unusually 
diverse group of compounds that can be grouped 
5
198 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Brunton LL, Chabner BA, Knollmann BC (Eds): 
 Goodman & Gilman’s Th e Pharmacological Basis 
of Th erapeutics , 12th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2010: 
Chaps 18, 34. 
 Chu LF, Angst MS, Clark D: Opioid-induced hyperalgesia 
in humans: Molecular mechanisms and clinical 
considerations. Clin J Pain 2008;24:479. 
 Jahr JS, Lee VK: Intravenous acetaminophen. Anesthesiol 
Clin 2010;28:619. 
 Myles PS, Power I: Clinical update: Postoperative 
analgesia. Lancet 2007;369:810. 
 Parvizi J, Miller AG, Gandhi K: Multimodal pain 
management aft er total joint arthroplasty. J Bone Joint 
Surg Am 2011;93:1075. 
 B. Respiratory 
 At appropriate clinical doses, none of the COX 
inhibitors have eff ects on respiration or lung func-
tion. Aspirin overdosage has complex eff ects on 
acid–base balance and respiration. 
 C. Gastrointestinal 
 Th e classical complication of COX-1 inhibition 
is gastrointestinal upset. In its most extreme form 
this can cause upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Both 
complications result from direct actions of the drug, 
in the former case, on protective eff ects of prosta-
glandins in the mucosa, and in the latter case, on 
the combination of mucosal eff ects and inhibition of 
platelet aggregation. 
 Acetaminophen abuse or overdosage is a 
common cause of fulminant hepatic failure result-
ing in need for hepatic transplantation in western 
societies. 
 199
 Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agents 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 It is important to realize that muscle 
relaxation does not ensure unconsciousness, 
amnesia, or analgesia . 
 Depolarizing muscle relaxants act as 
acetylcholine (ACh) receptor agonists, 
whereas nondepolarizing muscle relaxants 
function as competitive antagonists . 
 Because depolarizing muscle relaxants are 
not metabolized by acetylcholinesterase, 
they diﬀ use away from the neuromuscular 
junction and are hydrolyzed in the 
plasma and liver by another enzyme, 
pseudocholinesterase (nonspeciﬁ c 
cholinesterase, plasma cholinesterase, or 
butyrylcholinesterase) . 
 With the exception of mivacurium, 
nondepolarizing agents are not signiﬁ cantly 
metabolized by either acetylcholinesterase 
or pseudocholinesterase. Reversal of their 
blockade depends on redistribution, gradual 
metabolism, and excretion of the relaxant by 
the body, or administration of speciﬁ c reversal 
agents (eg, cholinesterase inhibitors) that 
inhibit acetylcholinesterase enzyme activity . 
 Muscle relaxants owe their paralytic 
properties to mimicry of ACh. For example, 
succinylcholine consists of two joined ACh 
molecules . 
 Compared with patients with low enzyme 
levels or heterozygous atypical enzyme 
in whom blockade duration is doubled or 
1
2
3
4
5
6
tripled, patients with homozygous atypical 
enzyme will have a very long blockade 
(eg, 4–8 h) following succinylcholine 
administration . 
 Succinylcholine is considered 
contraindicated in the routine management 
of children and adolescents because of the 
risk of hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, and 
cardiac arrest in children with undiagnosed 
myopathies . 
 Normal muscle releases enough 
potassium during succinylcholine-induced 
depolarization to raise serum potassium 
by 0.5 mEq/L. Although this is usually 
insigniﬁ cant in patients with normal baseline 
potassium levels, a life-threatening potassium 
elevation is possible in patients with 
burn injury, massive trauma, neurological 
disorders, and several other conditions . 
 Doxacurium, pancuronium, vecuronium, 
and pipecuronium are partially excreted by 
the kidneys, and their action is prolonged in 
patients with renal failure . 
 Cirrhotic liver disease and chronic renal 
failure often result in an increased volume 
of distribution and a lower plasma 
concentration for a given dose of water-
soluble drugs, such as muscle relaxants. 
On the other hand, drugs dependent on 
hepatic or renal excretion may demonstrate 
prolonged clearance. Thus, depending on 
7
8
9
10
—Continued next page
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
11
200 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
Continued—
the drug, a greater initial dose—but smaller 
maintenance doses—might be required in 
these diseases . 
 Atracurium and cisatracurium undergo 
degra dation in plasma at physiological pH 
and temperature by organ-independent 
Hofmann elimination. The resulting 
metabolites (a mono quaternary acrylate 
and laudanosine) have no intrinsic 
neuromuscular blocking eﬀ ects . 
 Hypertension and tachycardia may occur 
in patients given pancuronium. These 
cardiovascular eﬀ ects are caused by 
the combination of vagal blockade and 
11
12
catecholamine release from adrenergic 
nerve endings . 
 Long-term administration of vecuronium to 
patients in intensive care units has resulted 
in prolonged neuromuscular blockade (up 
to several days), possibly from accumulation 
of its active 3-hydroxy metabolite, changing 
drug clearance, or the development of a 
polyneuropathy . 
 Rocuronium (0.9–1.2 mg/kg) has an onset 
of action that approaches succinylcholine 
(60–90 s), making it a suitable alternative for 
rapid-sequence inductions, but at the cost 
of a much longer duration of action . 
13
14
muscle fi ber are separated by a narrow (20-nm) gap, 
the synaptic cleft . As a nerve’s action potential depo-
larizes its terminal, an infl ux of calcium ions through 
voltage-gated calcium channels into the nerve cyto-
plasm allows storage vesicles to fuse with the ter-
minal plasma membrane and release their contents 
 Skeletal muscle relaxation can be produced by deep 
inhalational anesthesia, regional nerve block, or 
neuromuscular blocking agents (commonly called 
 muscle relaxants ). In 1942, Harold Griffi  th pub-
lished the results of a study using an extract of cu-
rare (a South American arrow poison) during anes-
thesia. Following the introduction of succinylcholine 
as a “new approach to muscular relaxation,” these 
agents rapidly became a routine part of the anesthe-
siologist’s drug arsenal. However, as noted by 
Beecher and Todd in 1954: “[m]uscle relaxants giv-
en inappropriately may provide the surgeon with 
optimal [operating] conditions in . . . a patient [who] 
is paralyzed but not anesthetized—a state [that] is 
wholly unacceptable for the patient.”  In other 
words, muscle relaxation does not ensure un-
consciousness, amnesia, or analgesia. Th is chapter 
reviews the principles of neuromuscular transmis-
sion and presents the mechanisms of action, physi-
cal structures, routes of elimination, recommended 
dosages, and side eff ects of several muscle relaxants. 
 Neuromuscular Transmission 
 Association between a motor neuron and a mus-
cle cell  occurs at the neuromuscular junction 
( Figure 11–1 ). Th e cell membranes of the neuron and 
1
Nerve
terminal
ACh
receptors
Muscle
End plate
Axon
V
M
JF
AChE
ACh
Release site
 FIGURE 111  The neuromuscular junction. V, 
transmitter vesicle; M, mitochondrion; ACh, acetylcholine; 
AChE, acetylcholinesterase; JF, junctional folds.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Drachman DB: Myasthenia gravis. N Engl J Med 
1978;298:135.) 
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
201 
mature) junctional ACh receptor, another isoform 
contains a γ subunit instead of the ε subunit. Th is 
isoform is referred to as the fetal or immature recep-
tor because it is in the form initially expressed in 
fetal muscle. It is also oft en referred to as extrajunc-
tional because, unlike the mature isoform, it may be 
located anywhere in the muscle membrane, inside or 
outside the neuromuscular junction when expressed 
in adults. 
 Cations fl ow through the open ACh receptor 
channel (sodium and calcium in; potassium out), 
generating an  end-plate potential . Th e contents of 
a single vesicle, a quantum of ACh (10 4 molecules 
per quantum), produce a miniature end-plate 
potential. Th e number of quanta released by each 
nerve impulse, normally at least 200, is very sensi-
tive to extracellular ionized calcium concentration; 
increasing calcium concentration increases the 
(acetylcholine [ACh]). Th e ACh molecules diff use 
across the synaptic cleft  to bind with nicotinic cholin-
ergic receptors on a specialized portion of the muscle 
membrane, the motor end-plate. Each neuromuscu-
lar junction contains approximately 5 million of these 
receptors, but activation of only about 500,000 recep-
tors is required for normal muscle contraction. 
 Th e structure of ACh receptors varies in diff er-
ent tissues and at diff erent times in development. 
Each ACh receptor in the neuromuscular junction 
normally consists of fi ve protein subunits; two α 
subunits; and single β, δ, and ε subunits. Only the 
two identical α subunits are capable of binding ACh 
molecules. If both binding sites are occupied by 
ACh, a conformational change in the subunits briefl y 
(1 ms) opens an ion channel in the core of the recep-
tor ( Figure 11–2 ). Th e channel will not open if ACh 
binds on only one site. In contrast to the normal (or 
 FIGURE 112  A: Structure of the 
ACh receptor. Note the two α subunits 
that actually bind ACh and the center 
channel.  B: Binding of ACh to receptors 
on muscle end-plate causes channel 
opening and ion ﬂ ux. 
A
B
Center
channel
Nicotinic
cholinergic
receptor
Ion
channel
ACh
Ca2+
Na+
K+
α
α
β
ε
δ
202 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
amount of ACh released and the number of recep-
tors subsequently activated will normally far exceed 
the minimum required for the initiation of an action 
potential. Th e nearly 10-fold margin of safety is lost 
in Eaton–Lambert myasthenic syndrome (decreased 
release of ACh) and myasthenia gravis (decreased 
number of receptors). 
 ACh is rapidly hydrolyzed into acetate and 
choline by the substrate-specifi c enzyme  acetylcho-
linesterase . Th is enzyme (also called specifi c cholin-
esterase or true cholinesterase) is embedded into the 
motor end-plate membrane immediately adjacent to 
the ACh receptors. Aft er unbinding ACh, the recep-
tors’ ion channels close, permitting the end-plate to 
repolarize. Calcium is resequestered in the sarco-
plasmic reticulum, and the muscle cell relaxes. 
 Distinctions Between 
Depolarizing & 
Nondepolarizing Blockade 
 Neuromuscular blocking agents are divided into 
two classes: depolarizing and nondepolarizing 
( Table 11–1 ). Th is division refl ects distinct dif-
ferences in the mechanism of action, response to 
peripheral nerve stimulation, and reversal of block. 
 MECHANISM OF ACTION 
 Similar to ACh, all neuromuscular blocking agents 
are quaternary ammonium compounds whose 
positively charged nitrogen imparts an affi  nity to 
number of quanta released. When enough recep-
tors are occupied by ACh, the end-plate potential 
will be suffi  ciently strong to depolarize the perijunc-
tional membrane. Voltage-gated sodium channels 
within this portion of the muscle membrane open 
when a threshold voltage is developed across them, 
as opposed to end-plate receptors that open when 
ACh is applied ( Figure 11–3 ). Perijunctional areas 
of muscle membrane have a higher density of these 
sodium channels than other parts of the membrane. 
Th e resulting action potential propagates along the 
muscle membrane and T-tubule system, opening 
sodium channels and releasing calcium from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Th is intracellular calcium 
allows the contractile proteins actin and myosin to 
interact, bringing about muscle contraction. Th e 
 FIGURE 113  Schematic of the sodium channel. The 
sodium channel is a transmembrane protein that can be 
conceptualized as having two gates. Sodium ions pass 
only when both gates are open. Opening of the gates is 
time dependent and voltage dependent. The channel 
therefore possesses three functional states. At rest, the 
lower gate is open but the upper gate is closed ( A ). 
When the muscle membrane reaches threshold voltage 
depolarization, the upper gate opens and sodium can 
pass ( B ). Shortly after the upper gate opens the time-
dependent lower gate closes ( C ). When the membrane 
repolarizes to its resting voltage, the upper gate closes 
and the lower gate opens ( A ). 
A
B
C
Membrane
Upper gate
Lower gate
Na+
 TABLE 111 Depolarizing and 
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
Depolarizing
Nondepolarizing
Short-acting
 Succinylcholine
Short-acting
 Gantacurium  1  
Intermediate-acting
 Atracurium
 Cisatracurium
 Vecuronium
 Rocuronium
Long-acting
 Pancuronium
  1  Not yet commercially available in the United States.
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
203
but a resistance to nondepolarizing relaxants (more 
receptors that must be blocked). In contrast, condi-
tions associated with fewer ACh receptors (eg, down- 
regulation in myasthenia gravis) demonstrate a 
resistance to depolarizing relaxants and an increased 
sensitivity to nondepolarizing relaxants. 
 OTHER MECHANISMS 
OF NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKADE 
 Some drugs may interfere with the function of the 
ACh receptor without acting as an agonist or antag-
onist. Th ey interfere with normal functioning of the 
ACh receptor binding site or with the opening and 
closing of the receptor channel. Th ese may include 
inhaled anesthetic agents, local anesthetics, and ket-
amine. Th e ACh receptor–lipid membrane interface 
may be an important site of action. 
 Drugs may also cause either closed or open 
channel blockade. During closed channel blockade, 
the drug physically plugs up the channel, prevent-
ing passage of cations whether or not ACh has acti-
vated the receptor. Open channel blockade is use 
dependent, because the drug enters and obstructs 
the ACh receptor channel only aft er it is opened by 
ACh binding. Th e clinical relevance of open channel 
blockade is unknown. Based on laboratory experi-
ments, one would expect that increasing the concen-
tration of ACh with a cholinesterase inhibitor would 
not overcome this form of neuromuscular blockade. 
Drugs that may cause channel block in the labora-
tory include neostigmine, some antibiotics, cocaine, 
and quinidine. Other drugs may impair the presyn-
aptic release of ACh. Prejunctional receptors play a 
role in mobilizing ACh to maintain muscle contrac-
tion. Blocking these receptors can lead to a fading of 
the train-of-four response. 
 REVERSAL OF 
NEUROMUSCULAR 
BLOCKADE 
 Because succinylcholine is not metabolized by 
acetylcholinesterase, it unbinds the receptor 
and diff uses away from the neuromuscular junction 
3
nicotinic ACh receptors. Whereas most agents have 
two quaternary ammonium atoms, a few have one 
quaternary ammonium cation and one tertiary 
amine that is protonated at physiological pH. 
 Depolarizing muscle relaxants very closely 
resemble ACh and readily bind to ACh receptors, 
generating a muscle action potential. Unlike ACh, 
however, these drugs are  not metabolized by ace-
tylcholinesterase, and their concentration in the 
synaptic cleft  does not fall as rapidly, resulting in a 
prolonged depolarization of the muscle end-plate. 
 Continuous end-plate depolarization causes 
muscle relaxation because opening of perijunctional 
sodium channels is time limited (sodium channels 
rapidly “inactivate” with continuing depolarization) 
( Figure 11–3 ). Aft er the initial excitation and open-
ing ( Figure 11–3B ), these sodium channels inacti-
vate ( Figure 11–3C ) and cannot reopen until the 
end-plate repolarizes. Th e end-plate cannot repolar-
ize as long as the depolarizing muscle relaxant con-
tinues to bind to ACh receptors; this is called a phase 
I block. Aft er a period of time, prolonged end-plate 
depolarization can cause poorly understood changes 
in the ACh receptor that result in a phase II block, 
which clinically resembles that of nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants. 
 Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants bind ACh 
receptors but are incapable of inducing the confor-
mational change necessary for ion channel opening. 
Because ACh is prevented from binding to its recep-
tors, no end-plate potential develops. Neuromuscular 
blockade occurs even if only one α subunit is 
blocked. 
 Th us, depolarizing muscle relaxants act as ACh 
receptor agonists, whereas nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants function as competitive antago-
nists. Th is basic diff erence in mechanism of action 
explains their varying eff ects in certain disease states. 
For example, conditions associated with a chronic 
decrease in ACh release (eg, muscle denervation 
injuries) stimulate a compensatory increase in the 
number of ACh receptors within muscle membranes. 
Th ese states also promote the expression of the imma-
ture (extrajunctional) isoform of the ACh receptor, 
which displays low channel conductance properties 
and prolonged open-channel time. Th is up- regulation 
causes an exaggerated response to depolarizing mus-
cle relaxants (with more receptors being depolarized), 
2
204 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Chapter  6 . Four patterns of electrical stimula-
tion with supramaximal square-wave pulses are 
considered: 
 Tetany: A sustained stimulus of 50–100 Hz, 
usually lasting 5 sec. 
 Single twitch: A single pulse 0.2 ms in duration. 
 Train-of-four: A series of four twitches in 2 s 
(2-Hz frequency), each 0.2 ms long. 
 Double-burst stimulation (DBS): Th ree short 
(0.2 ms) high-frequency stimulations separated 
by a 20-ms interval (50 Hz) and followed 750 ms 
later by two (DBS 3,2 ) or three (DBS 3,3 ) additional 
impulses. 
 Th e occurrence of fade, a gradual diminution 
of evoked response during prolonged or repeated 
nerve stimulation, is indicative of a nondepolar-
izing block ( Table 11–2 ), or of a phase II block if 
only succinylcholine has been administered. Fade 
may be due to a prejunctional eff ect of nondepolar-
izing relaxants that reduces the amount of ACh in 
the nerve terminal available for release during stim-
ulation (blockade of ACh mobilization). Adequate 
clinical recovery correlates well with the absence of 
fade. Because fade is more obvious during sustained 
tetanic stimulation or double-burst stimulation 
than following a train-of-four pattern or repeated 
twitches, the fi rst two patterns are the preferred 
methods for determining adequacy of recovery 
from a nondepolarizing block. 
 Th e ability of tetanic stimulation during a par-
tial nondepolarizing block to increase the evoked 
response to a subsequent twitch is termed postte-
tanic potentiation. Th is phenomenon may relate to 
a transient increase in ACh mobilization following 
tetanic stimulation. 
 In contrast, a phase I depolarization block from 
succinylcholine does not exhibit fade during tetanus 
or train-of-four; neither does it demonstrate postte-
tanic potentiation. With longer infusions of suc-
cinylcholine, however, the quality of the block will 
sometimes change to resemble a nondepolarizing 
block (phase II block). 
 Newer quantitative methods of assessment of 
neuromuscular blockade, such as acceleromyog-
raphy, permit determination of exact train-of-four 
ratios, as opposed to subjective interpretations. 
Acceleromyography may reduce the incidence of 
to be hydrolyzed in the plasma and liver by another 
enzyme, pseudocholinesterase (nonspecifi c cholin-
esterase, plasma cholinesterase, or butyrylcholin-
esterase). Fortunately, this is a fairly rapid process, 
because no specifi c agent to reverse a depolarizing 
blockade is available. 
 4
With the exception of the discontinued drug 
mivacurium, nondepolarizing agents are not 
metabolized by either acetylcholinesterase or pseu-
docholinesterase. Reversal of their blockade 
depends on unbinding the receptor, redistribution, 
metabolism, and excretion of the relaxant by the 
body, or administration of specifi c reversal agents 
(eg, cholinesterase inhibitors) that inhibit acetyl-
cholinesterase enzyme activity. Because this inhibi-
tion increases the amount of ACh that is available at 
the neuromuscular junction and can compete with 
the nondepolarizing agent, clearly, the reversal 
agents are of no benefi t in reversing a depolarizing 
block. In fact, by increasing neuromuscular junc-
tion ACh concentration and inhibiting pseudocho-
linesterase-induced metabolism of succinylcholine, 
 cholinesterase inhibitors can prolong neuromuscular 
blockade produced by succinylcholine . Th e ONLY 
time neostigmine reverses neuromuscular block 
aft er succinylcholine is when there is a phase II 
block (fade of the train-of-four) AND suffi  cient 
time has passed for the circulating concentration of 
succinylcholine to be negligible. 
 Sugammadex, a cyclodextrin, is the fi rst selec-
tive relaxant-binding agent; it exerts its reversal 
eff ect by forming tight complexes in a 1:1 ratio with 
steroidal nondepolarizing agents (vecuronium, 
rocuronium,). Th is drug has been in use in the Euro-
pean Union for the past few years, but is not yet 
commercially available in the United States. 
 Th e newer neuromuscular blocking agents, 
such as gantacurium, which are still under investiga-
tion, show promise as ultrashort-acting nondepolar-
izing agents; they undergo chemical degradation by 
rapid adduction with L-cysteine. 
 RESPONSE TO PERIPHERAL 
NERVE STIMULATION 
 Th e use of peripheral nerve stimulators to moni-
tor  neuromuscular function is discussed in 
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
205
unexpected postoperative residual neuromuscular 
blockade. 
 Depolarizing 
Muscle Relaxants 
 SUCCINYLCHOLINE 
 Th e only depolarizing muscle relaxant in clinical use 
today is succinylcholine. 
 Physical Structure 
 Succinylcholine—also called diacetylcholine 
or suxamethonium—consists of two joined 
ACh molecules ( Figure 11–4 ). Th is structure under-
lies succinylcholine’s mechanism of action, side 
eff ects, and metabolism. 
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Th e popularity of succinylcholine is due to its 
rapid onset of action (30–60 s) and short duration 
5
 TABLE 112 Evoked responses during depolarizing (phase I and phase II) 
and nondepolarizing block. 
Train-of-four
Tetany
Double-burst stimulation
(DBS3,2)
Posttetanic potentiation
Constant but diminished
Fade
Fade
Constant but diminished
Fade
Fade
Constant but diminished
Fade
Fade
Absent
Present
Present
Normal Evoked Stimulus
Phase I
Phase II
Depolarizing Block
Nondepolarizing Block
206 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 FIGURE 114  Chemical structures of neuromuscular blocking agents. 
+N
N
OCCH3
O
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3CO
O
N+
+N
OCCH3
O
CH3
CH3CO
O
N+
+N
OCCH3
O
H3CCO
O
N
N+
N+
+N
O
O
H3C
H3C
CH3
OCH3
OCH3
H3C
CH3
(CH2)2CO(CH2)5OC(CH2)2
H2C
CH2
CH3
N+
+N
N+
CH3COO
CH2CH
CH3
CH3    N+    CH2CH2    O    C    CH2CH2    C    O    CH2CH2    N+    CH3
OCH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
OCH3
CH2
HO
O
O
H
H
H
HO
CH2
HO
H
N
O
H3CO
H3CO
OCH3
OCH3
H3CO
OCH3
O
O
CH3
CH3
CH3    C    O    CH2    CH2    N+    CH3
O
Succinylcholine
Acetylcholine
Pancuronium
Vecuronium
Pipecuronium
Tubocurarine
Rocuronium
Atracurium
of action (typically less than 10 min). Its rapid 
onset of action relative to other neuromuscular 
blockers is largely due to the relative overdose 
that is usually administered. Succinylcholine, like 
all neuromuscular blockers, has a small volume 
of distribution due to its very low lipid solubility, 
and this also underlies a rapid onset of action. As 
succinylcholine enters the circulation, most of it is 
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
207
patients with low enzyme levels or heterozygous 
atypical enzyme, patients with homozygous atypi-
cal enzyme will have a  very long blockade (eg, 
4–8 h) following administration of succinylcholine. 
Of the recognized abnormal pseudocholinesterase 
genes, the dibucaine-resistant (variant) allele, which 
produces an enzyme with 1/100 of normal affi  nity 
for succinylcholine, is the most common. Other 
variants include fl uoride-resistant and silent (no 
activity) alleles. 
 Dibucaine, a local anesthetic, inhibits normal 
pseudocholinesterase activity by 80%, but inhib-
its atypical enzyme activity by only 20%. Serum 
from an individual who is heterozygous for the 
atypical enzyme is characterized by an intermediate 
40% to 60% inhibition. Th e percentage of inhibi-
tion of pseudocholinesterase activity is termed the 
dibucaine number . A patient with normal pseu-
docholinesterase has a dibucaine number of 80; a 
homozygote for the most common abnormal allele 
will have a dibucaine number of 20. Th e dibucaine 
number measures pseudocholinesterase function, 
not the amount of enzyme. Th erefore, adequacy 
of pseudocholinesterase can be determined in the 
laboratory quantitatively in units per liter (a minor 
factor) and qualitatively by dibucaine number (the 
major factor).  Prolonged paralysis from succinyl-
choline caused by abnormal pseudocholinester-
ase (atypical cholinesterase) should be treated 
with continued mechanical ventilation and seda-
tion until muscle function returns to normal by 
clinical signs. Such unsedated patients do NOT 
appreciate unnecessary, repetitive use of nerve 
stimulation when all members of a department 
come by to confi rm the diagnosis . 
 Drug Interactions 
 Th e eff ects of muscle relaxants can be modifi ed by 
concurrent drug therapy ( Table 11–4 ). Succinyl-
choline is involved in two interactions deserving 
special comment. 
 A. Cholinesterase Inhibitors 
 Although cholinesterase inhibitors reverse non-
depolarizing paralysis, they markedly prolong a 
depolarizing phase I block by two mechanisms. 
By inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, they lead to a 
rapidly metabolized by pseudocholinesterase into 
succinylmonocholine. Th is process is so effi  cient 
that only a small fraction of the injected dose ever 
reaches the neuromuscular junction. As drug lev-
els fall in blood, succinylcholine molecules diff use 
away from the neuromuscular junction, limiting 
the duration of action. However, this duration of 
action can be prolonged by high doses, infusion 
of succinylcholine, or abnormal metabolism. Th e 
latter may result from hypothermia, reduced pseu-
docholinesterase levels, or a genetically aberrant 
enzyme. Hypothermia decreases the rate of hydro-
lysis. Reduced levels of pseudocholinesterase (mea-
sured as units per liter) accompany pregnancy, liver 
disease, renal failure, and certain drug therapies 
( Table 11–3 ). Reduced pseudocholinesterase lev-
els generally produce only modest prolongation of 
succinylcholine’s actions (2–20 min). 
 One in 25-30 patients of European extraction is 
a heterozygote with one normal and one abnormal 
(atypical) pseudocholinesterase gene, resulting in a 
slightly prolonged block (20–30 min). Even fewer 
(1 in 3000) patients have two copies of the most 
prevalent abnormal gene (homozygous atypical) 
that produce an enzyme with little or no affi  nity for 
succinylcholine.  In contrast to the doubling 
or tripling of blockade duration seen in 
6
 TABLE 113 Drugs known to decrease 
pseudocholinesterase activity. 
Drug
Description
Echothiophate
Organophosphate use for 
glaucoma
Neostigmine 
Pyridostigmine
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Phenelzine
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor
Cyclophosphamide
Antineoplastic agent
Metoclopramide
Antiemetic/prokinetic agent
Esmolol
β-Blocker
Pancuronium
Nondepolarizing muscle relaxant
Oral contraceptives
Various agents
208 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
that it is still a good choice for routine intubation 
in adults. Th e usual adult dose of succinylcholine 
for intubation is 1–1.5 mg/kg intravenously. Doses 
as small as 0.5 mg/kg will oft en provide accept-
able intubating conditions if a defasciculating dose 
of a nondepolarizing agent is not used. Repeated 
small boluses (10 mg) or a succinylcholine drip 
(1 g in 500 or 1000 mL, titrated to eff ect) can be 
used during surgical procedures that require brief 
but intense paralysis (eg, otolaryngological endos-
copies). Neuromuscular function should be fre-
quently monitored with a nerve stimulator to 
prevent overdosing and to watch for phase II block. 
Th e availability of intermediate-acting nondepolar-
izing muscle relaxants has reduced the popularity 
of succinylcholine infusions. In the past, these infu-
sions were a mainstay of ambulatory practice in the 
United States. 
 Because succinylcholine is not lipid soluble, it 
has a small volume of distribution. Per kilogram, 
infants and neonates have a larger extracellular space 
than adults. Th erefore, dosage requirements for 
higher ACh concentration at the nerve terminal, 
which intensifi es depolarization. Th ey also reduce 
the hydrolysis of succinylcholine by inhibiting pseu-
docholinesterase. Organophosphate pesticides, for 
example, cause an irreversible inhibition of acetyl-
cholinesterase and can prolong the action of succi-
nylcholine by 20–30 min. Echothiophate eye drops, 
used in the past for glaucoma, can markedly prolong 
succinylcholine by this mechanism. 
 B. Nondepolarizing Relaxants 
 In general, small doses of nondepolarizing relaxants 
antagonize a depolarizing phase I block. Because the 
drugs occupy some ACh receptors, depolarization 
by succinylcholine is partially prevented. 
 If enough depolarizing agent is administered 
to develop a phase II block, a nondepolarizer will 
potentiate paralysis. 
 Dosage 
 Because of the rapid onset, short duration, and low 
cost of succinylcholine, many clinicians believe 
 TABLE 114 Potentiation (+) and resistance (−) of neuromuscular blocking agents by other drugs. 
Drug
Eﬀ ect on 
Depolarizing 
Blockade
Eﬀ ect on 
Nondepolarizing 
Blockade
Comments
Antibiotics
+
+
Streptomycin, aminoglycosides, kanamycin, neomycin, 
colistin, polymyxin, tetracycline, lincomycin, clindamycin
Anticonvulsants
?
−
Phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone, sodium valproate
Antiarrhythmics
+
+
Quinidine, calcium channel blockers
Cholinesterase 
inhibitors
+
−
Neostigmine, pyridostigmine
Dantrolene
?
+
Used in treatment of malignant hyperthermia 
(has quaternary ammonium group)
Inhalational 
anesthetics
+
+
Volatile anesthetics
Ketamine
?
+
Local anesthetics
+
+
High doses only
Lithium carbonate
+
?
Prolongs onset and duration of succinylcholine
Magnesium sulfate
+
+
Doses used to treat preeclampsia and eclampsia of pregnancy
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
209
inconsequential in comparison to the eff ects of the 
induction agent and laryngoscopy. 
 Children are particularly susceptible to pro-
found bradycardia following administration of 
succinylcholine. Bradycardia will sometimes occur 
in adults when a second bolus of succinylcholine 
is administered approximately 3–8 min aft er the 
fi rst dose. Th e dogma (based on no real evidence) 
is that the succinylcholine metabolite, succinyl-
monocholine, sensitizes muscarinic cholinergic 
receptors in the sinoatrial node to the second 
dose of succinylcholine, resulting in bradycardia. 
Intravenous atropine (0.02 mg/kg in children, 
0.4  mg in adults) is normally given prophylacti-
cally to children prior to the fi rst and subsequent 
doses, and  usually before a second dose of succi-
nylcholine is given to adults. Other arrhythmias, 
such as nodal bradycardia and ventricular ectopy, 
have been reported. 
 B. Fasciculations 
 Th e onset of paralysis by succinylcholine is usually 
signaled by visible motor unit contractions called 
fasciculations. Th ese can be prevented by pretreat-
ment with a small dose of nondepolarizing relax-
ant. Because this pretreatment usually antagonizes 
a depolarizing block, a larger dose of succinyl-
choline is required (1.5 mg/kg). Fasciculations 
are typically not observed in young children and 
elderly patients. 
 C. Hyperkalemia 
 Normal muscle releases enough potassium 
during succinylcholine-induced depolariza-
tion to increase serum potassium by 0.5 mEq/L. 
Although this is usually insignifi cant in patients 
with normal baseline potassium levels, it can be life- 
threatening in patients with preexisting hyperkale-
mia. Th e increase in potassium in patients with burn 
injury, massive trauma, neurological disorders, and 
several other conditions ( Table 11–5 ) can be large 
and catastrophic. Hyperkalemic cardiac arrest can 
prove to be quite refractory to routine cardiopul-
monary resuscitation, requiring calcium, insulin, 
glucose, bicarbonate, and even cardiopulmonary 
bypass to support the circulation while reducing 
serum potassium levels. 
8
pediatric patients are oft en greater than for adults. 
If succinylcholine is administered  intramuscularly
to children, a dose as high as 4–5 mg/kg does not 
always produce complete paralysis. 
 Succinylcholine should be stored under refrig-
eration (2–8°C), and should generally be used 
within 14 days aft er removal from refrigeration and 
exposure to room temperature. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Clinical Considerations 
 Succinylcholine is a relatively safe drug—assuming 
that its many potential complications are under-
stood and avoided.  Because of the risk of 
hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, and cardiac 
arrest in children with undiagnosed myopathies, 
succinylcholine is considered relatively contraindi-
cated in the routine management of children and 
adolescent patients. Most clinicians have also aban-
doned the  routine use of succinylcholine for adults. 
Succinylcholine is still useful for rapid sequence 
induction and for short periods of intense paralysis 
because none of the presently available nondepolar-
izing muscle relaxants can match its very rapid onset 
and short duration. 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Because of the resemblance of muscle relaxants 
to ACh, it is not surprising that they aff ect cho-
linergic receptors in addition to those at the neu-
romuscular junction. Th e entire parasympathetic 
nervous system and parts of the sympathetic 
nervous system (sympathetic ganglions, adrenal 
medulla, and sweat glands) depend on ACh as a 
neurotransmitter. 
 Succinylcholine not only stimulates nicotinic 
cholinergic receptors at the neuromuscular junc-
tion, it stimulates all ACh receptors. Th e cardio-
vascular actions of succinylcholine are therefore 
very complex. Stimulation of nicotinic receptors in 
parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia, and mus-
carinic receptors in the sinoatrial node of the heart, 
can increase or decrease blood pressure and heart 
rate. Low doses of succinylcholine can produce neg-
ative chronotropic and inotropic eff ects, but higher 
doses usually increase heart rate and contractil-
ity and elevate circulating catecholamine levels. In 
most patients, the hemodynamic consequences are 
7
210 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
use of nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory drugs may 
reduce the incidence and severity of myalgias. 
 E. Intragastric Pressure Elevation 
 Abdominal wall muscle fasciculations increase 
intragastric pressure, which is off set by an increase 
in lower esophageal sphincter tone. Th erefore, 
despite being much discussed, there is no evidence 
that the risk of gastric refl ux or pulmonary aspira-
tion is increased by succinylcholine. 
 F. Intraocular Pressure Elevation 
 Extraocular muscle diff ers from other striated 
muscle  in that it has multiple motor end-plates 
on each cell. Prolonged membrane depolarization 
and contraction of extraocular muscles follow-
ing administration of succinylcholine transiently 
raise intraocular pressure and theoretically could 
compromise an injured eye. However, there is no 
evidence that succinylcholine leads to worsened 
outcome in patients with “open” eye injuries. Th e 
elevation in intraocular pressure is not always pre-
vented by pretreatment with a nondepolarizing 
agent. 
 G. Masseter Muscle Rigidity 
 Succinylcholine transiently increases muscle tone 
in the masseter muscles. Some diffi  culty may ini-
tially be encountered in opening the mouth because 
of incomplete relaxation of the jaw. A marked 
increase in tone preventing laryngoscopy is abnor-
mal and can be a premonitory sign of malignant 
hyperthermia. 
 H. Malignant Hyperthermia 
 Succinylcholine is a potent triggering agent in 
patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia, 
a hypermetabolic disorder of skeletal muscle (see 
 Chapter 52). Although some of the signs and symp-
toms of neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) 
resemble those of malignant hyperthermia, the 
pathogenesis is completely diff erent and there is no 
need to avoid use of succinylcholine in patients with 
NMS. 
 I. Generalized Contractions 
 Patients affl  icted with myotonia may develop myoc-
lonus aft er administration of succinylcholine. 
 Following denervation injuries (spinal cord 
 injuries, larger burns), the immature isoform of 
the ACh receptor may be expressed inside and out-
side the neuromuscular junction (up-regulation). 
Th ese extrajunctional receptors allow succinylcho-
line to eff ect widespread depolarization and exten-
sive potassium release. Life-threatening potassium 
release is  not reliably prevented by pretreatment with 
a nondepolarizer. Th e risk of hyperkalemia usually 
seems to peak in 7–10 days following the injury, but 
the exact time of onset and the duration of the risk 
period vary. Th e risk of hyperkalemia from succinyl-
choline is minimal in the fi rst 2 days aft er spinal cord 
or burn injury. 
 D. Muscle Pains 
 Patients who have received succinylcholine have 
an increased incidence of postoperative myal-
gia. Th e effi  cacy of nondepolarizing pretreatment 
is controversial. Administration of rocuronium 
(0.06–0.1 mg/kg) prior to succinylcholine has been 
reported to be eff ective in preventing fasciculations 
and reducing postoperative myalgias. Th e relation-
ship between fasciculations and postoperative myal-
gias is also inconsistent. Th e myalgias are theorized 
to be due to the initial unsynchronized contraction 
of muscle groups; myoglobinemia and increases in 
serum creatine kinase can be detected following 
administration of succinylcholine. Perioperative 
 TABLE 115 Conditions causing 
susceptibility to succinylcholine-induced 
hyperkalemia. 
 Burn injury 
 Massive trauma 
 Severe intraabdominal infection 
 Spinal cord injury 
 Encephalitis 
 Stroke 
 Guillain-Barré syndrome 
 Severe Parkinson’s disease 
 Tetanus 
 Prolonged total body immobilization 
 Ruptured cerebral aneurysm 
 Polyneuropathy 
 Closed head injury 
 Hemorrhagic shock with metabolic acidosis 
 Myopathies (eg, Duchenne’s dystrophy) 
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
211 
 Nondepolarizing 
Muscle Relaxants 
 Unique Pharmacological 
Characteristics 
 In contrast to depolarizing muscle relaxants, there 
is a wide selection of nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants ( Tables 11–6 and  11–7 ). Based on their 
chemical structure, they can be classifi ed as benzyl-
isoquinolinium, steroidal, or other compounds. It is 
oft en said that choice of a particular drug depends 
on its unique characteristics, which are oft en related 
to its structure; however, for most patients, the dif-
ferences among the intermediate-acting neuro-
muscular blockers are inconsequential. In general, 
steroidal compounds can be vagolytic, but this prop-
erty is most notable with pancuronium and clini-
cally unimportant with vecuronium or rocuronium. 
Benzylisoquinolines tend to release histamine. 
Because of structural similarities, an allergic history 
to one muscle relaxant strongly suggests the possi-
bility of allergic reactions to other muscle relaxants, 
particularly those in the same chemical class. 
 A. Suitability for Intubation 
 None of the currently available nondepolarizing 
 muscle relaxants equals succinylcholine’s rapid 
onset of action or short duration. However, the 
 J. Prolonged Paralysis 
 As discussed above, patients with reduced levels of 
normal pseudocholinesterase may have a longer 
than normal duration of action, whereas patients 
with atypical pseudocholinesterase will experience 
markedly prolonged paralysis. 
 K. Intracranial Pressure 
 Succinylcholine may lead to an activation of the 
electroencephalogram and slight increases in cere-
bral blood fl ow and intracranial pressure in some 
patients. Muscle fasciculations stimulate muscle 
stretch receptors, which subsequently increase 
cerebral activity. Th e increase in intracranial pres-
sure can be attenuated by maintaining good airway 
control and instituting hyperventilation. It can also 
be prevented by pretreating with a nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxant and administering intravenous lido-
caine (1.5–2.0 mg/kg) 2–3 min prior to intubation. 
Th e eff ects of intubation on intracranial pressure far 
outweigh any increase caused by succinylcholine, 
and succinylcholine is NOT contraindicated for 
rapid sequence induction of patients with intracra-
nial mass lesions or other causes of increased intra-
cranial pressure. 
 L. Histamine Release 
 Slight histamine release may be observed following 
succinylcholine in some patients. 
 TABLE 116 A summary of the pharmacology of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
Relaxant
Chemical 
Structure  1  
Metabolism
Primary 
Excretion
Onset  2  
Duration  3  
Histamine 
Release  4  
Vagal 
Blockade  5  
Atracurium
B
+++
Insignificant
++
++
+
0
Cisatracurium
B
+++
Insignificant
++
++
0
0
Pancuronium
S
+
Renal
++
+++
0
++
Vecuronium
S
+
Biliary
++
++
0
0
Rocuronium
S
Insignificant
Biliary
+++
++
0
+
Gantacurium
C
+++
Insignificant
+++
+
+
0
  1  B, benzylisoquinolone; S, steroidal; C, chlorofumarate.
  2  Onset: +, slow; ++, moderately rapid; +++, rapid.
  3  Duration: +, short; ++, intermediate; +++, long.
  4  Histamine release: 0, no eﬀ ect; +, slight eﬀ ect; ++, moderate eﬀ ect; +++, marked eﬀ ect.
  5  Vagal blockade: 0, no eﬀ ect; +, slight eﬀ ect; ++, moderate eﬀ ect.
212 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Th e introduction of short- and intermediate- 
acting agents has resulted in the greater use of priming 
doses. Th eoretically, giving 10% to 15% of the usual 
intubating dose 5 min before induction will occupy 
enough receptors so that paralysis will quickly follow 
when the balance of relaxant is administered. Use of 
a priming dose can produce conditions suitable for 
intubation as soon as 60 sec following administra-
tion of rocuronium or 90 sec following administra-
tion of other intermediate-acting nondepolarizers. 
A priming dose does not  usually lead to clinically 
signifi cant paralysis, which requires that 75% to 80% 
of the receptors be blocked (a neuromuscular mar-
gin of safety). In some patients, however, the prim-
ing dose produces distressing dyspnea, diplopia, or 
dysphagia; in such instances, the patient should be 
reassured, and induction of anesthesia should pro-
ceed without delay. Priming can additionally cause 
measureable deterioration in respiratory function 
(eg, decreased forced vital capacity) and may lead to 
oxygen desaturation in patients with marginal pul-
monary reserve. Th ese negative side eff ects are more 
common in older, sicker patients. 
 Muscle groups vary in their sensitivity to 
muscle relaxants. For example, the laryngeal 
onset of nondepolarizing relaxants can be quick-
ened by using either a larger dose or a priming dose. 
Th e ED 95 of any drug is the eff ective dose of a drug 
in 95% of individuals. For neuromuscular block-
ers, one oft en specifi es the dose that produces 95% 
twitch depression in 50% of individuals. One to two 
times the ED 95 or twice the dose that produces 95% 
twitch depression is usually used for intubation. 
Although a larger intubating dose speeds onset, it 
exacerbates side eff ects and prolongs the duration 
of blockade. For example, a dose of 0.15 mg/kg 
of pancuronium may produce intubating condi-
tions in 90 sec, but at the cost of more pronounced 
tachycardia—and a block that may be irreversible 
(by neostigmine) for more than 60 min. Th e conse-
quence of a long duration of action is the ensuing 
diffi  culty in completely reversing the blockade and 
a subsequent increased incidence of postoperative 
pulmonary complica tions.  As a general rule, the 
more potent the nondepolarizing muscle relax-
ant, the slower its speed of onset; the “explana-
tory dogma” is that greater potency necessitates 
a smaller dose, with fewer total drug molecules, 
which in turn, decreases the rate of drug binding 
opportunities at the neuromuscular junction. 
 TABLE 117 Clinical characteristics of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
Drug
ED 95 for Adductor 
Pollicis During Nitrous 
Oxide/Oxygen/Intravenous 
Anesthesia (mg/kg)
Intubation 
Dose 
(mg/kg)
Onset of Action 
for Intubating 
Dose (min)
Duration of 
Intubating 
Dose (min)
Maintenance 
Dosing by 
Boluses 
(mg/kg)
Maintenance 
Dosing by 
Infusion 
(µg/kg/min)
Succinylcholine
0.5
1.0
0.5
 5–10
0.15
2–15 mg/min
Gantacurium  1  
0.19
0.2
1–2
 4–10
N/A
—
Rocuronium
0.3
0.8
1.5
35–75
0.15
9–12
Mivacurium  2  
0.08
0.2
2.5–3.0
15–20
0.05
4–15
Atracurium
0.2
0.5
2.5–3.0
30–45
0.1
5–12
Cisatracurium
0.05
0.2
2.0–3.0
40–75
0.02
1–2
Vecuronium
0.05
0.12
2.0–3.0
45–90
0.01
1–2
Pancuronium
0.07
0.12
2.0–3.0
60–120
0.01
—
Pipecuronium  2  
0.05
0.1
2.0–3.0
80–120
0.01
—
Doxacurium  2  
0.025
0.07
4.0–5.0
90–150
0.05
—
  1  Not commercially available in the United States.
  2  No longer available in the United States.
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
213 
 inhalational anesthetic (desfl urane > sevofl urane  > 
isofl urane and enfl urane > halothane > N 2 O/O 2 /
narcotic) and the muscle relaxant employed (pan-
curonium > vecuronium and atracurium). 
 E. Potentiation by Other Nondepolarizers 
 Some combinations of nondepolarizers produce a 
greater than additive (synergistic) neuromuscular 
blockade. Th e lack of synergism (ie, the drugs are 
only additive) by closely related compounds (eg, 
vecuronium and pancuronium) lends credence to 
the theory that synergism results from slightly dif-
fering mechanisms of action. 
 F. Autonomic Side Eﬀ ects 
 In clinical doses, the nondepolarizers diff er in their 
relative eff ects on nicotinic and muscarinic choliner-
gic receptors. Some older agents (tubocurarine and, 
to a lesser extent, metocurine) blocked autonomic 
ganglia, reducing the ability of the sympathetic ner-
vous system to increase heart contractility and rate 
in response to hypotension and other intraoperative 
stresses. In contrast, pancuronium (and gallamine) 
block vagal muscarinic receptors in the sinoatrial 
node, resulting in tachycardia. All newer nondepo-
larizing relaxants, including atracurium, cisatracu-
rium, vecuronium, and rocuronium, are devoid of 
signifi cant autonomic eff ects in their recommended 
dosage ranges. 
 G. Histamine Release 
 Histamine release from mast cells can result in 
bronchospasm, skin fl ushing, and hypotension from 
peripheral vasodilation. Both atracurium and miva-
curium are capable of triggering histamine release, 
particularly at higher doses. Slow injection rates and 
H 1 and H 2 antihistamine pretreatment ameliorate 
these side eff ects. 
 H. Hepatic Clearance 
 Only pancuronium and vecuronium are metab-
olized to any signifi cant degree by the liver. 
Active  metabolites likely contribute to their clini-
cal eff ect. Vecuronium and rocuronium depend 
heavily on  biliary excretion. Clinically, liver failure 
prolongs pancuronium and rocuronium block-
ade, with less eff ect on vecuronium, and no eff ect 
on pipecuronium. Atracurium, cisatracurium, and 
muscles—whose relaxation is important during 
intubation—recover from blockade more quickly 
than the adductor pollicis, which is commonly mon-
itored by the peripheral nerve stimulator. 
 B. Suitability for Preventing Fasciculations 
 To prevent fasciculations and myalgias, 10% to 
15%  of a nondepolarizer intubating dose can be 
administered 5 min before succinylcholine. When 
administered only shortly before succinylcholine, 
myalgias, but not fasciculations, will be inhibited. 
Although most nondepolarizers have been suc-
cessfully used for this purpose, tubocurarine and 
rocuronium have been most popular (precurari-
zation); tubocurarine is no longer available in the 
United States. 
 C. Maintenance Relaxation 
 Following intubation, muscle paralysis may need to 
be maintained to facilitate surgery, (eg, abdominal 
operations), to permit a reduced depth of anesthe-
sia, or to control ventilation. Th ere is great variabil-
ity among patients in response to muscle relaxants. 
Monitoring neuromuscular function with a nerve 
stimulator helps to prevent over- and underdos-
ing and to reduce the likelihood of serious residual 
muscle paralysis in the recovery room. Maintenance 
doses, whether by intermittent boluses or con-
tinuous infusion ( Table 11–7 ), should be guided 
by the nerve stimulator  and clinical signs (eg, 
spontaneous respiratory eff orts or movement). In 
some instances, clinical signs may precede twitch 
recovery because of diff ering sensitivities to mus-
cle relaxants between muscle groups or technical 
problems with the nerve stimulator. Some return 
of neuromuscular transmission should be evident 
prior to administering each maintenance dose, if 
the patient needs to resume spontaneous ventila-
tion at the end of the anesthetic. When an infusion 
is used for maintenance, the rate should be adjusted 
at or just above the rate that allows some return of 
neuromuscular transmission so that drug eff ects 
can be monitored. 
 D. Potentiation by Inhalational Anesthetics 
 Volatile agents decrease nondepolarizer dosage 
requirements by at least 15%. Th e actual degree of 
this postsynaptic augmentation depends on both the 
214 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 D. Age 
 Neonates have an increased sensitivity to nondepo-
larizing relaxants because of their immature neu-
romuscular junctions ( Table 11-8 ). Th is sensitivity 
does not necessarily decrease dosage requirements, 
as the neonate’s greater extracellular space provides 
a larger volume of distribution. 
 E. Drug Interactions 
 As noted earlier, many drugs augment nondepo-
larizing blockade (see  Table 11–4 ). Th ey have mul-
tiple sites of interaction: prejunctional structures, 
postjunctional cholinergic receptors, and muscle 
membranes. 
 F. Concurrent Disease 
 Th e presence of neurological or muscular disease 
can have profound eff ects on an individual’s response 
to muscle relaxants ( Table 11–9 ).  Cirrhotic 
liver disease and chronic renal failure oft en 
result in an increased volume of distribution and a 
lower plasma concentration for a given dose of 
10
mivacurium, although extensively metabolized, 
depend on extrahepatic mechanisms. Severe liver 
disease does not signifi cantly aff ect clearance of atra-
curium or cisatracurium, but the associated decrease 
in pseudocholinesterase levels may slow the metabo-
lism of mivacurium. 
 I. Renal Excretion 
 Doxacurium, pancuronium, vecuronium, and 
pipecuronium are partially excreted by the 
kidneys, and their action is prolonged in patients 
with renal failure. Th e elimination of atracurium, 
cisatracurium, mivacurium, and rocuronium is 
independent of kidney function. 
 General Pharmacological 
Characteristics 
 Some variables aff ect all nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants. 
 A. Temperature 
 Hypothermia prolongs blockade by decreasing 
metabolism (eg, mivacurium, atracurium, and cisa-
tracurium) and delaying excretion (eg, pancuronium 
and vecuronium). 
 B. Acid–Base Balance 
 Respiratory acidosis potentiates the blockade of 
most nondepolarizing relaxants and antagonizes 
its reversal. Th is could prevent complete neuro-
muscular recovery in a hypoventilating postop-
erative patient. Confl icting fi ndings regarding the 
neuromuscular eff ects of other acid–base changes 
may be due to coexisting alterations in extracellu-
lar pH, intracellular pH, electrolyte concentrations, 
or structural diff erences between drugs (eg, mono-
quaternary versus bisquaternary; steroidal versus 
isoquinolinium). 
 C. Electrolyte Abnormalities 
 Hypokalemia and hypocalcemia augment a non-
depolarizing block. Th e responses of patients with 
hypercalcemia are unpredictable. Hypermagnese-
mia, as may be seen in preeclamptic patients being 
managed with magnesium sulfate (or aft er intra-
venous magnesium administered in the operating 
room), potentiates a nondepolarizing blockade by 
competing with calcium at the motor end-plate. 
9
 TABLE 118 Additional considerations in 
special populations. 
Pediatric
 Succinylcholine – should not be used routinely 
 Nondepolarizing agents – faster onset 
 Vecuronium – long-acting in neonates 
Elderly
Decreased clearance – prolonged duration, 
except with cisatracurium
Obese
 Dosage 20% more than lean body weight; 
onset unchanged 
 Prolonged duration, except with cisatracurium 
Hepatic 
disease
 Increased volume of distribution 
 Pancuronium and vecuronium – prolonged 
elimination due to hepatic metabolism and 
biliary excretion 
 Cisatracurium – unchanged 
 Pseudocholinesterase decreased; prolonged 
action may be seen with succinylcholine in 
severe disease 
Renal 
failure
 Vecuronium – prolonged 
 Rocuronium – relatively unchanged 
 Cisatracurium – safest alternative 
Critically 
ill
Myopathy, polyneuropathy, nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor up-regulation
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
215 
persistent diaphragmatic contractions can be dis-
concerting in the face of complete adductor pollicis 
paralysis. Glottic musculature is also quite resistant 
to blockade, as is oft en confi rmed during laryngos-
copy. Th e ED 95 for laryngeal muscles is nearly two 
times that for the adductor pollicis muscle. Good 
intubating conditions are usually associated with 
visual loss of the orbicularis oculi twitch response. 
 Considering the multitude of factors infl uenc-
ing the duration and magnitude of muscle relax-
ation, it becomes clear that an individual’s response 
to neuromuscular blocking agents should be moni-
tored. Dosage recommendations, including those in 
this chapter, should be considered guidelines that 
require modifi cation for individual patients. Wide 
variability in sensitivity to nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants is oft en encountered in clinical practice. 
water-soluble drugs, such as muscle relaxants. On 
the other hand, drugs dependent on hepatic or renal 
excretion may demonstrate prolonged clearance 
( Table 11-8 ). Th us, depending on the drug chosen, a 
greater initial (loading) dose—but smaller mainte-
nance doses—might be required in these diseases. 
 G. Muscle Groups 
 Th e onset and intensity of blockade vary among mus-
cle groups. Th is may be due to diff erences in blood 
fl ow, distance from the central circulation, or diff er-
ent fi ber types. Furthermore, the relative sensitivity 
of a muscle group may depend on the choice of mus-
cle relaxant. In general, the diaphragm, jaw, larynx, 
and facial muscles (orbicularis oculi) respond to 
and recover from muscle relaxation sooner than the 
thumb. Although they are a fortuitous safety feature, 
 TABLE 119 Diseases with altered responses to muscle relaxants. 
Disease
Response to Depolarizers
Response to Nondepolarizers
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Contracture
Hypersensitivity
 Autoimmune disorders 
  Systemic lupus erythematosus 
  Polymyositis 
  Dermatomyositis 
Hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity
Burn injury
Hyperkalemia
Resistance
Cerebral palsy
Slight hypersensitivity
Resistance
Familial periodic paralysis (hyperkalemic)
Myotonia and hyperkalemia
Hypersensitivity?
Guillain–Barré syndrome
Hyperkalemia
Hypersensitivity
Hemiplegia
Hyperkalemia
Resistance on affected side
Muscular denervation (peripheral nerve injury)
Hyperkalemia and contracture
Normal response or resistance
Muscular dystrophy (Duchenne type)
Hyperkalemia and malignant hyperthermia
Hypersensitivity
Myasthenia gravis
Resistance
Hypersensitivity
Myasthenic syndrome
Hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity
 Myotonia 
  Dystrophica 
  Congenital 
  Paramyotonia 
Generalized muscular contractions
Normal or hypersensitivity
 Severe chronic infection 
  Tetanus 
  Botulism 
Hyperkalemia
Resistance
216 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
resistance and an increase in cardiac index indepen-
dent of any histamine release. A slow rate of injec-
tion minimizes these eff ects. 
 B. Bronchospasm 
 Atracurium should be avoided in asthmatic patients. 
Severe bronchospasm is occasionally seen in patients 
without a history of asthma. 
 C. Laudanosine Toxicity 
 Laudanosine, a tertiary amine, is a breakdown prod-
uct of atracurium’s Hofmann elimination and has 
been associated with central nervous system excita-
tion, resulting in elevation of the minimum alveolar 
concentration and even precipitation of seizures. 
Concerns about laudanosine are probably irrelevant 
unless a patient has received an extremely large total 
dose or has hepatic failure. Laudanosine is metabo-
lized by the liver and excreted in urine and bile. 
 D. Temperature and pH Sensitivity 
 Because of its unique metabolism, atracurium’s 
duration of action can be markedly prolonged by 
hypothermia and to a lesser extent by acidosis. 
 E. Chemical Incompatibility 
 Atracurium will precipitate as a free acid if it is 
introduced into an intravenous line containing an 
alkaline solution such as thiopental. 
 F. Allergic Reactions 
 Rare anaphylactoid reactions to atracurium have 
been described. Proposed mechanisms include 
direct immunogenicity and acrylate-mediated 
immune activation. IgE-mediated antibody reac-
tions directed against substituted ammonium com-
pounds, including muscle relaxants, have been 
described. Reactions to acrylate, a metabolite of 
atracurium and a structural component of some 
dialysis membranes, have also been reported in 
patients undergoing hemodialysis. 
 CISATRACURIUM 
 Physical Structure 
 Cisatracurium is a stereoisomer of atracurium that 
is four times more potent. Atracurium contains 
approximately 15% cisatracurium. 
 ATRACURIUM 
 Physical Structure 
 Like all muscle relaxants, atracurium has a quater-
nary group; however, a benzylisoquinoline structure 
is responsible for its unique method of degradation. 
Th e drug is a mixture of 10 stereoisomers. 
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Atracurium is so extensively metabolized that its 
pharmacokinetics are independent of renal and 
hepatic function, and less than 10% is excreted 
unchanged by renal and biliary routes. Two separate 
processes are responsible for metabolism. 
 A. Ester Hydrolysis 
 Th is action is catalyzed by nonspecifi c esterases, not 
by acetylcholinesterase or pseudocholinesterase. 
 B. Hofmann Elimination 
 A spontaneous nonenzymatic chemical breakdown 
occurs at physiological pH and temperature. 
 Dosage 
 A dose of 0.5 mg/kg is administered intravenously 
for intubation. Aft er succinylcholine, intraoperative 
relaxation is achieved with 0.25 mg/kg initially, then 
in incremental doses of 0.1 mg/kg every 10–20 min. 
An infusion of 5–10 mcg/kg/min can eff ectively 
replace intermittent boluses. 
 Although dosage requirements do not signifi -
cantly vary with age, atracurium may be shorter act-
ing in children and infants than in adults. 
 Atracurium is available as a solution of 10 mg/
mL. It must be stored at 2–8°C, as it loses 5% to 10% 
of its potency for each month it is exposed to room 
temperature. At room temperature, it should be used 
within 14 days to preserve potency. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Clinical Considerations 
 Atracurium triggers dose-dependent histamine 
release that becomes signifi cant at doses above 
0.5 mg/kg. 
 A. Hypotension and Tachycardia 
 Cardiovascular side eff ects are unusual unless doses 
in excess of 0.5 mg/kg are administered. Atracurium 
may also cause a transient drop in systemic vascular 
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
217
resembles ACh enough to bind (but not activate) the 
nicotinic ACh receptor. 
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Pancuronium is metabolized (deacetylated) by the 
liver to a limited degree. Its metabolic products have 
some neuromuscular blocking activity. Excretion is 
primarily renal (40%), although some of the drug is 
cleared by the bile (10%). Not surprisingly, elimina-
tion of pancuronium is slowed and neuromuscular 
blockade is prolonged by renal failure. Patients with 
cirrhosis may require a larger initial dose due to an 
increased volume of distribution but have reduced 
maintenance requirements because of a decreased 
rate of plasma clearance. 
 Dosage 
 A dose of 0.08–0.12 mg/kg of pancuronium pro-
vides adequate relaxation for intubation in 2–3 min. 
Intraoperative relaxation is achieved by administer-
ing 0.04 mg/kg initially followed every 20–40 min 
by 0.01 mg/kg. 
 Children may require moderately larger doses 
of pancuronium. Pancuronium is available as a solu-
tion of 1 or 2 mg/mL and is stored at 2–8°C but 
may be stable for up to 6 months at normal room 
temperature. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Clinical Considerations 
 A. Hypertension and Tachycardia 
 Th ese cardiovascular eff ects are caused 
by the combination of vagal blockade and 
sympathetic stimulation. Th e latter is due to a 
combination of ganglionic stimulation, catechol-
amine release from adrenergic nerve endings, and 
decreased catecholamine reuptake. Large bolus 
doses of pancuronium should be given with cau-
tion to patients in whom an increased heart rate 
would be particularly detrimental (eg, coronary 
artery disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, aor-
tic stenosis). 
 B. Arrhythmias 
 Increased atrioventricular conduction and catechol-
amine release increase the likelihood of ventricular 
arrhythmias in predisposed individuals. Th e com-
bination of pancuronium, tricyclic antidepressants, 
12
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Like atracurium, cisatracurium undergoes 
degradation in plasma at physiological pH 
and temperature by organ-independent Hofmann 
elimination. Th e resulting metabolites (a mono-
quaternary acrylate and laudanosine) have no 
neuromuscular blocking eff ects. Because of cisatra-
curium’s greater potency, the amount of laudanosine 
produced for the same extent and duration of neu-
romuscular blockade is much less than with atra-
curium. Nonspecifi c esterases are not involved in 
the metabolism of cisatracurium. Metabolism and 
elimination are independent of renal or liver failure. 
Minor variations in pharmacokinetic patterns due 
to age result in no clinically important changes in 
duration of action. 
 Dosage 
 Cisatracurium produces good intubating conditions 
following a dose of 0.1–0.15 mg/kg within 2 min and 
results in muscle blockade of intermediate duration. 
Th e typical maintenance infusion rate ranges from 
1.0–2.0 mcg/kg/min. Th us, it is more potent than 
atracurium. 
 Cisatracurium should be stored under refrig-
eration (2–8°C) and should be used within 21 days 
aft er removal from refrigeration and exposure to 
room temperature. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Clinical Considerations 
 Unlike atracurium, cisatracurium does not pro-
duce a  consistent, dose-dependent increase in 
plasma histamine levels following administration. 
Cisatracurium does not alter heart rate or blood 
pressure, nor does it produce autonomic eff ects, 
even at doses as high as eight times ED 95 . 
 Cisatracurium shares with atracurium the pro-
duction of laudanosine, pH and temperature sensi-
tivity, and chemical incompatibility. 
 PANCURONIUM 
 Physical Structure 
 Pancuronium consists of a steroid ring on which two 
modifi ed ACh molecules are positioned (a bisquater-
nary relaxant). Th e steroid ring serves as a “spacer” 
between the two quaternary amines. Pancuronium 
11
218 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
of 0.04 mg/kg initially followed by increments of 
0.01 mg/kg every 15–20 min provides intraop-
erative relaxation. Alternatively, an infusion of 
1–2 mcg/kg/min produces good maintenance of 
relaxation. 
 Age does not aff ect initial dose requirements, 
although subsequent doses are required less fre-
quently in neonates and infants. Women seem 
to be approximately 30% more sensitive than 
men to vecuronium, as evidenced by a greater 
degree of blockade and longer duration of action 
(this has also been seen with pancuronium and 
rocuronium). Th e cause for this sensitivity may 
be related to gender-related diff erences in fat and 
muscle mass, protein binding, volume of distribu-
tion, or metabolic activity. Th e duration of action 
of vecuronium may be further prolonged in post-
partum patients due to alterations in hepatic blood 
fl ow or liver uptake. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Clinical Considerations 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Even at doses of 0.28 mg/kg, vecuronium is devoid 
of signifi cant cardiovascular eff ects. Potentiation 
of opioid-induced bradycardia may be observed in 
some patients. 
 B. Liver Failure 
 Although it is dependent on biliary excretion, the 
duration of action of vecuronium is usually not 
signifi cantly prolonged in patients with cirrho-
sis unless doses greater than 0.15 mg/kg are given. 
Vecuronium requirements are reduced during the 
anhepatic phase of liver transplantation. 
 ROCURONIUM 
 Physical Structure 
 Th is monoquaternary steroid analogue of vecuroni-
um was designed to provide a rapid onset of action. 
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Rocuronium undergoes no metabolism and is 
eliminated primarily by the liver and slightly by 
the kidneys. Its duration of action is not signifi -
cantly aff ected by renal disease, but it is modestly 
and halothane has been reported to be particularly 
arrhythmogenic. 
 C. Allergic Reactions 
 Patients who are hypersensitive to bromides may 
exhibit allergic reactions to pancuronium (pan-
curonium bromide). 
 VECURONIUM 
 Physical Structure 
 Vecuronium is pancuronium minus a quaternary 
methyl group (a monoquaternary relaxant). Th is 
minor structural change benefi cially alters side 
eff ects without aff ecting potency. 
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Vecuronium is metabolized to a small extent by the 
liver. It depends primarily on biliary excretion and 
secondarily (25%) on renal excretion. Although it is 
a satisfactory drug for patients with renal failure, its 
duration of action is somewhat prolonged. Vecuroni-
um’s brief duration of action is explained by its 
shorter elimination half-life and more rapid clear-
ance compared with pancuronium.  Long-term 
administration of vecuronium to patients in 
intensive care units has resulted in prolonged neuro-
muscular blockade (up to several days), possibly 
from accumulation of its active 3-hydroxy metabo-
lite, changing drug clearance, and in some patients, 
leading to the development of a polyneuropathy. 
Risk factors seem to include female gender, renal 
failure, long-term or high-dose corticosteroid ther-
apy, and sepsis. Th us, these patients must be closely 
monitored, and the dose of vecuronium carefully 
titrated. Long-term relaxant administration and the 
subsequent prolonged lack of ACh binding at the 
postsynaptic nicotinic ACh receptors may mimic a 
chronic denervation state and cause lasting receptor 
dysfunction and paralysis. Tolerance to nondepolar-
izing muscle relaxants can also develop aft er long-
term use. Fortunately, the use of unnecessary 
paralysis has greatly declined in critical care units. 
 Dosage 
 Vecuronium is equipotent with pancuronium, and 
the intubating dose is 0.08–0.12 mg/kg. A dose 
13
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
219
gallamine, alcuronium, rapacuronium, and deca-
methonium. Tubocurarine, the fi rst muscle relax-
ant used clinically, oft en produced hypotension 
and tachycardia through histamine release; its abil-
ity to block autonomic ganglia was of secondary 
importance. Histamine release could also produce 
or exacerbate bronchospasm. Tubocurarine is not 
metabolized signifi cantly, and its elimination is pri-
marily renal and secondarily biliary. Metocurine, 
a closely related agent, shares many of the side 
eff ects of tubocurarine. It is primarily dependent 
on renal function for elimination. Patients aller-
gic to iodine (eg, shellfi sh allergies) could exhibit 
hypersensitivity 
to 
metocurine 
preparations, 
as they contain iodide. Gallamine has the most 
potent vagolytic properties of any relaxant, and it 
is entirely dependent on renal function for elimi-
nation. Alcuronium, a long-acting nondepolarizer 
with mild vagolytic properties, is also primar-
ily dependent on renal function for elimination. 
Rapacuronium has a rapid onset of action, minimal 
cardiovascular side eff ects, and a short duration of 
action. It was withdrawn by the manufacturer fol-
lowing multiple reports of serious bronchospasm, 
including a few unexplained fatalities. Histamine 
release may have been a factor. Decamethonium 
was an older depolarizing agent. 
 More recently, doxacurium, pipecuronium, 
and mivacurium are no longer commercially avail-
able in the United States. Mivacurium is a benzyl-
isoquinolinium derivative, which is metabolized 
by pseudocholinesterase; therefore, its duration 
of action may be prolonged in pathophysiological 
states that result in low pseudocholinesterase lev-
els. Th e usual intubating dose is 0.2 mg/kg, with 
the steady state infusion rate being 4-10 mcg/kg/
min. Mivacurium releases histamine to about 
the same degree as atracurium; the resulting car-
diovascular eff ects can be minimized by slow 
injection. Doxacurium is a potent long-acting 
benzylisoquinolinium compound that is primarily 
eliminated by renal excretion. Adequate intubat-
ing conditions are achieved in 5 min with 0.05 mg/
kg. It is essentially devoid of cardiovascular and 
histamine-releasing side eff ects. Pipecuronium, 
on the other hand, is a bisquarternary steroidal 
compound similar to pancuronium, without the 
prolonged by severe hepatic failure and pregnancy. 
Because rocuronium does not have active metabo-
lites, it may be a better choice than vecuronium in 
the rare patient requiring prolonged infusions in 
the intensive care unit setting. Elderly patients may 
experience a prolonged duration of action due to 
decreased liver mass. 
 Dosage 
 Rocuronium is less potent than most other steroi-
dal muscle relaxants (potency seems to be inversely 
related to speed of onset). It requires 0.45–0.9 mg/kg 
intravenously for intubation and 0.15 mg/kg boluses 
for maintenance. A lower dose of 0.4 mg/kg may 
allow reversal as soon as 25 min aft er intubation. 
Intramuscular rocuronium (1 mg/kg for infants; 
2 mg/kg for children) provides adequate vocal 
cord and diaphragmatic paralysis for intuba-
tion, but not until aft er 3–6 min (deltoid injection 
has a faster onset than quadriceps), and can be 
reversed aft er about 1 hr. Th e infusion requirements 
for rocuronium range from 5–12 mcg/kg/min. 
Rocuronium can produce a prolonged duration of 
action in elderly patients. Initial dosage require-
ments are modestly increased in patients with 
advanced liver disease, presumably due to a larger 
volume of distribution. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Clinical Considerations 
 Rocuronium (at a dose of 0.9–1.2 mg/kg) has 
an onset of action that  approaches succinyl-
choline (60–90 s), making it a suitable alternative 
for rapid-sequence inductions, but at the cost of a 
much longer duration of action. Th is intermediate 
duration of action is comparable to vecuronium or 
atracurium. 
 Rocuronium (0.1 mg/kg) has been shown to be 
a rapid (90 s) and eff ective agent (decreased fascicu-
lations and postoperative myalgias) for precurariza-
tion prior to administration of succinylcholine. It 
has slight vagolytic tendencies. 
 OTHER RELAXANTS 
 Muscle relaxants, primarily of historical interest, 
are either no longer manufactured or not clini-
cally used. Th ey include tubocurarine, metocurine, 
14
220 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 What is your general approach to this diagnostic 
dilemma? 
 Clues to the solution of complex clinical prob-
lems are usually found in a pertinent review of the 
medical and surgical history, the history of drug 
ingestions, the physical examination, and labora-
tory results. In this case, the perioperative anes-
thetic management should also be considered . 
 What medical illnesses predispose a patient to 
delayed awakening or prolonged paralysis? 
 Chronic hypertension alters cerebral blood 
ﬂ ow autoregulation and decreases the brain’s 
tolerance to episodes of hypotension. Liver dis-
ease reduces hepatic drug metabolism and bili-
ary excretion, resulting in prolonged drug action. 
Reduced serum albumin concentrations increase 
free drug (active drug) availability. Hepatic 
encephalopathy can alter consciousness. Kidney 
disease decreases the renal excretion of many 
drugs. Uremia can also aﬀ ect consciousness. 
Diabetic patients are prone to hypoglycemia and 
hyperosmotic, hyperglycemic, and nonketotic 
coma. A prior stroke or symptomatic carotid bruit 
increases the risk of intraoperative cerebral vascu-
lar accident. Right-to-left heart shunts, particularly 
in children with congenital heart disease, allow air 
emboli to pass directly from the venous circulation 
to the systemic (possibly cerebral) arterial circula-
tion. A paradoxic air embolism can result in per-
manent brain damage. Severe hypothyroidism is 
associated with impaired drug metabolism and, 
rarely, myxedema coma . 
 Does an uneventful history of general anesthesia 
narrow the diﬀ erential? 
 Hereditary atypical pseudocholinesterase is 
ruled out by uneventful prior general anesthe-
sia, assuming succinylcholine was administered. 
Decreased levels of normal enzyme would not 
result in postoperative apnea unless the surgery 
was of very short duration. Malignant hyperther-
mia does not typically present as delayed awak-
ening, although prolonged somnolence is not 
vagolytic eff ects. Onset and duration of action 
are also similar to pancuronium; elimination is 
primarily through renal (70%) and biliary (20%) 
excretion. Th e usual intubating dose ranges from 
0.06-0.1 mg/kg; its pharmacologic profi le is rela-
tively unchanged in elderly patients. 
 NEWER MUSCLE RELAXANTS 
 Gantacurium belongs to a new class of nondepolar-
izing neuromuscular blockers called chlorofuma-
rates. It is provided as a lyophilized powder, because 
it is not stable as an aqueous solution; therefore, it 
requires reconstitution prior to administration. In 
preclinical trials, gantacurium demonstrated an 
ultrashort duration of action, similar to that of suc-
cinylcholine. Its pharmacokinetic profi le is explained 
by the fact that it undergoes nonenzymatic degrada-
tion by two chemical mechanisms: rapid formation 
of inactive cysteine adduction product and ester 
hydrolysis. At a dose of 0.2 mg/kg (ED 95 ), the onset 
of action has been estimated to be 1-2 min, with a 
duration of blockade similar to that of succinyl-
choline. Its clinical duration of action ranged from 
5-10 min; recovery can be accelerated by edropho-
nium, as well as by the administration of exogenous 
cysteine. Cardiovascular eff ects suggestive of his-
tamine release were observed following the use of 
three times the ED 95 dosage. 
 AV002 (CW002) is another investigational 
nondepolarizing agent. It is a benzylisoquinolinium 
fumarate ester-based compound with an intermedi-
ate duration of action that undergoes metabolism 
and elimination similar to that of gantacurium. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Delayed Recovery 
from General Anesthesia 
 A 72-year-old man has undergone general anes-
thesia for transurethral resection of the prostate. 
Twenty minutes after conclusion of the proce-
dure, he is still intubated and shows no evidence 
of spontaneous respiration or consciousness . 
 
CHAPTER 11 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents  
221 
increased incidence of postoperative neurological 
deﬁ cits. Subdural hematomas can occur in severely 
coagulopathic patients. Transurethral resection 
of the prostate is associated with hyponatremia 
from the dilutional eﬀ ects of absorbed irrigating 
solution . 
 What clues does a physical examination provide? 
 Pupil size is not always a reliable indicator 
of central nervous system integrity. Fixed and 
dilated pupils in the absence of anticholinergic 
medication or ganglionic blockade (eg, the for-
merly used hypotensive agent, trimethaphan), 
however, may be an ominous sign. Response to 
physical stimulation, such as a forceful jaw thrust, 
may diﬀ erentiate somnolence from paralysis. 
Peripheral nerve stimulation also diﬀ erentiates 
paralysis from coma . 
 What speciﬁ c laboratory ﬁ ndings would you 
order? 
 Arterial blood gases and serum electrolytes, 
particularly sodium, may be helpful. Computed 
tomographic scanning may be necessary if unre-
sponsiveness is prolonged. Increased concentra-
tions of inhalational agent provided by respiratory 
gas analysis, as well as processed electroencepha-
logram (EEG) measurements, may assist in deter-
mining if the patient is still under the eﬀ ects 
of anesthesia. Slow EEG signals can be indica-
tive of both anesthesia and cerebral pathology. 
Processed EEG awareness monitors can also be 
employed with the realization that low numbers 
on the bispectral index can be caused both by 
anesthetic suppression of the EEG and ischemic 
brain injury . 
 What therapeutic interventions should be 
considered? 
 Supportive mechanical ventilation should be 
continued in the unresponsive patient. Naloxone, 
ﬂ umazenil, and physostigmine may be indicated, 
depending on the probable cause of the delayed 
emergence, if drug eﬀ ects are suspected and rever-
sal is considered both safe and desirable . 
unusual. Uneventful prior anesthetics do not, how-
ever, rule out malignant hyperthermia. Persons 
unusually sensitive to anesthetic agents (eg, 
geriatric patients) may have a history of delayed 
emergence . 
 How do drugs that a patient takes at home aﬀ ect 
awakening from general anesthesia? 
 Drugs that decrease minimum alveolar con-
centration, such as methyldopa, predispose 
patients to anesthetic overdose. Acute ethanol 
intoxication decreases barbiturate metabolism 
and acts independently as a sedative. Drugs that 
decrease liver blood ﬂ ow, such as cimetidine, will 
limit hepatic drug metabolism. Antiparkinsonian 
drugs and tricyclic antidepressants have anti-
cholinergic side eﬀ ects that augment the seda-
tion produced by scopolamine. Long-acting 
sedatives, such as the benzodiazepines, can delay 
awakening . 
 Does anesthetic technique alter awakening? 
 Preoperative medications can aﬀ ect awaken-
ing. In particular, anticholinergics (with the excep-
tion of glycopyrrolate, which does not cross the 
blood–brain barrier), opioids, and sedatives can 
interfere with postoperative recovery. Patients 
with low cardiac output may have delayed absorp-
tion of intramuscular injections . 
 Intraoperative hyperventilation is a common 
cause of postoperative apnea. Because volatile 
agents raise the apneic threshold, the Pa CO 2  level at 
which spontaneous ventilation ceases, moderate 
postoperative hypoventilation may be required to 
stimulate the respiratory centers. Severe intraop-
erative hypotension or hypertension may lead to 
cerebral hypoxia and edema . 
 Hypothermia decreases minimum alveolar 
concentration, antagonizes muscle relaxation 
reversal, and limits drug metabolism. Arterial 
hypoxia or severe hypercapnia (Pa CO 2  > 70 mm Hg) 
can alter consciousness . 
 Certain surgical procedures, such as carotid 
endarterectomy, cardiopulmonary bypass, and 
intracranial procedures, are associated with an 
222 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Lee C: Structure, conformation, and action of 
neuromuscular blocking drugs. Br J Anaesth 
2001;87:755. 
 Naguib M, Brull SJ: Update on neuromuscular 
pharmacology. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:483. 
 Murphy G, Szokol J, Avram M, et al: Intraoperative 
acceleromyography monitoring reduces symptoms 
of muscle weakness and improves quality recovery 
in the early postoperative period. Anesthesiology 
2011;115:946. 
 Naguib M, Lien CA: Pharmacology of muscle relaxants 
and their antagonists. In:  Miller’s Anesthesia , 7th ed. 
Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Wiener-Kronish JP, Young 
WL (editors). Churchill Livingstone, 2010. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Donati F, Bevan D: Neuromuscular Blocking Agents. 
In:  Clinical Anesthesia , 6th ed. Barash PG, Cullen 
BF, Stoelting RK, Cahalan MK, Stock MC (editors). 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2009. 
 Foldes FF, McNall PG, Borrego-Hinojosa JM: 
Succinylcholine: a new approach to muscular 
relaxation in anesthesiology. N Engl J Med 
1952;247:596. 
 Fuchs-Buder, Schreiber JU, Meistelman C: Monitoring 
neuromuscular block: an update. Anaesthesia 
2009;64:82. 
 Hunter JM: New neuromuscular blocking drugs. N Engl J 
Med 1995;22:1691. 
 223
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Cholinesterase Inhibitors 
& Other Pharmacologic 
Antagonists to Neuromuscular 
Blocking Agents 
12
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The primary clinical use of cholinesterase 
inhibitors, also called anticholinesterases, is 
to reverse nondepolarizing muscle blockade . 
 Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter for 
the entire parasympathetic nervous system 
(parasympathetic ganglions and eﬀ ector 
cells), parts of the sympathetic nervous 
system (sympathetic ganglions, adrenal 
medulla, and sweat glands), some neurons 
in the central nervous system, and somatic 
nerves innervating skeletal muscle . 
 Neuromuscular transmission is blocked 
when nondepolarizing muscle relaxants 
compete with acetylcholine to bind 
to nicotinic cholinergic receptors. The 
cholinesterase inhibitors indirectly increase 
the amount of acetylcholine available  to 
compete with the nondepolarizing agent, 
thereby reestablishing neuromuscular 
transmission . 
 In excessive doses, acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors can paradoxically potentiate a 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade. 
In addition, these drugs prolong the 
depolarization blockade of succinylcholine . 
 Any prolongation of action of a 
nondepolarizing muscle relaxant from renal 
or hepatic insuﬃ  ciency will probably be 
accompanied by a corresponding increase 
1
2
3
4
5
in the duration of action of a cholinesterase 
inhibitor . 
 The time required to fully reverse a 
nondepolarizing block depends on several 
factors, including the choice and dose of 
cholinesterase inhibitor administered, the 
muscle relaxant being antagonized, and the 
extent of the blockade before reversal . 
 A reversal agent should be routinely given to 
patients who have received nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants unless full reversal can 
be demonstrated or the postoperative 
plan includes continued intubation and 
ventilation . 
 In monitoring a patient’s recovery from 
neuromuscular blockade, the suggested 
end points are sustained tetanus for 
5 sec in response to a 100-Hz stimulus in 
anesthetized patients or sustained head 
lift in awake patients. If neither of these 
end points is achieved, the patient should 
remain intubated and ventilation should 
be continued . 
 Sugammadex exerts its eﬀ ects by forming 
tight complexes in a 1:1 ratio with steroidal 
neuromuscular blocking agents. 
C ysteine causes inactivation of gantacurium 
via metabolic degradation and adduct 
formation . 
6
7
8
9
10
224 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Incomplete reversal of neuromuscular blocking 
agents and residual post-procedure paralysis are 
associated with morbidity; therefore, careful evalua-
tion of neuromuscular blockade and appropriate 
pharmacologic antagonism are strongly recom-
mended whenever muscle relaxants are adminis-
tered.  Th e primary clinical use of cholinesterase 
inhibitors, also called anticholinesterases, is to 
reverse nondepolarizing muscle blockade. Some of 
these agents are also used to diagnose and treat 
myasthenia gravis. More recently, newer agents, 
such as cyclodextrins and cysteine, with superior 
ability to reverse neuromuscular blockade from spe-
cifi c agents, are being investigated with promising 
results. Th is chapter reviews cholinergic pharmacol-
ogy and mechanisms of acetylcholinesterase inhibi-
tion and presents the clinical pharmacology of 
commonly used cholinesterase inhibitors (neostig-
mine, edrophonium, pyridostigmine, and physo-
stigmine). It concludes with a brief description and 
mechanisms of action of some unique reversal 
agents. 
 Cholinergic Pharmacology 
 Th e term cholinergic refers to the eff ects of the neu-
rotransmitter acetyl choline , as opposed to the adren-
ergic eff ects of nor adrenaline (norepinephrine). 
Acetylcholine is synthesized in the nerve terminal 
by the enzyme cholineacetyltransferase, which cata-
lyzes the reaction between acetylcoenzyme A and 
choline ( Figure 12–1 ). Aft er its release, acetylcho-
line is rapidly hydrolyzed by acetylcholinesterase 
(true cholinesterase) into acetate and choline. 
 Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter for the 
entire parasympathetic nervous system (para-
sympathetic ganglions and eff ector cells), parts of 
the sympathetic nervous system (sympathetic gan-
glions, adrenal medulla, and sweat glands), some 
neurons in the central nervous system, and somatic 
nerves innervating skeletal muscle ( Figure 12–2 ). 
 Cholinergic receptors have been subdivided 
into two major groups based on their reaction to 
the alkaloids muscarine and nicotine ( Figure 12–3 ). 
Nicotine stimulates the autonomic ganglia and skel-
etal muscle receptors (nicotinic receptors), whereas 
muscarine activates end-organ eff ector cells in 
1
2
bronchial smooth muscle, salivary glands, and the 
sinoatrial node (muscarinic receptors). Th e central 
nervous system has both nicotinic and muscarinic 
receptors. Nicotinic receptors are blocked by mus-
cle relaxants (also called neuromuscular blockers), 
and muscarinic receptors are blocked by anticho-
linergic drugs, such as atropine. Although nicotinic 
and muscarinic receptors diff er in their response to 
some agonists (eg, nicotine, muscarine) and some 
antagonists (eg, vecuronium vs atropine), they both 
respond to acetylcholine ( Table 12–1 ). Clinically 
available cholinergic agonists resist hydrolysis by 
cholinesterase. Methacholine and bethanechol are 
primarily muscarinic agonists, whereas carbachol 
has both muscarinic and nicotinic agonist activi-
ties. Methacholine by inhalation has been used as a 
provocative test in asthma, bethanechol is used for 
bladder atony, and carbachol may be used topically 
for wide-angle glaucoma. 
 When reversing neuromuscular blockade, the 
primary goal is to maximize nicotinic transmission 
with a minimum of muscarinic side eff ects. 
 FIGURE 121  The synthesis and hydrolysis of 
acetylcholine. 
Acetyl-CoA
+
+
Choline
acetyltransferase
Acetylcholinesterase
CH3
C
O
CH2
CH2
+N
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
Acetylcholine
Acetate
Choline
Choline
O
HO
CH2
CH2
+N
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
OH
O
 
CHAPTER 12 Cholinesterase Inhibitors & Other Pharmacologic Antagonists to Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
225
 MECHANISM OF ACTION 
 Normal neuromuscular transmission criti-
cally depends on acetylcholine binding to 
nicotinic cholinergic receptors on the motor end-
plate. Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants act by 
competing with acetylcholine for these binding 
sites, thereby blocking neuromuscular transmission. 
Reversal of blockade depends on gradual diff usion, 
redistribution, metabolism, and excretion from the 
body of the nondepolarizing relaxant ( spontaneous 
reversal ), oft en assisted by the administration of 
specifi c reversal agents ( pharmacological reversal ). 
Cholinesterase inhibitors  indirectly increase the 
amount of acetylcholine available to compete with 
the nondepolarizing agent, thereby reestablishing 
normal neuromuscular transmission. 
3
 FIGURE 122  The parasympathetic nervous system uses acetylcholine as a preganglionic and postganglionic 
neurotransmitter. 
Pelvic
nerves
226 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Cholinesterase inhibitors inactivate acetylcho-
linesterase by reversibly binding to the enzyme. 
Th e stability of the bond infl uences the duration 
of action. Th e electrostatic attraction and hydro-
gen bonding of edrophonium are short-lived; the 
 TABLE 121 Characteristics of cholinergic 
receptors. 
Nicotinic
Muscarinic
Location
Autonomic ganglia
  Sympathetic 
ganglia
  Parasympathetic 
ganglia
Skeletal muscle
Glands
 Lacrimal
 Salivary
 Gastric
Smooth muscle
 Bronchial
 Gastrointestinal
 Bladder
 Blood vessels
Heart
 Sinoatrial node
  Atrioventricular 
node
Agonists
Acetylcholine
Nicotine
Acetylcholine
Muscarine
Antagonists
Nondepolarizing 
relaxants
Antimuscarinics
 Atropine
 Scopolamine
 Glycopyrrolate
covalent bonds of neostigmine and pyridostigmine 
are longer lasting. 
Organophosphates , a special class of cholines-
terase inhibitors, form very stable, irreversible bonds 
to the enzyme. Th ey are used in ophthalmology and 
more commonly as pesticides. Th e clinical duration 
of the cholinesterase inhibitors used in anesthesia, 
however, is probably most infl uenced by the rate of 
drug disappearance from the plasma. Diff erences in 
duration of action can be overcome by dosage adjust-
ments. Th us, the normally short duration of action of 
edrophonium can be partially overcome by increas-
ing the dosage. Cholinesterase inhibitors are also used 
in the diagnosis and treatment of myasthenia gravis. 
 Mechanisms of action other than acetylcholin-
esterase inactivation may contribute to the restora-
tion of neuromuscular function. Edrophonium 
seems to have prejunctional eff ects that enhance the 
release of acetylcholine. Neostigmine has a direct 
(but weak) agonist eff ect on nicotinic receptors. 
Acetylcholine mobilization and release by the nerve 
may also be enhanced (a presynaptic mechanism). 
 In excessive doses, acetylcholinesterase inhibi-
tors paradoxically potentiate a nondepolariz-
ing neuromuscular blockade. Standard dogma states 
that neostigmine in high doses may cause recep-
tor channel blockade; however, clinical evidence 
of this is lacking. In addition, these drugs prolong 
the depolarization blockade of succinylcholine. 
Two mechanisms may explain this latter eff ect: an 
increase in acetylcholine (which increases motor 
end-plate depolarization) and inhibition of pseu-
docholinesterase activity. Neostigmine and to some 
extent pyridostigmine display some limited pseudo-
cholinesterase-inhibiting activity, but their eff ect on 
acetylcholinesterase is much greater. Edrophonium 
has little or no eff ect on pseudocholinesterase. In 
large doses, neostigmine can cause a weak depolar-
izing neuromuscular blockade. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 General Pharmacological 
Characteristics 
 Th e increase in acetylcholine caused by cholinester-
ase inhibitors aff ects more than the nicotinic recep-
tors of skeletal muscle ( Table 12–2 ). Cholinesterase 
4
 FIGURE 123  The molecular structures of nicotine and 
muscarine. Compare these alkaloids with acetylcholine 
( Figure 12–1 ). 
Nicotine
Muscarine
N
N
O
CH2
H3C
HO
CH3
+N
CH3
CH3
CH3
 
CHAPTER 12 Cholinesterase Inhibitors & Other Pharmacologic Antagonists to Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
227
inhibitors can act at cholinergic receptors of several 
other organ systems, including the cardiovascular 
and gastrointestinal systems. 
Cardiovascular receptors —Th e predominant 
muscarinic eff ect on the heart is bradycardia 
that can progress to sinus arrest. 
Pulmonary receptors —Muscarinic stimulation 
can result in bronchospasm (smooth muscle 
contraction) and increased respiratory tract 
secretions. 
Cerebral receptors —Physostigmine is a 
cholinesterase inhibitor that crosses the blood–
brain barrier and can cause diff use activation 
of the electroencephalogram by stimulating 
muscarinic and nicotinic receptors within 
the central nervous system. Inactivation of 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the central 
nervous system may play a role in the action 
of general anesthetics. Unlike physostigmine, 
cholinesterase inhibitors used to reverse 
neuromuscular blockers do not cross the 
blood–brain barrier. 
Gastrointestinal receptors —Muscarinic 
stimulation increases peristaltic activity 
(esophageal, gastric, and intestinal) 
and glandular secretions (eg, salivary). 
Postoperative nausea, vomiting, and fecal 
incontinence have been attributed to the use 
of cholinesterase inhibitors. 
 Unwanted muscarinic side eff ects are mini-
mized by prior or concomitant administration of 
anticholinergic medications, such as atropine sulfate 
or glycopyrrolate. Th e duration of action is similar 
among the cholinesterase inhibitors. Clearance is 
due to both hepatic metabolism (25% to 50%) and 
renal excretion (50% to 75%).  Th us, any pro-
longation of action of a nondepolarizing mus-
cle relaxant from renal or hepatic insuffi  ciency will 
probably be accompanied by a corresponding 
increase in the duration of action of a cholinesterase 
inhibitor. 
 As a rule, no amount of cholinesterase inhibitor 
can immediately reverse a block that is so intense 
that there is no response to tetanic peripheral nerve 
stimulation. Moreover, the absence of any palpable 
single twitches following 5 sec of tetanic stimulation 
at 50 Hz implies a very intensive blockade that can-
not be reversed. Excessive doses of cholinesterase 
inhibitors may actually prolong recovery. Some evi-
dence of spontaneous recovery (ie, the fi rst twitch of 
the train-of-four [TOF]) should be present before 
reversal is attempted. Th e posttetanic count (the 
number of palpable twitches aft er tetanus) generally 
correlates with the time of return of the fi rst twitch 
of the TOF and therefore the ability to reverse 
intense paralysis. For intermediate-acting agents, 
such as atracurium and vecuronium, a palpable 
posttetanic twitch appears about 10 min before 
spontaneous recovery of the fi rst twitch of the TOF. 
In contrast, for longer-acting agents, such as pan-
curonium, the fi rst twitch of the TOF appears about 
40 min aft er a palpable posttetanic twitch. 
 Th e time required to fully reverse a nondepo-
larizing block depends on several factors, 
including the choice and dose of cholinesterase 
inhibitor administered, the muscle relaxant being 
antagonized, and the extent of the blockade before 
reversal. For example, reversal with edrophonium is 
usually faster than with neostigmine; large doses 
of neostigmine lead to faster reversal than small 
doses; intermediate-acting relaxants reverse sooner 
than long-acting relaxants; and a shallow block 
is easier to reverse than a deep block (ie, twitch 
height >10%). Intermediate-acting muscle relaxants 
5
6
 TABLE 122 Muscarinic side eﬀ ects 
of cholinesterase inhibitors. 
Organ System
Muscarinic Side Eﬀ ects
Cardiovascular
Decreased heart rate, 
bradyarrhythmias
Pulmonary
Bronchospasm, bronchial 
secretions
Cerebral
Diffuse excitation  1 
Gastrointestinal
Intestinal spasm, increased 
salivation
Genitourinary
Increased bladder tone
Ophthalmological
Pupillary constriction
 1  Applies only to physostigmine.
228 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
therefore require a lower dose of reversal agent (for 
the same degree of blockade) than long-acting 
agents, and concurrent excretion or metabolism 
provides a proportionally faster reversal of the 
short- and intermediate-acting agents. Th ese 
advantages can be lost in conditions associated with 
severe end-organ disease (eg, the use of vecuronium 
in a patient with liver failure) or enzyme defi cien-
cies (eg, mivacurium in a patient with homozygous 
atypical pseudocholinesterase). Depending on the 
dose of muscle relaxant that has been given, sponta-
neous recovery to a level adequate for pharmaco-
logical reversal may take more than 1 hr with 
long-acting muscle relaxants because of their insig-
nifi cant metabolism and slow excretion. Factors 
associated with faster reversal are also associated 
with a lower incidence of residual paralysis in the 
recovery room and a lower risk of postoperative 
respiratory complications. 
 A reversal agent should be routinely given to 
patients who have received nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants unless full reversal can be demon-
strated or the postoperative plan includes continued 
intubation and ventilation. In the latter situation, 
adequate sedation must also be provided. 
 A peripheral nerve stimulator should also be 
used to monitor the progress and confi rm the ade-
quacy of reversal. In general, the higher the fre-
quency of stimulation, the greater the sensitivity of 
7
the test (100-Hz tetany > 50-Hz tetany or TOF >
single-twitch height). Clinical signs of adequate 
reversal also vary in sensitivity (sustained head lift  >
inspiratory force > vital capacity > tidal volume). 
 Th erefore, the suggested end points of recov-
ery are sustained tetanus for 5 sec in response 
to a 100-Hz stimulus in anesthetized patients or sus-
tained head or leg lift  in awake patients. Newer 
quantitative methods for assessing recovery from 
neuromuscular blockade, such as acceleromyogra-
phy, may further reduce the incidence of residual 
postoperative neuromuscular paralysis. 
 Speciﬁ c Cholinesterase 
Inhibitors 
 NEOSTIGMINE 
 Physical Structure 
 Neostigmine consists of a carbamate moiety and a 
quaternary ammonium group ( Figure 12–4 ). Th e 
former provides covalent bonding to acetylcholines-
terase. Th e latter renders the molecule lipid insoluble, 
so that it cannot pass through the blood–brain barrier. 
 Dosage & Packaging 
 Th e maximum recommended dose of neostigmine 
is 0.08 mg/kg (up to 5 mg in adults), but smaller 
8
 FIGURE 124  The molecular structures of neostigmine, pyridostigmine, edrophonium, and physostigmine. 
Neostigmine
Pyridostigmine
Physostigmine
Edrophonium
N
O
N
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
N
H3C
O
H
N(CH3)3
+
O
C
N
H3C
H3C
O
CH3
O
C
N
H3C
H3C
O
N
+
CH3
CH3
CH3
HO
N
+
 
CHAPTER 12 Cholinesterase Inhibitors & Other Pharmacologic Antagonists to Neuromuscular Blocking Agents 
229 
amounts oft en suffi  ce and larger doses have also 
been given safely ( Table 12–3 ). Neostigmine is most 
commonly packaged as 10 mL of a 1 mg/mL solu-
tion, although 0.5 mg/mL and 0.25 mg/mL concen-
trations are also available. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e eff ects of neostigmine (0.04 mg/kg) are usually 
apparent in 5min, peak at 10 min, and last more 
than 1 hr. If reversal is not complete in 10 min aft er 
0.08 mg/kg, the time for full recovery of neuromus-
cular function will depend on the nondepolarizing 
agent used and the intensity of blockade. In practice, 
many clinicians use a dose of 0.04 mg/kg (or 2.5 mg) 
if the preexisting blockade is mild to moderate and 
a dose of 0.08 mg/kg (or 5 mg) if intense paralysis is 
being reversed. Th e duration of action is prolonged 
in geriatric patients. Muscarinic side eff ects are 
minimized by prior or concomitant administration 
of an anticholinergic agent. Th e onset of action of 
glycopyrrolate (0.2 mg glycopyrrolate per 1 mg of 
neostigmine) is similar to that of neostigmine and 
is associated with less tachycardia than is experi-
enced with atropine (0.4 mg of atropine per 1 mg of 
neostigmine). It has been reported that neostigmine 
crosses the placenta, resulting in fetal bradycardia. 
Th us,  theoretically , atropine may be a better choice 
of an anticholinergic agent than glycopyrrolate in 
pregnant patients receiving neostigmine, but there is 
no evidence that this makes any diff erence in patient 
outcomes. Neostigmine is also used to treat myas-
thenia gravis, urinary bladder atony, and  paralytic 
ileus. 
 PYRIDOSTIGMINE 
 Physical Structure 
 Pyridostigmine is structurally similar to neostig-
mine except that the quaternary ammonium is 
incorporated into the phenol ring. Pyridostigmine 
shares neostigmine’s covalent binding to acetylcho-
linesterase and its lipid insolubility. 
 Dosage & Packaging 
 Pyridostigmine is 20% as potent as neostigmine 
and may be administered in doses up to 0.25 mg/kg 
(a total of 20 mg in adults). It is available as a solu-
tion of 5 mg/mL. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e onset of action of pyridostigmine is slower 
(10–15 min) than that of neostigmine, and its 
duration is slightly longer (>2 h). Glycopyrrolate 
(0.05 mg per 1 mg of pyridostigmine) or atropine 
(0.1 mg per 1 mg of pyridostigmine) must also 
be administered to prevent bradycardia. Glyco-
pyrrolate is preferred because its slower onset of 
action better matches that of pyridostigmine, again 
resulting in less tachycardia. 
 EDROPHONIUM 
 Physical Structure 
 Because it lacks a carbamate group, edrophonium 
must rely on noncovalent bonding to the acetyl-
cholinesterase enzyme. Th e quaternary ammonium 
group limits lipid solubility. 
 TABLE 123 The choice and dose of cholinesterase inhibitor determine the choice and dose 
of anticholinergic. 
Cholinesterase Inhibitor
Usual Dose of 
Cholinesterase Inhibitor
Recommended 
Anticholinergic
Usual Dose of 
Anticholinergic per mg of 
Cholinesterase Inhibitor
Neostigmine
0.04–0.08 mg/kg
Glycopyrrolate
0.2 mg
Pyridostigmine
0.1–0..25 mg/kg
Glycopyrrolate
0.05 mg
Edrophonium
0.5–1 mg/kg
Atropine
0.014 mg
Physostigmine  1 
0.01–0.03 mg/kg
Usually not necessary
NA
  1  Not used to reverse muscle relaxants.
230 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Dosage & Packaging 
 Edrophonium is less than 10% as potent as neostig-
mine. Th e recommended dosage is 0.5–1 mg/kg. 
Edrophonium is available as a solution containing 
10 mg/mL; it is available with atropine as a combi-
nation drug (Enlon-Plus; 10 mg edrophonium and 
0.14 mg atropine per mL). 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Edrophonium has the most rapid onset of action 
(1–2 min) and the shortest duration of eff ect of 
any of the cholinesterase inhibitors. Reduced doses 
should not be used, because longer-acting muscle 
relaxants may outlast the eff ects of edrophonium. 
Higher doses prolong the duration of action to more 
than 1 hr. Edrophonium may not be as eff ective as 
neostigmine at reversing intense neuromuscular 
blockade. In equipotent doses, muscarinic eff ects 
of edrophonium are less pronounced than those of 
neostigmine or pyridostigmine, requiring only half 
the amount of anticholinergic agent. Edrophonium’s 
rapid onset is well matched to that of atropine (0.014 
mg of atropine per 1 mg of edrophonium). Although 
glycopyrrolate (0.007 mg per 1 mg of edrophonium) 
can also be used, it should be given several minutes 
prior to edrophonium to avoid the possibility of 
bradycardia. 
 PHYSOSTIGMINE 
 Physical Structure 
 Physostigmine, a tertiary amine, has a carbamate 
group but no quaternary ammonium. Th erefore, it 
is lipid soluble and is the only clinically available 
cholinesterase inhibitor that freely passes the blood–
brain barrier. 
 Dosage & Packaging 
 Th e dose of physostigmine is 0.01–0.03 mg/kg. It is 
packaged as a solution containing 1 mg/mL. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e lipid solubility and central nervous system 
penetration of physostigmine limit its usefulness 
as a reversal agent for nondepolarizing blockade, 
but make it eff ective in the treatment of central 
anticholinergic toxicity caused by overdoses of atro-
pine or scopolamine. In addition, it reverses some of 
the central nervous system depression and delirium 
associated with use of benzodiazepines and volatile 
anesthetics. Physostigmine (0.04 mg/kg) has been 
shown to be eff ective in preventing postoperative 
shivering. It reportedly partially antagonizes mor-
phine-induced respiratory depression, presumably 
because morphine reduces acetylcholine release in 
the brain. Th ese eff ects are transient, and repeated 
doses may be required. Bradycardia is infrequent in 
the recommended dosage range, but atropine should 
be immediately available. Because glycopyrrolate 
does not cross the blood–brain barrier, it will not 
reverse the central nervous system eff ects of phy-
sostigmine. Other possible muscarinic side eff ects 
include excessive salivation, vomiting, and convul-
sions. In contrast to other cholinesterase inhibitors, 
physostigmine is almost completely metabolized by 
plasma esterases, so renal excretion is not important. 
 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
 Recovery from neuromuscular blockade is infl u-
enced by the depth of block at the time of antago-
nism, clearance and half-life of the relaxant used, 
and other factors that aff ect neuromuscular block-
ade ( Table  12–4 ), such as drugs and electrolyte 
 TABLE 124 Factors potentiating 
neuromuscular blockade. 
 Drugs 
 Volatile anesthetics 
 Antibiotics: Aminoglycosides, polymyxin B, neomycin, 
tetracycline, clindamycin 
 Dantrolene 
 Verapamil 
 Furosemide 
 Lidocaine 
 Electrolytes and acid–base disorders 
 Hypermagnesemia 
 Hypocalcemia 
 Hypokalemia 
 Respiratory acidosis 
 Temperature 
 Hypothermia 
 
CHAPTER 12 Cholinesterase Inhibitors & Other Pharmacologic Antagonists to Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
231
disturbances. In addition, some specifi c agents with 
the potential of reversing the neuromuscular block-
ing eff ects of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants merit 
brief discussion. 
 NONCLASSIC 
REVERSAL AGENTS 
 Besides cholinesterase inhibitors, two unique drugs 
(sugammadex and L-cysteine) are currently under 
investigation in the United States; these agents act 
as selective antagonists of nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blockade. Sugammadex is able to reverse 
aminosteroid-induced 
neuromuscular 
blockade, 
whereas cysteine has been shown to reverse the 
neuromuscular blocking eff ects of gantacurium and 
other fumarates. 
 SUGAMMADEX 
 Sugammadex is a novel selective relaxant-binding 
agent that is currently available for clinical use 
in Europe. It is a modifi ed gamma-cyclodextrin 
( su refers to sugar, and  gammadex refers to the struc-
tural molecule gamma-cyclodextrin). 
 Physical Structure 
 Its three-dimensional structure resembles a hollow 
truncated cone or doughnut with a hydrophobic 
cavity and a hydrophilic exterior.  Hydrophobic 
interactions trap the drug (eg, rocuronium) in 
the cyclodextrin cavity (doughnut hole), 
resulting in tight formation of a water-soluble 
guest–host complex in a 1:1 ratio. Th is terminates 
the neuromuscular blocking action and restrains 
the drug in extracellular fl uid where it cannot 
 interact with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. 
Sugammadex is essentially eliminated unchanged 
via the kidneys. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Sugammadex has been administered in doses 
of 4–8 mg/kg. With an injection of 8 mg/kg, 
given 3 min aft er administration of 0.6 mg/kg 
of rocuronium, recovery of TOF ratio to 0.9 was 
observed within 2 min. It produces rapid and 
eff ective reversal of both shallow and profound 
9
rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade in a 
consistent manner. Because of some concerns about 
hypersensitivity and allergic reactions, sugamma-
dex has not yet been approved by the US Food and 
Drug Administration. 
 L CYSTEINE 
 L -cysteine is an endogenous amino acid that is 
oft en added to total parenteral nutrition regimens 
to enhance calcium and phosphate solubility. 
 Th e ultrashort-acting neuromuscular blocker, 
gantacurium, and other fumarates rapidly combine 
with  L -cysteine  in vitro to form less active degrada-
tion products (adducts). Exogenous administration 
of  L -cysteine (10–50 mg/kg intravenously) given to 
anesthetized monkeys 1 min aft er these neuromus-
cular blocking agents abolished the block within 
2–3 min; this antagonism was found to be superior 
to that produced by anticholinesterases. Th is 
unique method of antagonism by adduct formation 
and inactivation is still in the investigative stage, 
especially in terms of its safety and effi  cacy in 
humans. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Respiratory Failure 
in the Recovery Room 
 A 66-year-old woman weighing 85 kg is brought 
to the recovery room following cholecystectomy. 
The anesthetic technique included the use of iso-
ﬂ urane and vecuronium for muscle relaxation. At 
the conclusion of the procedure, the anesthesi-
ologist administered 6 mg of morphine sulfate 
for postoperative pain control and 3 mg of neo-
stigmine with 0.6 mg of glycopyrrolate to reverse 
any residual neuromuscular blockade. The dose 
of cholinesterase inhibitor was empirically based 
on clinical judgment. Although the patient was 
apparently breathing normally on arrival in the 
recovery room, her tidal volume progressively 
diminished. Arterial blood gas measurements 
revealed a Pa CO 2 of 62 mm Hg, a Pa O 2 of 110 mm 
Hg, and a pH of 7.26 on a fraction of inspired oxy-
gen (F IO 2 ) of 40%. 
10
232 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Which drugs administered to this patient could 
explain her hypoventilation? 
 Isoﬂ urane, morphine sulfate, and vecuronium 
all interfere with a patient’s ability to maintain a 
normal ventilatory response to an elevated Pa CO 2 . 
 Why would the patient’s breathing worsen in the 
recovery room? 
 Possibilities include the delayed onset of action 
of morphine sulfate, a lack of sensory stimulation 
in the recovery area, fatigue of respiratory muscles, 
and splinting as a result of upper abdominal pain . 
 Could the patient still have residual 
neuromuscular blockade? 
 If the dose of neostigmine was not determined 
by the response to a peripheral nerve stimulator, 
or if the recovery of muscle function was inade-
quately tested after the reversal drugs were given, 
persistent neuromuscular blockade is possible. 
Assume, for example, that the patient had mini-
mal or no response to initial tetanic stimulation 
at 100 Hz. Even the maximal dose of neostigmine 
(5 mg) might not yet have adequately reversed the 
paralysis. Because of enormous patient variability, 
the response to peripheral nerve stimulation must 
always be monitored when intermediate- or long-
acting muscle relaxants are administered. Even if 
partial reversal is achieved, paralysis may worsen if 
the patient hypoventilates .  Other factors (in addi-
tion to respiratory acidosis) that impair the rever-
sal of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants include 
intense neuromuscular paralysis, electrolyte 
disturbances (hypermagnesemia, hypokalemia, 
and hypocalcemia), hypothermia (temperature 
<32°C), drug interactions (see  Table 11–4 ),  meta-
bolic alkalosis (from accompanying hypokalemia 
and hypocalcemia), and coexisting diseases (see 
 Table 11–8 ). 
 How could the extent of reversal be tested? 
 Tetanic stimulation is a sensitive but uncom-
fortable test of neuromuscular transmission in an 
awake patient. Because of its shorter duration, 
double-burst stimulation is tolerated better than 
tetany by conscious patients. Many other tests of 
neuromuscular transmission, such as vital capac-
ity and tidal volume, are insensitive as they may 
still seem normal when 70% to 80% of receptors 
are blocked. In fact, 70% of receptors may remain 
blocked despite an apparently normal response to 
TOF stimulation. The ability to sustain a head lift for 
5 sec, however, indicates that fewer than 33% of 
receptors are occupied by muscle relaxant . 
 What treatment would you suggest? 
 Ventilation should be assisted to reduce the 
respiratory acidosis. Even if diaphragmatic function 
seems to be adequate, residual blockade can lead 
to airway obstruction and poor airway protection. 
More neostigmine (with an anticholinergic) could 
be administered up to a maximum recommended 
dose of 5 mg. If this does not adequately reverse 
paralysis, mechanical ventilation and airway pro-
tection should be instituted and continued until 
neuromuscular function is fully restored . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Naguib M: Sugammadex: another milestone in clinical 
neuromuscular pharmacology. Anesth Analg 
2007;104:575. 
 Naguib M, Lien CA: Pharmacology of muscle relaxants 
and their antagonists. In:  Miller’s Anesthesia , 7th ed. 
Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Wiener-Kronish JP, Young 
WL (editors). Churchill Livingstone, 2010. 
 Savarese JJ, McGilvra JD, Sunaga H, et al: Rapid chemical 
antagonism of neuromuscular blockade by L-cysteine 
adduction to and inactivation of the olefi nic 
(double-bonded) isoquinoliniumdiester compounds 
gantacurium (AV430A), CW 002, and CW 011. 
Anesthesiology 2010;113:58. 
 Stoelting RK:  Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic 
Practice , 4th ed. Lippincott, William & Wilkins, 2005. 
 Taylor P: Anticholinesterase agents. In:  Goodman and 
Gilman’sPharmacological Basis of Th erapeutics , 12th 
ed. Hardman JG (editor). McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 233
13
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anticholinergic Drugs 
 The ester linkage is essential for eﬀ ective 
binding of the anticholinergics to the 
acetylcholine receptors. This competitively 
blocks binding by acetylcholine and 
prevents receptor activation. The cellular 
eﬀ ects of acetylcholine, which are mediated 
through second messengers, are inhibited . 
 Anticholinergics relax the bronchial smooth 
musculature, which reduces airway resistance 
and increases anatomic dead space . 
 Atropine has particularly potent eﬀ ects on 
the heart and bronchial smooth muscle and 
is the most eﬃ  cacious anticholinergic for 
treating bradyarrhythmias . 
1
2
3
 Ipratropium solution (0.5 mg in 2.5 mL) 
seems to be particularly eﬀ ective in the 
treatment of acute chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease when combined 
with a β-agonist drug (eg, albuterol) . 
 Scopolamine is a more potent 
antisialagogue than atropine and causes 
greater central nervous system eﬀ ects . 
 Because of its quaternary structure, 
glycopyrrolate cannot cross the blood–
brain barrier and is almost devoid of 
central nervous system and ophthalmic 
activity . 
4
5
6
 One group of cholinergic antagonists has already 
been discussed: the nondepolarizing neuromuscular-
blocking agents. Th ese drugs act primarily at the 
nicotinic receptors in skeletal muscle. Th is chapter 
presents the pharmacology of drugs that block mus-
carinic receptors. Although the classifi cation  anti-
cholinergic usually refers to this latter group, a more 
precise term would be  antimuscarinic . 
 In this chapter, the mechanism of action and 
clinical pharmacology are introduced for three com-
mon anticholinergics: atropine, scopolamine, and 
glycopyrrolate. Th e clinical uses of these drugs in 
anesthesia relate to their eff ect on the cardiovascu-
lar, respiratory, cerebral, gastrointestinal, and other 
organ systems ( Table 13–1 ). 
 MECHANISMS OF ACTION 
 Anticholinergics are esters of an aromatic acid com-
bined with an organic base ( Figure 13–1 ).  Th e 
ester linkage is essential for eff ective binding of 
the anticholinergics to the acetylcholine receptors. 
 Th is competitively blocks binding by acetylcho-
line and prevents receptor activation . Th e cellular 
eff ects of acetylcholine, which are mediated through 
second messengers, are inhibited. Th e tissue recep-
tors vary in their sensitivity to blockade. In fact, 
muscarinic receptors are not homogeneous, and 
receptor subgroups have been identifi ed including: 
neuronal (M 1 ), cardiac (M 2 ), and glandular (M 3 ) 
receptors. 
1
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
234 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Blockade of muscarinic receptors in the sinoatrial 
node produces tachycardia. Th is eff ect is especially 
useful in reversing bradycardia due to vagal refl exes 
(eg, baroreceptor refl ex, peritoneal traction, or ocu-
locardiac refl ex). A transient slowing of heart rate in 
response to smaller intravenous doses of atropine 
(<0.4 mg) has been reported. Th e mechanism of 
this paradoxical response is unclear. Facilitation of 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 General Pharmacological 
Characteristics 
 In normal clinical doses, only muscarinic receptors 
are blocked by the anticholinergic drugs discussed 
in this chapter. Th e extent of the anticholinergic 
eff ect depends on the degree of baseline vagal tone. 
Several organ systems are aff ected. 
 TABLE 131 Pharmacological characteristics of anticholinergic drugs. 1 
Atropine
Scopolamine
Glycopyrrolate
Tachycardia
+++
+
++
Bronchodilatation
++
+
++
Sedation
+
+++
0
Antisialagogue effect
++
+++
+++
 1 0, no eﬀ ect; +, minimal eﬀ ect; ++, moderate eﬀ ect; +++, marked eﬀ ect.
 FIGURE 131  Physical structures of anticholinergic drugs. 
Atropine
Scopolamine
Glycopyrrolate
C
H
C
O
CH2OH
O
C
H
CH2
CH2
NCH3
CH
CH
CH
CH
N
H3C
CH3
C
O
O
O
+
C
O
C
H
C
O
CH2OH
O
C
H
CH2
CH2
NCH3
CH
CH
CH2
CH2
Organic base
Ester
linkage
Aromatic
base
 
CHAPTER 13 Anticholinergic Drugs
235
to near vision); acute angle-closure glaucoma is 
unlikely following systemic administration of most 
anticholinergic drugs. 
 F. Genitourinary 
 Anticholinergics may decrease ureter and bladder 
tone as a result of smooth muscle relaxation and lead 
to urinary retention, particularly in elderly men with 
prostatic hypertrophy. 
 G. Thermoregulation 
 Inhibition of sweat glands may lead to a rise in body 
temperature (atropine fever). 
 Speciﬁ c Anticholinergic Drugs 
 ATROPINE 
 Physical Structure 
 Atropine is a tertiary amine. Th e naturally occurring 
levorotatory form is active, but the commercial mix-
ture is racemic ( Figure 13–1 ). 
 Dosage & Packaging 
 As a premedication, atropine is administered intra-
venously or intramuscularly in a range of 0.01–0.02 
mg/kg, up to the usual adult dose of 0.4–0.6 mg. 
Larger intravenous doses up to 2 mg may be required 
to completely block the cardiac vagal nerves in treat-
ing severe bradycardia. Atropine sulfate is available 
in a multitude of concentrations. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Atropine has particularly potent eff ects on the 
heart and bronchial smooth muscle and is the 
most effi  cacious anticholinergic for treating brady-
arrhythmias. Patients with coronary artery disease 
may not tolerate the increased myocardial oxygen 
demand and decreased oxygen supply associated 
with the tachycardia caused by atropine. A derivative 
of atropine, ipratropium bromide, is available in a 
metered-dose inhaler for the treatment of broncho-
spasm. Its quaternary ammonium structure signifi -
cantly limits systemic absorption.  Ipratropium 
solution (0.5 mg in 2.5 mL) seems to be par-
ticularly eff ective in the treatment of acute chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease when combined with 
a β-agonist drug (eg, albuterol). Th e central nervous 
3
4
conduction through the atrioventricular node short-
ens the P–R interval on the electrocardiogram and 
oft en decreases heart block caused by vagal activity. 
Atrial arrhythmias and nodal (junctional) rhythms 
occasionally occur. Anticholinergics generally have 
little eff ect on ventricular function or peripheral vas-
culature because of the paucity of direct cholinergic 
innervation of these areas despite the presence of 
cholinergic receptors. Presynaptic muscarinic recep-
tors on adrenergic nerve terminals are known to 
inhibit norepinephrine release, so muscarinic antag-
onists may modestly enhance sympathetic activity. 
Large doses of anticholinergic agents can result in 
dilation of cutaneous blood vessels (atropine fl ush). 
 B. Respiratory 
 Th e anticholinergics inhibit the secretions of the 
respiratory tract mucosa, from the nose to the bron-
chi, a valuable property during airway endoscopic or 
surgical procedures.  Relaxation of the bron-
chial smooth musculature reduces airway 
resistance and increases anatomic dead space. Th ese 
eff ects are particularly pronounced in patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma. 
 C. Cerebral 
 Anticholinergic medications can cause a spectrum of 
central nervous system eff ects ranging from stimula-
tion to depression, depending on drug choice and dos-
age. Cerebral stimulation may present as excitation, 
restlessness, or hallucinations. Cerebral depression, 
including sedation and amnesia, are prominent aft er 
scopolamine. Physostigmine, a cholinesterase inhibi-
tor that crosses the blood–brain barrier, promptly 
reverses anticholinergic actions on the brain. 
 D. Gastrointestinal 
 Salivary secretions are markedly reduced by anticho-
linergic drugs. Gastric secretions are also decreased, 
but larger doses are necessary. Decreased intesti-
nal motility and peristalsis prolong gastric empty-
ing time. Lower esophageal sphincter pressure is 
reduced. Overall, the anticholinergic drugs do not 
prevent aspiration pneumonia. 
 E. Ophthalmic 
 Anticholinergics cause mydriasis (pupillary dila-
tion) and cycloplegia (an inability to accommodate 
2
236 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Dosage & Packaging 
 Th e usual dose of glycopyrrolate is one-half that of 
atropine. For instance, the premedication dose is 
0.005–0.01 mg/kg up to 0.2–0.3 mg in adults. Gly-
copyrrolate for injection is packaged as a solution of 
0.2 mg/mL. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Because of its quaternary structure, glycopyr-
rolate cannot cross the blood–brain barrier 
and is almost devoid of central nervous system and 
ophthalmic activity. Potent inhibition of salivary 
gland and respiratory tract secretions is the primary 
rationale for using glycopyrrolate as a premedication. 
Heart rate usually increases aft er intravenous—but 
not intramuscular—administration. Glycopyrrolate 
has a longer duration of action than atropine (2–4 h 
vs 30 min aft er intravenous administration). 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Central Anticholinergic Syndrome 
 An elderly patient is scheduled for enucleation of 
a blind, painful eye. Scopolamine, 0.4 mg intra-
muscularly, is administered as premedication. 
In the preoperative holding area, the patient 
becomes agitated and disoriented. The only 
other medication the patient has received is 1% 
atropine eye drops . 
 How many milligrams of atropine are in one drop 
of a 1% solution? 
 A 1% solution contains 1 g dissolved in 100 mL, 
or 10 mg/mL. Eyedroppers vary in the number of 
drops formed per milliliter of solution, but average 
20 drops/mL. Therefore, one drop usually contains 
0.5 mg of atropine . 
 How are ophthalmic drops systemically 
absorbed? 
 Absorption by vessels in the conjunctival sac 
is similar to subcutaneous injection. More rapid 
absorption is possible by the nasolacrimal duct 
mucosa . 
6
system eff ects of atropine are minimal aft er the usual 
doses, even though this tertiary amine can rapidly 
cross the blood–brain barrier. Atropine has been 
associated with mild postoperative memory defi cits, 
and toxic doses are usually associated with excit-
atory reactions. An intramuscular dose of 0.01–
0.02 mg/kg reliably provides an antisialagogue 
eff ect. Atropine should be used cautiously in patients 
with narrow-angle glaucoma, prostatic hypertrophy, 
or bladder-neck obstruction. 
 SCOPOLAMINE 
 Physical Structure 
 Scopolamine, a tertiary amine, diff ers from atropine 
by the addition of an epoxide to the heterocyclic ring. 
 Dosage & Packaging 
 Th e premedication dose of scopolamine is the same 
as that of atropine, and it is usually given intramus-
cularly. Scopolamine hydrobromide is available as 
solutions containing 0.3, 0.4, and 1 mg/mL. 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Scopolamine is a more potent antisialagogue 
than atropine and causes greater central ner-
vous system eff ects. Clinical dosages usually result in 
drowsiness and amnesia, although restlessness, diz-
ziness, and delirium are possible. Th e sedative eff ects 
may be desirable for premedication but can interfere 
with awakening following short procedures. Scopol-
amine has the added virtue of preventing motion 
sickness. Th e lipid solubility allows transdermal 
absorption, and transdermal scopolamine has been 
used to prevent postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
Because of its pronounced ocular eff ects, scopol-
amine is best avoided in patients with closed-angle 
glaucoma. 
 GLYCOPYRROLATE 
 Physical Structure 
 Glycopyrrolate is a synthetic product that diff ers 
from atropine in being a quaternary amine and 
having both cyclopentane and a pyridine moieties in 
the compound. 
5
 
CHAPTER 13 Anticholinergic Drugs 
237 
eﬀ ectively reverses central anticholinergic toxicity. 
An initial dose of 0.01–0.03 mg/kg may have to be 
repeated after 15–30 min . 
 Should this case be canceled or allowed to 
proceed? 
 Enucleation to relieve a painful eye is clearly 
an elective procedure. The most important ques-
tion that must be addressed for elective cases is 
whether the patient is optimally medically man-
aged. In other words, would canceling surgery 
allow further ﬁ ne-tuning of any medical problems? 
For example, if this anticholinergic overdose were 
accompanied by tachycardia, it would probably be 
prudent to postpone surgery in this elderly patient. 
On the other hand, if the patient’s mental status 
responds to physostigmine and there seems to be 
no other signiﬁ cant anticholinergic side eﬀ ects, 
surgery could proceed . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Brown JH: Muscarinic receptor agonists and antagonists. 
In:  Goodman and Gilman’s Th e Pharmacological 
Basis of Th erapeutics , 12th ed. Brunton LL (editor). 
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Katzung BG (editor): Cholinoceptor-blocking drugs. 
In:  Basic and Clinical Pharmacology , 11th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2009. 
 What are the signs and symptoms 
of anticholinergic poisoning? 
 Reactions from an overdose of anticholin-
ergic medication involve several organ systems. 
The central anticholinergic syndrome refers to 
central nervous system changes that range from 
unconsciousness to hallucinations. Agitation and 
delirium are not unusual in elderly patients. Other 
systemic manifestations include dry mouth, tachy-
cardia, atropine ﬂ ush, atropine fever, and impaired 
vision . 
 What other drugs possess anticholinergic 
activity that could predispose patients to the 
central anticholinergic syndrome? 
 Tricyclic antidepressants, antihistamines, and 
antipsychotics have antimuscarinic properties that 
could potentiate the side eﬀ ects of anticholinergic 
drugs . 
 What drug is an eﬀ ective antidote to 
anticholinergic overdosage? 
 Cholinesterase inhibitors indirectly increase 
the amount of acetylcholine available to compete 
with anticholinergic drugs at the muscarinic recep-
tor. Neostigmine, pyridostigmine, and edropho-
nium possess a quaternary ammonium group that 
prevents penetration of the blood–brain barrier. 
Physostigmine, a tertiary amine, is lipid soluble and 
This page intentionally left blank 
 239
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Adrenergic Agonists 
& Antagonists 
14
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Adrenergic agonists can be categorized as 
direct or indirect. Direct agonists bind to the 
receptor, whereas indirect agonists increase 
endogenous neurotransmitter activity . 
 The primary eﬀ ect of phenylephrine 
is peripheral vasoconstriction with a 
concomitant rise in systemic vascular 
resistance and arterial blood pressure . 
 Clonidine seems to decrease anesthetic 
and analgesic requirements and to provide 
sedation and anxiolysis . 
 Dexmedetomidine is a lipophylic 
α-methylol derivative with a higher 
aﬃ  nity for α 2 -receptors than clonidine. 
It has sedative, analgesic, and 
sympatholytic eﬀ ects that blunt many 
of the cardiovascular responses seen 
during the perioperative period . 
 Long-term use of these agents, particularly 
clonidine and dexmedetomidine, leads to 
supersensitization and up-regulation of 
receptors; with abrupt discontinuation of 
either drug, an acute withdrawal syndrome 
manifested by a hypertensive crisis can 
occur . 
 Ephedrine is commonly used as a 
vasopressor during anesthesia. As such, 
its administration should be viewed 
1
2
3
4
5
6
as a temporizing measure while the 
cause of hypotension is determined 
and remedied . 
 Small doses (approximately 2 mcg/kg/min) 
of dopamine (DA) have minimal adrenergic 
eﬀ ects but activate dopaminergic receptors. 
Stimulation of these nonadrenergic 
receptors (speciﬁ cally, DA 1 receptors) 
vasodilates the renal vasculature and 
promotes diuresis . 
 Favorable eﬀ ects on myocardial oxygen 
balance are believed to make dobutamine 
a good choice for patients with the 
combination of congestive heart failure 
and coronary artery disease, particularly if 
peripheral vascular resistance is elevated. 
(There are some recent debates regarding 
this beneﬁ cial eﬀ ect.) 
 Labetalol lowers blood pressure 
without reﬂ ex tachycardia because of its 
combination of α- and β-eﬀ ects . 
 Esmolol is an ultrashort-acting selective 
β 1 -antagonist that reduces heart rate and, 
to a lesser extent, blood pressure . 
 Discontinuation of β-blocker therapy 
for 24–48 hr may trigger a withdrawal 
syndrome characterized by hypertension, 
tachycardia, and angina pectoris . 
7
8
9
10
11
240 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Adrenergic agonists and antagonists produce their 
clinical eff ects by interacting with the adrenergic 
receptors (ie, adrenoceptors). Th e clinical eff ects 
of these drugs can be deduced from an under-
standing of the adrenoceptor physiology and a 
knowledge of which receptors each drug activates 
or blocks. 
 ADRENOCEPTOR PHYSIOLOGY 
 Th e term “adrenergic” originally referred to the 
eff ects of epinephrine ( adren aline), although nor-
epinephrine (noradrenaline) is the primary neu-
rotransmitter responsible for most of the adrenergic 
activity of the sympathetic nervous system. With 
the exception of eccrine sweat glands and some 
blood vessels, norepinephrine is released by post-
ganglionic sympathetic fi bers at end-organ tissues 
( Figure 14–1 ). In contrast, acetylcholine is released 
by preganglionic sympathetic fi bers and all para-
sympathetic fi bers. 
 Norepinephrine is synthesized in the cyto-
plasm of sympathetic postganglionic nerve end-
ings and stored in the vesicles ( Figure 14–2 ). Aft er 
release by a process of exocytosis, the action of 
norepinephrine is primarily terminated by reup-
take into the postganglionic nerve ending (inhib-
ited by tricyclic antidepressants), but also by 
diff usion from receptor sites, or via metabolism 
by monoamine oxidase (inhibited by monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors) and catechol- O -methyltransfer-
ase ( Fig ure 14–3 ). Prolonged adrenergic activation 
leads to desensitization and hyporesponsiveness to 
further stimulation. 
 Adrenergic receptors are divided into two gen-
eral categories: α and β. Each of these has been fur-
ther subdivided into at least two subtypes: α 1 and 
α 2 , and β 1 , β 2 , and β 3 . Th e α-receptors have been 
further divided using molecular cloning techniques 
into α 1A , α 1B , α 1D , α 2A , α 2B , and α 2C . Th ese receptors 
are linked to G proteins ( Figure 14–4 ; Drs. Rodbell 
and Gilman received the Nobel Prize in physiology 
or medicine in 1994 for their discovery)—heterotri-
meric receptors with α, β, and γ subunits. Th e diff er-
ent adrenoceptors are linked to specifi c G proteins, 
each with a unique eff ector, but each using guano-
sine triphosphate (GTP) as a cofactor. α 1 is linked 
to G q , which activates phospholipases; α 2 is linked to 
G i , which inhibits adenylate cyclase, and β is linked 
to G s , which activates adenylate cyclase. 
 α 1 -Receptors 
 α 1 -Receptors 
are 
postsynaptic 
adrenoceptors 
located in smooth muscle throughout the body (in 
the eye, lung, blood vessels, uterus, gut, and geni-
tourinary system). Activation of these receptors 
increases intracellular calcium ion concentration, 
which leads to contraction of smooth muscles. Th us, 
α 1 -agonists are associated with mydriasis (pupil-
lary dilation due to contraction of the radial eye 
muscles), bronchoconstriction, vasoconstriction, 
uterine contraction, and constriction of sphincters 
in the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts. 
α 1 -stimulation also inhibits insulin secretion and 
lipolysis. Th e myocardium possesses α 1 -receptors 
that have a positive inotropic eff ect, which might 
play a role in catecholamine-induced arrhythmia. 
During myocardial ischemia, enhanced α 1 -receptor 
coupling with agonists is observed. Nonetheless, 
the most important cardiovascular eff ect of α 1 -
stimulation is vasoconstriction, which increases 
peripheral vascular resistance, left  ventricular aft er-
load, and arterial blood pressure. 
 α 2 -Receptors 
 In contrast to α 1 -receptors, α 2 -receptors are 
located primarily on the presynaptic nerve termi-
nals. Activation of these adrenoceptors inhibits 
adenylate cyclase activity. Th is decreases the entry 
of calcium ions into the neuronal terminal, which 
limits subsequent exocytosis of storage vesicles 
containing norepinephrine. Th us, α 2 -receptors cre-
ate a negative feedback loop that inhibits further 
norepinephrine release from the neuron. In addi-
tion, vascular smooth muscle contains postsyn-
aptic α 2 -receptors that produce vasoconstriction. 
More importantly, stimulation of postsynaptic 
α 2 -receptors in the central nervous system causes 
sedation and reduces sympathetic outfl ow, which 
leads to peripheral vasodilation and lower blood 
pressure. 
 β 1 -Receptors 
 β-Adrenergic receptors are classifi ed into β 1 , β 2 , and 
β 3 receptors. Th e catecholamines, norepinephrine, 
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists 
241 
and epinephrine are equipotent on β 1 receptors, but 
epinephrine is signifi cantly more potent than nor-
epinephrine on β 2 receptors. 
 Th e most important β 1 -receptors are located 
on the postsynaptic membranes in the heart. 
Stimulation of these receptors activates adenyl-
ate cyclase, which converts adenosine triphosphate 
to cyclic adenosine monophosphate and initiates a 
kinase phosphorylation cascade. Initiation of the 
cascade has positive chronotropic (increased heart 
 FIGURE 141  The sympathetic nervous system. 
Organ innervation, receptor type, and response to 
stimulation. The origin of the sympathetic chain is the 
thoracoabdominal (T1–L3) spinal cord, in contrast to the 
craniosacral distribution of the parasympathetic nervous 
system. Another anatomic diﬀ erence is the greater 
distance from the sympathetic ganglion to the visceral 
structures. 
Eye
β
β2
β1
α1
α1,
β2
α1
β2
α1
β2
α1
β2
α1
β2
α1
β2
β3
α1,
Brain
Superior
cervical
ganglion
Middle
cervical
ganglion
Lower
cervical
ganglion
Sympathetic
chain
Inferior
mesenteric
ganglion
Celiac
ganglion
Small
splanchnic
Greater
splanchnic
Spinal
cord
C1
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
T1
L1
S1
Salivary
glands
Heart
Lungs
Pancreas
Upper
GI tract
Liver
Gallbladder
Bladder
Sphincter contraction
Constriction
Glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis
Sphincter contraction
Decreased tone and
motility
insulin secretion
Bronchoconstriction
Bronchodilation
heart rate
secretion
conduction velocity
contractility
Contraction of radial
muscle (mydriasis)
Ciliary muscle relaxation
(far vision)
insulin secretion
Unknown
Dilation
Detrusor relaxation
Abdominal
blood
vessels
242 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
rate), dromotropic (increased conduction), and ino-
tropic (increased contractility) eff ects. 
 β 2 -Receptors 
 β 2 -Receptors are primarily postsynaptic adreno-
ceptors located in smooth muscle and gland cells. 
Th ey share a common mechanism of action with 
β 1 -receptors: adenylate cyclase activation. Despite 
this commonality, β 2 stimulation relaxes smooth 
muscle, resulting in bronchodilation, vasodilation, 
and relaxation of the uterus (tocolysis), bladder, and 
gut. Glycogenolysis, lipolysis, gluconeogenesis, and 
insulin release are stimulated by β 2- receptor activa-
tion. β 2 -agonists also activate the sodium– potassium 
pump, which drives potassium intracellularly and 
can induce hypokalemia and dysrhythmias. 
 β 3 -Receptors 
 β 3 -Receptors are found in the gallbladder and brain 
adipose tissue. Th eir role in gallbladder physiology 
is unknown, but they are thought to play a role in 
lipolysis and thermogenesis in brown fat. 
 FIGURE 142  The synthesis of norepinephrine. Hydroxylation of tyrosine to dopa is the rate-limiting step. Dopamine is 
actively transported into storage vesicles. Norepinephrine can be converted to epinephrine in the adrenal medulla. 
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Dopa
Postganglionic cytoplasm
Storage vesicle
Liver
Dopamine
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
CH2
NH2
HC
COOH
CH2
NH2
OH
HC
COOH
CH2
NH2
OH
HC
HO
COOH
CH2
NH2
OH
CH2
HO
NH2
OH
CH2
HO
HC
OH
OH
CH2
HO
HC
OH
HN
CH3
Adrenal medulla
Phenylalanine
hydroxylase
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
Dopa
decarboxylase
Phenylethanolamine-N-
methyltransferase
Dopamine
β-hydroxylase
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists 
243 
 Dopaminergic Receptors 
 Dopamine (DA) receptors are a group of adrener-
gic receptors that are activated by dopamine; these 
receptors are classifi ed as D 1 and D 2 receptors. Acti-
vation of D 1 receptors mediates vasodilation in the 
kidney, intestine, and heart. D 2 receptors are believed 
to play a role in the antiemetic action of droperidol. 
 Adrenergic Agonists 
 Adrenergic agonists interact with varying specifi city 
(selectivity) at α- and β-adrenoceptors ( Tables 14–1 
and  14–2 ). 
 Overlapping of activity complicates the predic-
tion of clinical eff ects. For example, epinephrine 
stimulates α 1 -, α 2 -, β 1 -, and β 2 -adrenoceptors. Its 
net eff ect on arterial blood pressure depends on 
the balance between α 1- vasoconstriction, α 2 - and 
 FIGURE 143  Sequential metabolism of norepinephrine and epinephrine. Monoamine oxidase (MAO) and catechol- O -
methyltransferase (COMT) produce a common end product, vanillylmandelic acid (VMA). 
Metabolic
pathway
in liver
Metabolic
pathway
in nerve
endings
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine
Normetanephrine
Epinephrine
Epinephrine
Metanephrine
MAO
MAO
COMT
COMT
COMT
3, 4-Dihydroxymandelic acid
VANILLYLMANDELIC ACID
(VMA)
 FIGURE 144  The adrenoceptor is a transmembrane-
spanning receptor made up of seven subunits, which is 
linked to a G protein. G proteins are trimeric endoplasmic 
membrane proteins made of α, β, and γ units. With 
activation, GTP on the α-subunit is replaced by GDP, 
stimulating a conformational change, disassociating the α, 
β, and γ units. Either the Gα or Gβγ subunits can activate 
(or inhibit) the enzyme eﬀ ector for that adrenoceptor. 
M1–M7, membrane-spanning units; α, β, γ, subunits of 
G protein; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; P i , inorganic 
phosphate—quickly assimilated; GDP, guanosine 
diphosphate; E, eﬀ ector; cyclophosphatase for G q , 
adenylate cyclase for G i , and G s . 
NH2
COOH
M-1
M-2
M-3
M-4
M-5
M-6
M-7
GDP
GTP
Pi
E
β
γ
α
244 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 TABLE 141 Receptor selectivity of adrenergic agonists. 1 
Drug
α 1 
α 2 
β 1 
β 2 
DA 1 
DA 2 
Phenylephrine
+++
+
0
0
0
0
Methyldopa
+
+
0
0
0
0
Clonidine
+
++
0
0
0
0
Dexmedetomidine
+
+++
0
0
0
0
Epinephrine 2 
++
++
+++
++
0
0
Ephedrine 3 
++
?
++
+
0
0
Fenoldopam
0
0
0
0
+++
0
Norepinephrine 2 
++
++
++
0
0
0
Dopamine 2 
++
++
++
+
+++
+++
Dopexamine
0
0
+
+++
++
+++
Dobutamine
0/+
0
+++
+
0
0
Terbutaline
0
0
+
+++
0
0
 1 0, no eﬀ ect; +, agonist eﬀ ect (mild, moderate, marked); ?, unknown eﬀ ect; DA 1 and DA 2 , dopaminergic receptors.
 2 The α 1 -eﬀ ects of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine become more prominent at high doses.
 3 The primary mode of action of ephedrine is indirect stimulation.
 TABLE 142 Eﬀ ects of adrenergic agonists on organ systems. 1 
Drug
Heart 
Rate
Mean Arterial 
Pressure
Cardiac 
Output
Peripheral 
Vascular 
Resistance
Bronchodilation
Renal 
Blood Flow
Phenylephrine
↓
↑↑↑
↓
↑↑↑
0
↓↓↓
Epinephrine
↑↑
↑
↑↑
↑/↓
↑↑
↓↓
Ephedrine
↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑
↑↑
↓↓
Fenoldopam
↑↑
↓↓↓
↓/↑
↓↓
0
↑↑↑
Norepinephrine
↓
↑↑↑
↓/↑
↑↑↑
0
↓↓↓
Dopamine
↑/↑↑
↑
↑↑↑
↑
0
↑↑↑
Dopexamine
↑/↑↑
↓/↑
↑↑
↑
0
↑
Isoproterenol
↑↑↑
↓
↑↑↑
↓↓
↑↑↑
↓/↑
Dobutamine
↑
↑
↑↑↑
↓
0
↑
 1 0, no eﬀ ect; ↑, increase (mild, moderate, marked); ↓, decrease (mild, moderate, marked); ↓/↑, variable eﬀ ect; ↑/↑↑, mild-to-moderate increase.
β 2 -vasodilation, and β 1 -inotropic infl uences. More-
over, this balance changes at diff erent doses. 
 Adrenergic agonists can be categorized as 
direct or indirect. Direct agonists bind to 
the receptor, whereas indirect agonists increase 
endogenous neurotransmitter activity. Mecha-
nisms of indirect action include increased release or 
decreased reuptake of norepinephrine. Th e diff er-
entiation between direct and indirect mechanisms 
of action is particularly important in patients who 
1
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists
245
have abnormal endogenous norepinephrine stores, 
as may occur with use of some antihypertensive 
medications or monoamine oxidase inhibitors. 
Intraoperative hypotension in these patients should 
be treated with direct agonists, as their response to 
indirect agonists will be altered. 
 Another feature distinguishing adrenergic ago-
nists from each other is their chemical structure. 
Adrenergic agonists that have a 3,4-dihydroxyben-
zene structure ( Figure 14–5 ) are known as cat-
echolamines. Th ese drugs are typically short-acting 
because of their metabolism by monoamine oxidase 
and catechol- O -methyltransferase. Patients taking 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antide-
pressants may therefore demonstrate an exaggerated 
response to catecholamines. Th e naturally occurring 
catecholamines are epinephrine, norepinephrine, 
and DA. Changing the side-chain structure (R 1 , R 2 , 
R 3 ) of naturally occurring catecholamines has led to 
the development of synthetic catecholamines (eg, 
isoproterenol and dobutamine), which tend to be 
more receptor specifi c. 
 Adrenergic agonists commonly used in anes-
thesiology are discussed individually below. Note 
that the recommended doses for continuous infu-
sion are expressed as mcg/kg/min for some agents 
and mcg/min for others. In either case, these recom-
mendations should be regarded only as guidelines, 
as individual responses are quite variable. 
 PHENYLEPHRINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Phenylephrine is a noncatecholamine with predom-
inantly selective α 1 -agonist activity.  Th e pri-
mary eff ect of phenylephrine is peripheral 
2
vasoconstriction with a concomitant rise in systemic 
vascular resistance and arterial blood pressure. 
Refl ex bradycardia mediated by the vagus nerve can 
reduce cardiac output. Phenylephrine is also used 
topically as a decongestant and a mydriatic agent. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Small intravenous boluses of 50–100 µg (0.5–
1 mcg/kg) of phenylephrine rapidly reverse reduc-
tions in blood pressure caused by peripheral vasodi-
lation (eg, spinal anesthesia). Th e duration of action 
is short, lasting approximately 15 min aft er admin-
istration of a single dose. A continuous infusion 
(100 mcg/mL at a rate of 0.25–1 mcg/kg/min) will 
maintain arterial blood pressure, but at the expense 
of renal blood fl ow. Tachyphylaxis occurs with phen-
ylephrine infusions requiring upward titration of 
the infusion. Phenylephrine must be diluted from 
a 1% solution (10 mg/1-mL ampule), usually to a 
100 mcg/mL solution. 
α 2 AGONISTS 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Clonidine is an α 2 -agonist that is commonly used 
for its antihypertensive and negative chronotropic 
eff ects. More recently, it and other α 2 -agonists are 
increasingly being used for their sedative properties. 
Various studies have examined the anesthetic eff ects 
of oral (3–5 mcg/kg), intramuscular (2 mcg/kg), 
intravenous (1–3 mcg/kg), transdermal (0.1–0.3 mg 
released per day), intrathecal (75–150 mcg), and 
epidural (1–2 mcg/kg) clonidine administration. 
 In general, clonidine seems to decrease anes-
thetic and analgesic requirements (decreases 
minimum alveolar concentration) and provides 
sedation and anxiolysis. During general anesthesia, 
clonidine reportedly enhances intraoperative circu-
latory stability by reducing catecholamine levels. 
During regional anesthesia, including peripheral 
nerve block, clonidine prolongs the duration of the 
block. Direct eff ects on the spinal cord may be medi-
ated by α 2 -postsynaptic receptors within the dorsal 
horn. Other possible benefi ts include decreased 
postoperative shivering, inhibition of opioid-
induced muscle rigidity, attenuation of opioid 
 withdrawal symptoms, and the treatment of 
3
 FIGURE 145  Adrenergic agonists that have 
a 3,4-dihydroxybenzene structure are known as 
catecholamines. Substitutions at the R 1 , R 2 , and R 3 sites 
aﬀ ect activity and selectivity. 
6
5
2
3
1
4
HO
HO
CH
CH
NH
R1
R2
β
α
R3
246 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
some chronic pain syndromes. Side eff ects include 
bradycardia, hypotension, sedation, respiratory 
depression, and dry mouth. 
4
 Dexmedetomidine is a lipophylic α-methylol 
derivative with a higher affi  nity for α 2 -
receptors than clonidine. Compared with clonidine, 
dexmedetomidine is more selective to α 2 -receptors 
(α 2 :α 1 specifi city ratio is 200:1 for clonidine and 
1600:1 for dexmedetomidine). Dexmedetomidine 
has a shorter half-life (2–3 h) than clonidine 
(12–24 h). It has sedative, analgesic, and sympatho-
lytic eff ects that blunt many of the cardiovascular 
responses seen during the perioperative period. Th e 
sedative and analgesic eff ects are mediated by α 2 -
adrenergic receptors in the brain (locus ceruleus) 
and spinal cord. When used intraoperatively, dex-
medetomidine reduces intravenous and volatile 
anesthetic requirements; when used postoperatively, 
it reduces concurrent analgesic and sedative require-
ments. Dexmedetomidine is useful in sedating 
patients in preparation for awake fi beroptic intuba-
tion. It is also a useful agent for sedating patients 
postoperatively in postanesthesia and intensive care 
units, because it does so without signifi cant ventila-
tory depression. Rapid administration may elevate 
blood pressure, but hypotension and bradycardia 
can occur during ongoing therapy. Th e recom-
mended dosing of dexmedetomidine consists of a 
loading dose at 1 mcg/kg over 10 min followed by an 
infusion at 0.2–0.7 mcg/kg/hr. 
 Although these agents are adrenergic agonists, 
they are also considered to be sympatholytic because 
sympathetic outfl ow is reduced.  Long-term 
use of these agents, particularly clonidine and 
dexmedetomidine, leads to supersensitization and 
up- regulation of receptors; with abrupt discontinua-
tion of either drug, an acute withdrawal syndrome 
manifested by a hypertensive crisis can occur. 
Because of the increased affi  nity of dexmedetomi-
dine for the α 2 -receptor, compared with that of 
clonidine, this syndrome may manifest aft er only 
48 hr of dexmedetomidine use when the drug is 
discontinued. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Clonidine is available as an oral, transdermal, or 
parenteral preparation. Dexmedetomidine is avail-
able as an injectable solution (100 mcg/mL), which 
5
should be diluted to 5–10 mcg/mL for bolus admin-
istration and titrated to eff ect. 
 EPINEPHRINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Epinephrine is an endogenous catecholamine syn-
thesized in the adrenal medulla. Direct stimulation 
of β 1 -receptors of the myocardium by epinephrine 
raises blood pressure, cardiac output, and myocar-
dial oxygen demand by increasing contractility and 
heart rate (increased rate of spontaneous phase IV 
depolarization). α 1 -stimulation decreases splanch-
nic and renal blood fl ow but increases coronary 
perfusion pressure by increasing aortic diastolic 
pressure. Systolic blood pressure rises, although β 2 -
mediated vasodilation in skeletal muscle may lower 
diastolic pressure. β 2 -stimulation also relaxes bron-
chial smooth muscle. 
 Administration of epinephrine is the princi-
pal pharmacological treatment for anaphylaxis and 
can be used to treat ventricular fi brillation. Com-
plications include cerebral hemorrhage, coronary 
ischemia, and ventricular dysrhythmias. Volatile 
anesthetics, particularly halothane, potentiate the 
dysrhythmic eff ects of epinephrine. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 In emergency situations (eg, cardiac arrest and 
shock), epinephrine is administered as an intrave-
nous bolus of 0.05–1 mg, depending on the severity 
of cardiovascular compromise. In major anaphylac-
tic reactions, epinephrine should be used at a dose 
of 100–500 mcg (repeated, if necessary) followed 
by infusion. To improve myocardial contractil-
ity or heart rate, a continuous infusion is prepared 
(1 mg in 250 mL [4 mcg/mL]) and run at a rate of 
2–20 mcg/min. Epinephrine is also used to reduce 
bleeding from the operative sites. Some local anes-
thetic solutions containing epinephrine at a con-
centration of 1:200,000 (5 mcg/mL) or 1:400,000 
(2.5  mcg/mL) are characterized by less systemic 
absorption and a longer duration of action. Epi-
nephrine is available in vials at a concentration of 
1:1000 (1 mg/mL) and prefi lled syringes at a con-
centration of 1:10,000 (0.1 mg/mL [100 mcg/mL]). 
A 1:100,000 (10 mcg/mL) concentration is available 
for pediatric use. 
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists
247
 EPHEDRINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e cardiovascular eff ects of ephedrine, a noncate-
cholamine sympathomimetic, are similar to those of 
epinephrine: increase in blood pressure, heart rate, 
contractility, and cardiac output. Likewise, ephed-
rine is also a bronchodilator. Th ere are important 
diff erences, however: ephedrine has a longer dura-
tion of action, is much less potent, has indirect and 
direct actions, and stimulates the central nervous 
system (it raises minimum alveolar concentration). 
Th e indirect agonist properties of ephedrine may 
be due to peripheral postsynaptic norepinephrine 
release, or by inhibition of norepinephrine reuptake. 
 Ephedrine is commonly used as a vasopressor 
during anesthesia. As such, its administration 
should be viewed as a temporizing measure while 
the cause of hypotension is determined and reme-
died. Unlike direct-acting α 1 -agonists, ephedrine is 
believed not to decrease uterine blood fl ow, and thus 
was regarded as the preferred vasopressor for most 
obstetric uses. Recently, however, phenylephrine has 
been argued to be a better vasopressor in obstetric 
patients undergoing neuroaxial anesthesia due its 
faster onset, shorter duration of action, and better 
titratability and maintenance of fetal pH. Ephedrine 
has also been reported to possess antiemetic prop-
erties, particularly in association with hypotension 
following spinal anesthesia. Clonidine premedica-
tion augments the eff ects of ephedrine. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 In adults, ephedrine is administered as a bolus 
of 2.5–10 mg; in children, it is given as a bolus of 
0.1 mg/kg. Subsequent doses are increased to off set 
the development of tachyphylaxis, which is probably 
due to depletion of norepinephrine stores. Ephed-
rine is available in 1-mL ampules containing 25 or 
50 mg of the agent. 
 NOREPINEPHRINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Direct α 1 -stimulation with little β 2 -activity induces 
intense vasoconstriction of arterial and venous 
vessels. Increased myocardial contractility from 
6
β 1 -eff ects, along with peripheral vasoconstriction, 
contributes to a rise in arterial blood pressure. Both 
systolic and diastolic pressures usually rise, but 
increased aft erload and refl ex bradycardia prevent 
any elevation in cardiac output. Decreased renal 
and splanchnic blood fl ow and increased myocar-
dial oxygen requirements limit the outcome benefi ts 
of norepinephrine in the management of refrac-
tory shock. Norepinephrine has been used with 
an α-blocker (eg, phentolamine) in an attempt to 
take advantage of its β-activity without the pro-
found vasoconstriction caused by its α-stimulation. 
Extravasation of norepinephrine at the site of intra-
venous administration can cause tissue necrosis. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Norepinephrine is administered as a bolus (0.1 mcg/
kg) or usually as a continuous infusion due to its 
short half-life at a rate of 2–20 mcg/min. Ampules 
contain 4 mg of norepinephrine in 4 mL of solution. 
 DOPAMINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Th e clinical eff ects of DA, an endogenous nonselec-
tive direct and indirect adrenergic and dopaminer-
gic agonist, vary markedly with the dose.  At 
low doses (0.5–3 mcg/kg/min), DA primarily 
activates dopaminergic receptors (specifi cally, DA 1
receptors); stimulation of these receptors vasodilates 
the renal vasculature and promotes diuresis and 
natriuresis. Although this action increases renal 
blood fl ow, use of this “renal dose” does not impart 
any benefi cial eff ect on renal function. When used in 
moderate doses (3–10 mcg/kg/min), β 1 -stimulation 
increases myocardial contractility, heart rate, sys-
tolic blood pressure, and cardiac output. Myocardial 
oxygen demand typically increases more than sup-
ply. Th e α 1 -eff ects become prominent at higher 
doses (10–20 mcg/kg/min), causing an increase in 
peripheral vascular resistance and a fall in renal 
blood fl ow. Th e indirect eff ects of DA are due to 
release of norepinephrine from presynaptic sympa-
thetic nerve ganglion. 
 DA is commonly used in the treatment of shock 
to improve cardiac output, support blood pres-
sure, and maintain renal function. It is oft en used 
in combination with a vasodilator (eg, nitroglycerin 
7
248 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
or nitroprusside), which reduces aft erload and fur-
ther improves cardiac output. Th e chronotropic and 
proarrhythmic eff ects of DA limit its usefulness in 
some patients. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 DA is administered as a continuous infusion at a 
rate of 1–20 mcg/kg/min. It is most commonly sup-
plied in 5–10 mL vials containing 200 or 400 mg 
of DA. 
 ISOPROTERENOL 
 Isoproterenol is of interest because it is a pure 
β-agonist. β 1 -Eff ects increase heart rate, contractil-
ity, and cardiac output. Systolic blood pressure may 
increase or remain unchanged, but β 2 -stimulation 
decreases peripheral vascular resistance and dia-
stolic blood pressure. Myocardial oxygen demand 
increases while oxygen supply falls, making iso-
proterenol or any pure β-agonist a poor inotropic 
choice in most situations. 
 DOBUTAMINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Dobutamine is a racemic mixture of two isomers 
with affi  nity for both β 1 and β 2 receptors, with rela-
tively higher selectivity for β 1 receptors. Its primary 
cardiovascular eff ect is a rise in cardiac output as a 
result of increased myocardial contractility. A 
decline in peripheral vascular resistance caused by 
β 2 -activation usually prevents much of a rise in arte-
rial blood pressure. Left  ventricular fi lling pressure 
decreases, whereas coronary blood fl ow increases. 
 Favorable eff ects on myocardial oxygen bal-
ance are believed to make dobutamine a choice 
for patients with the combination of congestive heart 
failure and coronary artery disease, particularly if 
peripheral vascular resistance is elevated. However, 
because it has been shown to increase myocardial 
oxygen consumption, such as during stress testing 
(rationale for its use in perfusion imaging), some 
concern remains regarding its use in patients with 
myocardial ischemia. Moreover, dobutamine should 
not be routinely used without specifi c indications to 
facilitate separation from cardiopulmonary bypass. 
8
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Dobutamine is administered as an infusion at a rate 
of 2–20 mcg/kg/min. It is supplied in 20-mL vials 
containing 250 mg. 
 DOPEXAMINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Dopexamine, a structural analogue of DA, has 
potential advantages over DA because it has less 
β 1 -adrenergic (arrhythmogenic) and α-adrenergic 
eff ects. Because of the decreased β-adrenergic eff ects 
and its specifi c eff ect on renal perfusion, it may have 
advantages over dobutamine. Th e drug has been 
clinically available in many countries since 1990, but 
has not gained widespread acceptance in practice. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Dopexamine infusion should be started at a rate 
of 0.5 mcg/kg/min, increasing to 1 mcg/kg/min at 
intervals of 10–15 min to a maximum infusion rate 
of 6 mcg/kg/min. 
 FENOLDOPAM 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Fenoldopam is a selective D 1 -receptor agonist that 
has many of the benefi ts of DA but with little or no 
α- or β-adrenoceptor or D 2 -receptor agonist activ-
ity. Fenoldopam has been shown to exert hypoten-
sive eff ects characterized by a decrease in peripheral 
vascular resistance, along with an increase in renal 
blood fl ow, diuresis, and natriuresis. It is indicated for 
patients undergoing cardiac surgery and aortic aneu-
rysm repair with potential risk of perioperative renal 
impairment. Fenoldopam exerts an antihypertensive 
eff ect, but helps to maintain renal blood fl ow. It is also 
indicated for patients who have severe hypertension, 
particularly those with renal impairment. Along with 
its recommended use in hypertensive emergencies, 
fenoldopam is also indicated in the prevention of 
contrast media-induced nephropathy. Fenoldopam 
has a fairly rapid onset of action and is easily titrat-
able because of its short elimination half-life. Th e 
ability of fenoldopam to “protect” the kidney periop-
eratively remains the subject of ongoing studies. 
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists
249
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Fenoldopam is supplied in 1-, 2-, and 5-mL ampules, 
10 mg/mL. It is started as a continuous infusion of 
0.1 mcg/kg/min, increased by increments of 0.1 mcg/
kg/min at 15- to 20-min intervals until target blood 
pressure is achieved. Lower doses have been associ-
ated with less refl ex tachycardia. 
 Adrenergic Antagonists 
 Adrenergic antagonists bind but do not activate 
adrenoceptors. Th ey act by preventing adrenergic 
agonist activity. Like the agonists, the antagonists 
diff er in their spectrum of receptor interaction. 
αBLOCKERSPHENTOLAMINE 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Phentolamine produces a competitive (revers-
ible) blockade of both α 1 - and α 2 - receptors. α 1 -
Antagonism and direct smooth muscle relaxation are 
responsible for peripheral vasodilation and a decline 
in arterial blood pressure. Th e drop in blood pressure 
provokes refl ex tachycardia. Th is tachycardia is aug-
mented by antagonism of presynaptic α 2 -receptors 
in the heart because α 2 -blockade promotes norepi-
nephrine release by eliminating negative feedback. 
Th ese cardiovascular eff ects are usually apparent 
within 2 min and last up to 15 min. As with all of the 
adrenergic antagonists, the extent of the response to 
receptor blockade depends on the degree of existing 
sympathetic tone. Refl ex tachycardia and postural 
hypotension limit the usefulness of phentolamine to 
the treatment of hypertension caused by excessive 
α-stimulation (eg, pheochromocytoma, clonidine 
withdrawal).  Prazosin and phenoxybenzamine are 
examples of other alpha antagonists.
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Phentolamine is administered intravenously as 
intermittent boluses (1–5 mg in adults) or as a con-
tinuous infusion. To prevent tissue necrosis follow-
ing extravasation of intravenous fl uids containing an 
α-agonist (eg, norepinephrine), 5–10 mg of phen-
tolamine in 10 mL of normal saline can be locally 
infi ltrated. Phentolamine is packaged as a lyophi-
lized powder (5 mg). 
 MIXED ANTAGONISTS
LABETALOL 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Labetalol blocks α 1 -, β 1 -, and β 2 -receptors. Th e ratio 
of α-blockade to β-blockade has been estimated to 
be approximately 1:7 following intravenous admin-
istration. Th is mixed blockade reduces peripheral 
vascular resistance and arterial blood pressure. 
Heart rate and cardiac output are usually slightly 
depressed or unchanged.  Th us, labetalol lowers 
blood pressure without refl ex tachycardia 
because of its combination of α- and β-eff ects, 
which is benefi cial to patients with coronary artery 
disease. Peak eff ect usually occurs within 5 min aft er 
an intravenous dose. Left  ventricular failure, para-
doxical hypertension, and bronchospasm have been 
reported. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Th e initial recommended dose of labetalol is 2.5–
10 mg administered intravenously over 2 min. Twice 
this amount may be given at 10-min intervals until 
the desired blood pressure response is obtained. 
Labetalol can also be administered as a slow contin-
uous infusion at a rate of 0.5–2 mg/min. However, 
due to its long elimination half-life (>5 h), prolonged 
infusions are not recommended. 
βBLOCKERS 
β-Receptor blockers have variable degrees of selectiv-
ity for the β 1 -receptors. Th ose that are more β 1 selec-
tive have less infl uence on bronchopulmonary and 
vascular β 2 -receptors ( Table 14–3 ). Th eoretically, 
a selective β 1- blocker would have less of an inhibi-
tory eff ect on β 2- receptors and, therefore, might be 
preferred in patients with chronic obstructive lung 
disease or peripheral vascular disease. Patients with 
peripheral vascular disease could potentially have a 
decrease in blood fl ow if β 2- receptors, which dilate 
the arterioles, are blocked. β-Receptor blocking 
agents also reduce intraocular pressure in patients 
with glaucoma. 
9
250 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
β-Blockers are also classifi ed by the amount of 
intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (ISA) they have. 
Many of the β-blockers have some agonist activity; 
although they would not produce eff ects similar to 
full agonists (such as epinephrine), β-blockers with 
ISA may not be as benefi cial as β-blockers without 
ISA in treating patients with cardiovascular disease. 
β-Blockers can be further classifi ed as those 
that are eliminated by hepatic metabolism (such 
as metoprolol), those that are excreted by the kid-
neys unchanged (such as atenolol), or those that are 
hydrolyzed in the blood (such as esmolol). 
 ESMOLOL 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Esmolol is an ultrashort-acting selective β 1 -
antagonist that reduces heart rate and, to a 
lesser extent, blood pressure. It has been successfully 
used to prevent tachycardia and hypertension in 
response to perioperative stimuli, such as intubation, 
surgical stimulation, and emergence. For example, 
esmolol (0.5–1 mg/kg) attenuates the rise in blood 
pressure and heart rate that usually accompanies 
electroconvulsive therapy, without signifi cantly 
aff ecting seizure duration. Esmolol is as eff ective 
as propranolol in controlling the ventricular rate of 
patients with atrial fi brillation or fl utter. Although 
esmolol is considered to be cardioselective, at higher 
doses it inhibits β 2 -receptors in bronchial and vascu-
lar smooth muscle. 
 Th e short duration of action of esmolol is 
due to rapid redistribution (distribution half-life 
is 2 min) and hydrolysis by red blood cell esterase 
10
(elimination half-life is 9 min). Side eff ects can be 
reversed within minutes by discontinuing its infu-
sion. As with all β 1 -antagonists, esmolol should be 
avoided in patients with sinus bradycardia, heart 
block greater than fi rst degree, cardiogenic shock, 
or overt heart failure. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Esmolol is administered as a bolus (0.2–0.5 mg/kg) 
for short-term therapy, such as attenuating the car-
diovascular response to laryngoscopy and intu-
bation. Long-term treatment is typically initiated 
with a loading dose of 0.5 mg/kg administered 
over 1 min, followed by a continuous infusion of 
50 mcg/kg/min to maintain therapeutic eff ect. If this 
fails to produce a suffi  cient response within 5 min, 
the loading dose may be repeated and the infusion 
increased by increments of 50 mcg/kg/min every 
5 min to a maximum of 200 mcg/kg/min. 
 Esmolol is supplied as multidose vials for 
bolus administration containing 10 mL of drug 
(10 mg/mL). Ampules for continuous infusion (2.5 g 
in 10 mL) are also available but must be diluted prior 
to administration to a concentration of 10 mg/mL. 
 METOPROLOL 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Metoprolol is a selective β 1 -antagonist with no 
intrinsic sympathomimetic activity. It is available 
for both oral and intravenous use. It can be adminis-
tered intravenously in 2–5 mg increments every 2 to 
5 min, titrated to blood pressure and heart rate. 
 TABLE 143 Pharmacology of β-blockers. 1 
Selectivity for β1-Receptors
ISA
α -Blockade
Hepatic Metabolism
t 1/2 
Atenolol
+
0
0
0
6–7
Esmolol
+
0
0
0
–¼
Labetalol
0
+
+
4
Metoprolol
+
0
0
+
3–4
Propranolol
0
0
+
4–6
 1 ISA, intrinsic sympathomimetic activity; +, mild eﬀ ect; 0, no eﬀ ect.
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists 
251 
 NEBIVOLOL 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Nebivolol is a newer generation β-blocker with high 
affi  nity for β 1 -receptors. Th e drug is unique in its 
ability to cause direct vasodilation via its stimulatory 
eff ect on endothelial nitric oxide synthase. It is pres-
ently available only in oral formulation; the recom-
mended dose is 5–40 mg daily. 
 CARVEDILOL 
 Carvedilol is a mixed β- and α-blocker used in the 
management of chronic heart failure secondary to 
cardiomyopathy, left  ventricular dysfunction follow-
ing acute myocardial infarction, and hypertension. 
Carvedilol dosage is individualized and gradually 
increased up to 25 mg twice daily, as required and 
tolerated. 
 PERIOPERATIVE 
βBLOCKER THERAPY 
Management of β-blockers perioperatively is a key 
anesthesia performance indicator and is closely 
monitored by various “quality management” agen-
cies. Although studies regarding the perioperative 
administration of β-blockers have yielded confl ict-
ing results as to benefi t, maintenance of β-blockers in 
patients already being treated with them is essential, 
unless contraindicated by other clinical concerns.
 β-Blocker therapy in the perioperative period 
has the potential to reduce the perioperative cardio-
vascular complications (myocardial ischemia, stroke, 
cardiac failure) due to counteraction of catechol-
amine-induced tachycardia and hypertension. How-
ever, these benefi cial eff ects have not been widely 
demonstrated in recent clinical trials. Perioperative 
β-blocker therapy was associated with a reduced 
risk of in-hospital death in a small group of high-
risk patients (ie, those with a Revised Cardiac Score 
Index of 3 or higher), but showed no improvement 
or even an increase in stroke and overall mortality 
in low-risk patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. 
 Current American Heart Association/American 
College of Cardiology guidelines recommend 
 continuation of β-blocker therapy during the 
 PROPRANOLOL 
 Clinical Considerations 
 Propranolol nonselectively blocks β 1 - and β 2 -
receptors. Arterial blood pressure is lowered by 
several mechanisms, including decreased myo-
cardial contractility, lowered heart rate, and 
diminished renin release. Cardiac output and myo-
cardial oxygen demand are reduced. Propranolol 
is particularly useful during myocardial ischemia 
related to increased blood pressure and heart 
rate. Impedance of ventricular ejection is benefi -
cial in patients with obstructive cardiomyopathy 
and aortic aneurysm. Propranolol slows atrio-
ventricular conduction and stabilizes myocardial 
membranes, although the latter eff ect may not be 
signifi cant at clinical doses. Propranolol is particu-
larly eff ective in slowing the ventricular response 
to supraventricular tachycardia, and it occasionally 
controls recurrent ventricular tachycardia or fi bril-
lation caused by myocardial ischemia. Propranolol 
blocks the β-adrenergic eff ects of thyrotoxicosis 
and pheochromocytoma. 
 Side eff ects of propranolol include broncho-
spasm (β 2 -antagonism), congestive heart failure, 
bradycardia, and atrioventricular heart block (β 1 -
antagonism). Propranolol may worsen the myocar-
dial depression of volatile anesthetics (eg, halothane) 
or unmask the negative inotropic characteristics 
of indirect cardiac stimulants (eg, isofl urane). 
Concomitant administration of propranolol and 
verapamil (a calcium channel blocker) can synergis-
tically depress heart rate, contractility, and atrioven-
tricular node conduction. 
 Propranolol is extensively protein bound and is 
cleared by hepatic metabolism. Its elimination half-
life of 100 min is quite long compared with that of 
esmolol. 
 Dosing & Packaging 
 Individual dosage requirements of propranolol 
depend on baseline sympathetic tone. Generally, 
propranolol is titrated to the desired eff ect, beginning 
with 0.5 mg and progressing by 0.5-mg increments 
every 3–5 min. Total doses rarely exceed 0.15 mg/kg. 
Propranolol is supplied in 1-mL ampules containing 
1 mg. 
252 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
perioperative period in patients who are receiving 
β-blockers for the treatment of angina, symptomatic 
arrhythmia, heart failure, and hypertension. In addi-
tion, β-blocker therapy should be initiated in patients 
undergoing vascular surgery who are at high risk of 
cardiac events because of fi ndings of myocardial 
ischemia during perioperative testing. Th e guide-
lines also note that β-blockers titrated to heart rate 
and blood pressure are “reasonable” in patients 
undergoing vascular surgery who have more than 
one cardiac risk factor. Additionally, the guidelines 
suggest that perioperative β-blockers are likewise 
“reasonable” in patients undergoing intermediate-
risk procedures who have more than one cardiac dis-
ease risk factor. Th e routine administration of 
high-dose β-blockers in the absence of dose titration 
may be harmful in patients not currently taking 
β-blockers who are undergoing noncardiac surgery. 
 Discontinuation of β-blocker therapy for 
24–48 hr may trigger a withdrawal syndrome 
characterized by hypertension (rebound hyperten-
sion), tachycardia, and angina pectoris. Th is eff ect 
seems to be caused by an increase in the number of 
β-adrenergic receptors (up-regulation). 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Pheochromocytoma 
 A 45-year-old man with a history of paroxysmal 
attacks of headache, hypertension, sweating, 
and palpitations is scheduled for resection of an 
abdominal pheochromocytoma . 
 What is a pheochromocytoma? 
 A pheochromocytoma is a vascular tumor of 
chromaﬃ  n tissue (most commonly the adrenal 
medulla) that produces and secretes norepineph-
rine and epinephrine. The diagnosis and manage-
ment of pheochromocytoma are based on the 
eﬀ ects of abnormally high circulating levels of 
these endogenous adrenergic agonists . 
 How is the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma 
made in the laboratory? 
 Urinary excretion of vanillylmandelic acid (an 
end product of catecholamine metabolism), nor-
epinephrine, and epinephrine is often markedly 
11
increased. Elevated levels of urinary catechol-
amines and metanephrines ( Figure 14–3 ) provide 
a highly accurate diagnosis. Fractionated plasma-
free metanephrine levels may be superior to uri-
nary studies in making the diagnosis. The location 
of the tumor can be determined by magnetic reso-
nance imaging or computed tomographic scan 
with or without contrast . 
 What pathophysiology is associated with chronic 
elevations of norepinephrine and epinephrine? 
α 1 -Stimulation increases peripheral vascular 
resistance and arterial blood pressure. Hyperten-
sion can lead to intravascular volume depletion 
(increasing hematocrit), renal failure, and cere-
bral hemorrhage. Elevated peripheral vascular 
resistance also increases myocardial work, which 
predisposes patients to myocardial ischemia, 
ventricular hypertrophy, and congestive heart 
failure. Prolonged exposure to epinephrine and 
norepinephrine may lead to a catecholamine-
induced cardiomyopathy. Hyperglycemia results 
from decreased insulin secretion in the face of 
increased glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. β 1- 
Stimulation increases automaticity and ventricular 
ectopy . 
 Which adrenergic antagonists might be helpful 
in controlling the eﬀ ects of norepinephrine and 
epinephrine hypersecretion? 
 Phenoxybenzamine, an α 1 -antagonist, eﬀ ec-
tively reverses the vasoconstriction, resulting in a 
drop in arterial blood pressure and an increase in 
intravascular volume (hematocrit drops). Glucose 
intolerance is often corrected. Phenoxybenzamine 
can be administered orally and is longer acting 
than phentolamine, another α 1 -antagonist. For 
these reasons, phenoxybenzamine is often admin-
istered preoperatively to control symptoms . 
 Intravenous phentolamine is often used intra-
operatively to control hypertensive episodes. 
Compared with some other hypotensive agents, 
however, phentolamine has a slow onset and long 
duration of action; furthermore, tachyphylaxis 
often develops . 
β 1 -Blockade with an agent such as labetalol 
is recommended for patients with tachycardia or 
ventricular arrhythmias . 
 
CHAPTER 14 Adrenergic Agonists & Antagonists 
253 
 Why should α 1 -receptors be blocked with 
phenoxybenzamine before administration of a 
β -antagonist? 
 If β-receptors are blocked ﬁ rst, norepineph-
rine and epinephrine will produce unopposed 
α-stimulation. β 2 -Mediated vasodilation will not 
be able to oﬀ set α 1 -vasoconstriction, and periph-
eral vascular resistance would increase. This may 
explain the paradoxical hypertension that has 
been reported in a few patients with pheochro-
mocytoma treated only with labetalol. Finally, 
the myocardium might not be able to handle its 
already elevated workload without the inotropic 
eﬀ ects of β 1 -stimulation . 
 Which anesthetic agents should be speciﬁ cally 
avoided? 
 Succinylcholine-induced fasciculations of the 
abdominal musculature will increase intraab-
dominal pressure, which theoretically might cause 
release of catecholamines from the tumor. Ket-
amine is a sympathomimetic and would exacer-
bate the eﬀ ects of adrenergic agonists. Halothane 
sensitizes the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic 
eﬀ ects of epinephrine. Vagolytic drugs (eg, anti-
cholinergics and pancuronium) will worsen the 
imbalance of autonomic tone. Because hista-
mine provokes catecholamine secretion by the 
tumor, drugs associated with histamine release 
(eg, atracurium) are best avoided. Vecuronium 
and rocuronium are probably the neuromuscular 
blocking agents of choice . 
 Would an epidural or spinal technique eﬀ ectively 
block sympathetic hyperactivity? 
 A major regional block—such as an epidural or 
spinal anesthetic—could block sensory (aﬀ erent) 
nerves and sympathetic (eﬀ erent) discharge in 
GUIDELINES
 Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA, et al: 2009 ACCF/
AHA focused update on perioperative beta blockade 
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines 
on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care 
for noncardiac surgery: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association task force on practice guidelines. 
Circulation 2009;120:2123. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Bonet S, Agusti A, Arnau JM, et al: β-Adrenergic 
blocking agents in heart failure: Benefi ts of 
vasodilating and nonvasodilating agents according 
to patients’ characteristics: A meta-analysis of clinical 
trials. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:621. 
 Ebert TJ: Is gaining control of the autonomic nervous 
system important to our specialty? Anesthesiology 
1999;90:651. 
 Glick DB: Th e autonomic nervous system. In: 
 Miller’s Anesthesia , 7th ed. Miller RD, Eriksson LI, 
Fleisher LI, et al (editors). Churchill Livingstone, 
2010. 
 Insel PA: Adrenergic receptors—evolving concepts 
and clinical implications. N Engl J Med 1996;
334:580. 
 Johnson JO, Grecu L, Lawson NW: Autonomic nervous 
system. In:  Clinical Anesthesia , 6th ed. Barash PG, 
Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, et al. (editors). Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2009. 
 Stoelting RK:  Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic 
Practice , 4th ed. Lippincott-Raven, 2005. 
the area of the surgical ﬁ eld. The catecholamines 
released from a pheochromocytoma during surgi-
cal manipulation would still be able to bind and 
activate adrenergic receptors throughout the 
body, however . 
This page intentionally left blank 
 255
 Hypotensive Agents 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
15
 Clinical trials have shown that inhaled nitric 
oxide is a selective pulmonary vasodilator 
that is beneﬁ cial in the treatment of reversible 
pulmonary hypertension. By improving 
perfusion only in ventilated areas of the lung, 
inhaled nitric oxide may improve oxygenation 
in patients with acute respiratory distress 
syndrome or during one-lung ventilation . 
 Acute cyanide toxicity is characterized by 
metabolic acidosis, cardiac arrhythmias, 
and increased venous oxygen content (as 
a result of the inability to utilize oxygen). 
Another early sign of cyanide toxicity is the 
acute resistance to the hypotensive eﬀ ects 
of increasing doses of sodium nitroprusside 
(tachyphylaxis) . 
 By dilating pulmonary vessels, sodium 
nitroprusside may prevent the normal 
vasoconstrictive response of the pulmonary 
vasculature to hypoxia (hypoxic pulmonary 
vasoconstriction) . 
 Preload reduction makes nitroglycerin an 
excellent drug for the relief of cardiogenic 
pulmonary edema . 
1
2
3
4
 Hydralazine relaxes arteriolar smooth 
muscle, causing dilatation of precapillary 
resistance vessels via increased cyclic 
guanosine 3’,5’-monophosphate . 
 The body reacts to a hydralazine-induced 
fall in blood pressure by increasing heart 
rate, myocardial contractility, and cardiac 
output. These compensatory responses can 
be detrimental to patients with coronary 
artery disease and are minimized by the 
concurrent administration of a β-adrenergic 
antagonist . 
 Fenoldopam mesylate (infusion rates 
studied in clinical trials range from 
0.01–1.6 mcg/kg/min) reduces systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure in patients 
with malignant hypertension to an extent 
comparable to nitroprusside . 
 Dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers preferentially dilate arterial 
vessels, often preserving or increasing 
cardiac output . 
5
6
7
8
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 A multitude of drugs are capable of lowering blood 
pressure, including volatile anesthetics, sympathetic 
antagonists and agonists, calcium channel block-
ers, β-blockers, and angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors. Th is chapter examines agents that may be 
useful to the anesthesiologist for intraoperative con-
trol of arterial blood pressure. 
 Patients with an increasing “vascular age” 
routinely present for anesthesia and surgery. As 
patients chronologically age, so too does their vas-
culature. When a pulse wave is generated by ven-
tricular contraction, it is propagated through the 
arterial system. At branch points of the aorta, the 
wave is refl ected back toward the heart. In patients 
256 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
develop increased systolic pressure and decreased 
diastolic pressure. 
 Widened pulse pressures (the diff erence 
between systolic and diastolic pressures) have been 
associated with both increased incidence of postop-
erative renal dysfunction and increased risk of cere-
bral events in patients undergoing coronary bypass 
of young vascular age, the refl ected wave tends to 
augment diastole, improving diastolic pressure. In 
patients with “older” vasculature, the wave arrives 
sooner, being conducted back by the noncompli-
ant vasculature during late systole, which causes an 
increase in cardiac workload and a decrease in dia-
stolic pressure ( Figure 15–1 ). Th us, older patients 
 FIGURE 151  Illustration of the inﬂ uence of increased 
vascular stiﬀ ness on peripheral (radial) and central (aortic) 
pressures. Note the similarity of peripheral radial pressures 
in individuals with normal (lower left panel) and increased 
(upper left panel) vascular stiﬀ ness. In young individuals 
with normal vascular stiﬀ ness, central aortic pressures are 
lower than radial pressures (lower panels). In contrast, in 
older individuals with increased vascular stiﬀ ness, central 
aortic pressures are increased and can approach or equal 
peripheral pressures as a result of wave reﬂ ection and 
central wave augmentation during systole (top panels). 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Barodka V, Joshi B, Berkowitz D, 
Hogue CW Jr, Nyhan D: Implications of vascular aging. Anesth Analg 
2011;112:1048.) 
Pressure
Time
Time
Time
Time
Pressure
Pressure
Pressure
Central aortic
waveform
Central aortic
waveform
Radial artery
waveform
Radial artery
waveform
Reflected
wave point
Reflected
wave point
Augmented
pressure
Young patient
Elderly patient
 
CHAPTER 15 Hypotensive Agents
257
that lower blood pressure either reduce the force of 
myocardial contraction and/or produce vasodilata-
tion of the arterial and venous capacitance vessels. 
Agents used to lower blood pressure include nitro-
vasodilators, calcium antagonists, dopamine ago-
nists, anesthetic agents, and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors. β-Blockers have been previously 
discussed. 
 Nitrovasodilators 
 SODIUM NITROPRUSSIDE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Sodium nitroprusside and other nitrovasodilators 
relax both arteriolar and venous smooth muscle. 
Its primary mechanism of action is shared with 
other nitrates (eg, hydralazine and nitroglycerin). 
As these drugs are metabolized, they release  nitric 
oxide , which activates guanylyl cyclase. Th is enzyme 
is responsible for the synthesis of cyclic guanosine 
3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP), which controls the 
phosphorylation of several proteins, including 
some involved in the control of free intracellular 
 calcium and smooth muscle contraction. 
 Nitric oxide, a naturally occurring potent 
vasodilator released by endothelial cells (endothe-
lium-derived relaxing factor), plays an important 
role in regulating vascular tone throughout the 
body. Its ultrashort half-life (<5 s) provides sensi-
tive endogenous control of regional blood fl ow. 
 Inhaled nitric oxide is a selective pulmonary 
vasodilator that is benefi cial and routinely 
used in the treatment of reversible pulmonary 
hypertension. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Sodium nitroprusside is a potent and reliable antihy-
pertensive. It is usually diluted to a concentration of 
100 mcg/mL and administered as a continuous intra-
venous infusion (0.5–10 mcg/kg/min). Its extremely 
rapid onset of action (1–2 min) and fl eeting dura-
tion of action allow precise titration of arterial blood 
pressure. A bolus of 1–2 mcg/kg minimizes blood 
pressure elevation during laryngoscopy but can 
cause transient hypotension in some patients. Th e 
1
surgery. Consequently, control of blood pressure is 
essential to mitigate postoperative morbidity, espe-
cially as patients of advanced vascular age present 
for surgery. 
 β-Blocker therapy should be maintained peri-
operatively in patients who are being treated with 
β-blockers as a part of their routine medical regimen. 
Furthermore, according to the American College of 
Cardiology, β-blockers are also of potential benefi t to 
patients with more than one cardiac risk factor, espe-
cially those who are undergoing vascular surgery. 
However, the routine administration of high-dose 
β-blocker therapy may, in the absence of dose titra-
tion, be harmful in patients not taking β-blockers. 
Th e American College of  Cardiology/American 
Heart Association guidelines for β-blocker use peri-
operatively should be closely followed. Adherence to 
such guidelines is used by third parties as a “quality” 
performance indicator for anesthesia delivery. Th us, 
anesthesia providers should periodically review 
recommendations regarding β-blocker therapy, as 
guidelines evolve as new evidence becomes available 
and older evidence is refuted. β-Blockers (esmolol, 
metoprolol, and others) were previously discussed 
for the treatment of transient perioperative hyper-
tension and are routinely used by anesthesia provid-
ers. Th is chapter discusses antihypertensive agents 
other than β-blockers that are used perioperatively. 
 Along with increased vascular age, diastolic 
dysfunction is oft en underestimated in patients, as 
it can present in individuals with preserved sys-
tolic function. Acute diastolic heart failure can 
develop in the perioperative period secondary to 
hypertensive crisis. Diastolic dysfunction occurs 
due to the inability of the heart to relax eff ectively. 
Failure to actively sequester calcium ion into the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (an energy-dependent 
process) impedes relaxation. Acute hypertension 
can produce diastolic dysfunction perioperatively, 
leading to elevated left  ventricular end-diastolic 
pressures, myocardial ischemia, and pulmonary 
edema. Consequently, as increasing numbers of 
patients have diastolic dysfunction, tight control 
of blood pressure perioperatively is essential for 
safe anesthetic practice. 
 Blood pressure is essentially the product of car-
diac output and systemic vascular resistance. Agents 
258 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
if the cumulative dose of sodium nitroprusside is 
greater than 500 mcg/kg administered at an infusion 
rate faster than 2 mcg/kg/min. Patients with cyanide 
toxicity should be mechanically ventilated with 100% 
oxygen to maximize oxygen availability. Th e phar-
macological treatment of cyanide toxicity depends 
on increasing the kinetics of the two reactions by 
administering sodium thiosulfate (150 mg/kg over 
15 min) or 3% sodium nitrate (5 mg/kg over 5 min), 
which oxidizes hemoglobin to methemoglobin. 
Hydroxocobalamin combines with cyanide to form 
cyanocobalamin (vitamin B 12 ). 
 Th iocyanate is slowly cleared by the kidney. 
Accumulation of large amounts of thiocyanate (eg, 
in patients with renal failure) may result in a milder 
toxic reaction that includes thyroid dysfunction, 
muscle weakness, nausea, hypoxia, and an acute 
toxic psychosis. Th e risk of cyanide toxicity is not 
increased by renal failure, however. Methemoglo-
binemia from excessive doses of sodium nitroprus-
side or sodium nitrate can be treated with methylene 
blue (1–2 mg/kg of a 1% solution over 5 min), which 
reduces methemoglobin to hemoglobin. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 Th e combined dilation of venous and arteriolar 
vascular beds by sodium nitroprusside results in 
reductions of preload and aft erload. Arterial blood 
pressure falls due to the decrease in peripheral vas-
cular resistance. Although cardiac output is usu-
ally unchanged in normal patients, the reduction 
in aft erload may increase cardiac output in patients 
with congestive heart failure, mitral regurgitation, 
or aortic regurgitation. In opposition to any favor-
able changes in myocardial oxygen requirements are 
refl ex-mediated responses to the fall in arterial blood 
pressure. Th ese include tachycardia and increased 
myocardial contractility. In addition, dilation of cor-
onary arterioles by sodium nitroprusside may result 
in an  intracoronary steal of blood fl ow away from 
ischemic areas that are already maximally dilated. 
 Sodium nitroprusside dilates cerebral vessels 
and abolishes cerebral autoregulation. Cerebral 
blood fl ow is maintained or increases unless arterial 
blood pressure is markedly reduced. Th e resulting 
increase in cerebral blood volume tends to increase 
intracranial pressure, particularly in patients with 
potency of this drug requires frequent blood pres-
sure measurements—or, preferably, intraarterial 
monitoring—and the use of mechanical infusion 
pumps. Solutions of sodium nitroprusside must be 
protected from light because of photodegradation. 
 Metabolism 
 Aft er parenteral injection, sodium nitroprus-
side enters red blood cells, where it receives an 
electron from the iron (Fe 2+ ) of oxyhemoglobin. 
Th is nonenzymatic electron transfer results in an 
unstable nitroprusside radical and methemoglo-
bin (Hgb Fe 3+ ). Th e former moiety spontaneously 
decomposes into fi ve cyanide ions and the active 
nitroso (N 
 O) group. 
 Th e cyanide ions can be involved in one of three 
possible reactions: binding to methemoglobin to 
form  cyanmethemoglobin; undergoing a reaction 
in the liver and kidney catalyzed by the enzyme rho-
danase (thiosulfate + cyanide → thiocyanate); or 
binding to tissue cytochrome oxidase, which inter-
feres with normal oxygen utilization ( Figure 15–2 ). 
 Th e last of these reactions is responsible for 
the development of  acute cyanide  toxicity , 
characterized by metabolic acidosis, cardiac arrhyth-
mias, and increased venous oxygen content (as a 
result of the inability to utilize oxygen). Another 
early sign of cyanide toxicity is the acute resistance 
to the hypotensive eff ects of increasing doses of 
sodium nitroprusside (tachyphylaxis). It should be 
noted that tachyphylaxis implies acute tolerance 
to the drug following multiple rapid injections, 
as opposed to tolerance, which is caused by more 
chronic exposure. Cyanide toxicity is more likely 
2
 FIGURE 152  The metabolism of sodium nitroprusside. 
SNP + Oxyhemoglobin
(SNP)– + Methemoglobin
(SNP)–
5CN–
CN– + Methemoglobin
CN– + Thiosulfate
CN– + Cytochrome oxidase
Cyanide toxicity
Thiocyanate
Rhodanase, vitamin B12
or
or
Cyanmethemoglobin
 
CHAPTER 15 Hypotensive Agents
259
nitroglycerin to polyvinylchloride. Nitroglycerin 
can also be administered by a sublingual (peak eff ect 
in 4 min) or transdermal (sustained release for 24 
h) route. Some patients seem to require higher than 
expected doses of nitroglycerin to achieve a given 
drop in blood pressure, particularly aft er chronic 
administration (tolerance). Tolerance may be due 
to depletion of reactants necessary for nitric oxide 
formation, compensatory secretion of vasoconstric-
tive substances, or volume expansion. Dosing regi-
mens that provide for intermittent periods of low or 
no drug exposure may minimize the development 
of tolerance. 
 Metabolism 
 Nitroglycerin undergoes rapid reductive hydro-
lysis in the liver and blood by glutathione-organic 
nitrate reductase. One metabolic product is nitrite, 
which can convert hemoglobin to methemoglobin. 
Signifi cant methemoglobinemia is rare and can be 
treated with intravenous methylene blue (1–2 mg/kg 
over 5 min). 
 Nitroglycerin 
reduces 
myocardial 
oxygen 
demand and increases myocardial oxygen supply by 
several mechanisms: 
 •  Th e pooling of blood in the large-capacitance 
vessels reduces venous return and preload. 
Th e accompanying decrease in ventricular end-
diastolic pressure reduces myocardial oxygen 
demand and increases endocardial perfusion. 
•  Any aft erload reduction from arteriolar 
dilation will decrease both end-systolic 
pressure and oxygen demand. Of course, a 
fall in diastolic pressure may lower coronary 
perfusion pressure and actually decrease 
myocardial oxygen supply. 
•  Nitroglycerin redistributes coronary blood fl ow 
to ischemic areas of the subendocardium. 
•  Coronary artery spasm may be relieved. 
 Th e benefi cial eff ect of nitroglycerin in patients 
with coronary artery disease contrasts with the 
 coronary steal phenomenon seen with sodium 
nitroprusside.  Preload reduction makes nitro-
glycerin an excellent drug for the relief of car-
diogenic pulmonary edema. Heart rate is unchanged 
or minimally increased. Rebound hypertension is 
4
reduced intracranial compliance (eg, brain tumors). 
Th is intracranial hypertension can be minimized by 
slow administration of sodium nitroprusside and 
institution of hypocapnia. 
 Th e pulmonary vasculature also dilates in 
response to sodium nitroprusside infusion. Reduc-
tions in pulmonary artery pressure may decrease the 
perfusion of some normally ventilated alveoli, 
increasing physiological dead space.  By dilating pul-
monary vessels, sodium nitroprusside may 
prevent the normal vasoconstrictive response 
of the pulmonary vasculature to hypoxia (hypoxic 
pulmonary vasoconstriction). Both of these eff ects 
tend to mismatch pulmonary ventilation to perfu-
sion and decrease arterial oxygenation. 
 In response to decreased arterial blood pres-
sure, renin and catecholamines are released during 
administration of nitroprusside. Renal function is 
fairly well maintained during sodium nitroprusside 
infusion, despite moderate drops in arterial blood 
pressure and renal perfusion. 
 Sodium nitroprusside does not directly interact 
with neuromuscular blocking agents. Nonetheless, 
a decrease in muscle blood fl ow caused by arterial 
hypotension could indirectly delay the onset and 
prolong the duration of neuromuscular blockade. 
 NITROGLYCERIN 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Nitroglycerin relaxes vascular smooth muscle, with 
venous dilation predominating over arterial dilation. 
Its mechanism of action is presumably similar to 
that of sodium nitroprusside: metabolism to nitric 
oxide, which activates guanylyl cyclase, leading to 
increased cGMP, decreased intracellular calcium, 
and vascular smooth muscle relaxation. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Nitroglycerin relieves myocardial ischemia, hyper-
tension, and ventricular failure. Like sodium nitro-
prusside, nitroglycerin is commonly diluted to a 
concentration of 100 mcg/mL and administered as 
a continuous intravenous infusion (0.5–10 mcg/kg/
min). Glass containers and special intravenous tub-
ing are recommended because of the adsorption of 
3
260 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
the concurrent administration of a β-adrenergic 
antagonist. Conversely, the decline in aft erload oft en 
proves benefi cial to patients in congestive heart 
failure. 
 Hydralazine is a potent cerebral vasodilator 
and inhibitor of cerebral blood fl ow autoregulation. 
Unless blood pressure is markedly reduced, cerebral 
blood fl ow and intracranial pressure will rise. 
 Renal blood fl ow is usually maintained or 
increased by hydralazine. 
 Non-Nitrovasodilator 
Hypotensive Agents 
 FENOLDOPAM 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Fenoldopam mesylate causes rapid vasodilation 
by selectively activating D 1 -dopamine receptors. 
It has also demonstrated moderate affi  nity for 
α 2 -adrenoceptors. Th e R-isomer is responsible for 
the racemic mixture’s biological activity due to its 
much greater receptor affi  nity, compared with the 
S-isomer. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Fenoldopam mesylate (infusion rates studied 
in clinical trials range from 0.01–1.6 mcg/
kg/min) reduces systolic and diastolic blood pres-
sure in patients with malignant hypertension to 
an extent comparable to nitroprusside. Side eff ects 
include headache, fl ushing, nausea, tachycardia, 
hypokalemia, and hypotension. Th e onset of the 
hypotensive eff ect occurs within 15 min, and dis-
continuation of an infusion quickly reverses this 
eff ect without rebound hypertension. Some degree 
of tolerance may develop 48 hr aft er the infusion. 
Studies are confl icted as to fenolodopam’s ability to 
“protect” and “maintain” renal function in periop-
erative patients with hypertension at risk of periop-
erative kidney injury. 
 Metabolism 
 Fenoldopam undergoes conjugation without par-
ticipation of the cytochrome P-450 enzymes, and its 
7
less likely aft er discontinuation of nitroglycerin than 
following discontinuation of sodium nitroprusside. 
Th e prophylactic administration of low-dose nitro-
glycerin (0.5–2.0 mcg/kg/min) during anesthesia of 
patients at high risk for perioperative myocardial 
ischemia remains controversial. 
 Th e eff ects of nitroglycerin on cerebral blood 
fl ow and intracranial pressure are similar to those 
of sodium nitroprusside. Headache from dila-
tion of cerebral vessels is a common side eff ect of 
nitroglycerin. 
 In addition to the dilating eff ects on the 
 pulmonary vasculature (previously described for 
sodium nitroprusside), nitroglycerin relaxes bron-
chial smooth muscle. 
 Nitroglycerin (50–100 mcg boluses) has been 
demonstrated to be an eff ective (but transient) uterine 
relaxant that can be benefi cial during certain obstet-
rical procedures if the placenta is still present in the 
uterus (eg, retained placenta, uterine inversion, uter-
ine tetany, breech extraction, and external version 
of the second twin). Nitroglycerin therapy has been 
shown to diminish platelet aggregation, an eff ect 
enhanced by administration of  N -acetylcysteine. 
 HYDRALAZINE 
 Hydralazine relaxes arteriolar smooth muscle, 
causing dilation of precapillary resistance ves-
sels via increased cGMP. 
 Intraoperative hypertension is usually con-
trolled with an intravenous dose of 5–20 mg of 
hydralazine. Th e onset of action is within 15 min, 
and the antihypertensive eff ect usually lasts 2–4 hr. 
Hydralazine can be used to control pregnancy-
induced hypertension. 
 Hydralazine undergoes acetylation and hydrox-
ylation in the liver. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 Th e lowering of peripheral vascular resistance causes 
a drop in arterial blood pressure.  Th e 
body reacts to a hydralazine-induced fall in 
blood pressure by increasing heart rate, myocardial 
contractility, and cardiac output. Th ese compensa-
tory responses can be detrimental to patients with 
coronary artery disease and are minimized by 
5
6
 
CHAPTER 15 Hypotensive Agents
261
blockers. Nicardipine infusion is titrated to eff ect 
(5–15 mg/h). 
 Other intravenous agents that can produce 
hypotension perioperatively include the intravenous 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor enala-
prilat (0.625–1.25 mg). Th e role of enalaprilat as a 
nondirect-acting agent in the acute treatment of a 
hypertensive crisis is limited. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Controlled Hypotension 
 A 59-year-old man is scheduled for total hip 
 arthroplasty under general anesthesia. The sur-
geon requests a controlled hypotensive technique . 
 What is controlled hypotension, and what are its 
advantages? 
 Controlled hypotension  is the elective lower-
ing of arterial blood pressure. The primary advan-
tages of this technique are minimization of surgical 
blood loss and better surgical visualization . 
 How is controlled hypotension achieved? 
 The primary methods of electively lowering 
blood pressure are proper positioning, positive-
pressure ventilation, and the administration of 
hypotensive drugs. Positioning involves elevation 
of the surgical site so that the blood pressure at 
the wound is selectively reduced. The increase in 
intrathoracic pressure that accompanies positive-
pressure ventilation lowers venous return, cardiac 
output, and mean arterial pressure. Numerous 
pharmacological agents eﬀ ectively lower blood 
pressure: volatile anesthetics, spinal and epidural 
anesthesia, sympathetic antagonists, calcium 
channel blockers, and the peripheral vasodilators 
discussed in this chapter . 
 What surgical procedures might beneﬁ t 
most from a controlled hypotensive 
technique? 
 Controlled hypotension has been success-
fully used during cerebral aneurysm repair, brain 
tumor resection, total hip arthroplasty, radical neck 
metabolites are inactive. Clearance of fenoldopam 
remains unaltered despite the presence of renal or 
hepatic failure, and no dosage adjustments are nec-
essary for these patients. 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 Fenoldopam decreases systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure. Heart rate typically increases. Low ini-
tial doses (0.03–0.1 mcg/kg/min) titrated slowly 
have been associated with less refl ex tachycardia 
than higher doses (>0.3 mcg/kg/min). Tachycardia 
decreases over time but remains substantial at 
higher doses. 
 Fenoldopam can lead to rises in intraocular 
pressure and should be administered with caution 
or avoided in patients with a history of glaucoma or 
intraocular hypertension. 
 As would be expected from a D 1 -dopamine 
receptor agonist, fenoldopam markedly increases 
renal blood fl ow. Despite a drop in arterial blood 
pressure, the glomerular fi ltration rate is well main-
tained. Fenoldopam increases urinary fl ow rate, uri-
nary sodium extraction, and creatinine clearance 
compared with sodium nitroprusside. 
 CALCIUM ANTAGONISTS 
 Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers 
(nicardipine, clevidipine) are arterial selec-
tive vasodilators routinely used for perioperative 
blood pressure control in patients undergoing 
cardiothoracic surgery. Clevidipine is a relatively 
new drug with a short half- life, which facilitates 
its rapid titration. Unlike verapamil and diltiazem, 
the dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers 
have minimal eff ects on cardiac conduction and 
ventricular contractility. Calcium channel block-
ers bind to L-type calcium channel and impair cal-
cium entry into the vascular smooth muscle. Th ese 
L-type receptors are more prevalent on arterial ves-
sels than venous capacitance vessels. Consequently, 
cardiac fi lling and preload is less aff ected by these 
agents than nitrates, which might dilate both arte-
rial and venous systems. With preload maintained, 
cardiac output oft en increases when vascular tone 
is reduced by use of dihydropyridine calcium 
8
262 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 What special monitoring is indicated during 
controlled hypotension? 
 Intraarterial blood pressure monitoring and 
electrocardiography with ST-segment analysis are 
strongly recommended. Central venous monitor-
ing and measurement of urinary output by an 
indwelling catheter are indicated if extensive sur-
gery is anticipated . 
GUIDELINES
 Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA, et al: 2009 ACCF/
AHA focused update on perioperative beta blockade 
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines 
on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care 
for noncardiac surgery: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association task force on practice guidelines. 
Circulation 2009;120:2123. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Barodka V, Joshi B, Berkowitz D, Hogue CW Jr, Nyhan D: 
Implications of vascular aging. Anesth Analg 2011;
112:1048. 
 Lauretti GR, de Oliveira R, Reis MP: Transdermal 
nitroglycerine enhances spinal sufentanil 
postoperative analgesia following orthopedic surgery. 
Anesthesiology 1999;90:734. 
 Marshman LAG, Morice AH, Th ompson JS: Increased 
effi  cacy of sodium nitroprusside in middle cerebral 
arteries following acute subarachnoid hemorrhage: 
Indications for its use aft er rupture. J Neurosurg 
Anesthesiol 1998;10:171. 
 Parker JD, Parker JO: Nitrate therapy for stable angina 
pectoris. N Engl J Med 1998;338:520. 
 Pirracchio R, Cholley B, De Hert S, Solal AC, Mebazaa A: 
Diastolic heart failure in anaesthesia and critical care. 
Br J Anaesth 2007;98:707. 
 Tobias JD: Fenoldopam: Applications in anesthesiology, 
perioperative medicine, and critical care medicine. 
Am J Anesthesiol 2000;27:395. 
 Williams-Russo P, Sharrock NE, Mattis S: Randomized 
trial of hypotensive epidural anesthesia in older 
adults. Anesthesiology 1999;91:926. 
dissection, radical cystectomy, and other opera-
tions associated with signiﬁ cant blood loss. 
Controlled hypotension may allow safer surgery 
of patients whose religious beliefs prohibit blood 
transfusions (eg, Jehovah’s Witnesses). Decreasing 
extravasation of blood may improve the result of 
some plastic surgery procedures . 
 What are some relative contraindications to 
controlled hypotension? 
 Some patients have predisposing illnesses that 
decrease the margin of safety for adequate organ 
perfusion: severe anemia, hypovolemia, athero-
sclerotic cardiovascular disease, renal or hepatic 
insuﬃ  ciency, cerebrovascular disease, or uncon-
trolled glaucoma . 
 What are the possible complications of 
controlled hypotension? 
 As the above list of contraindications sug-
gests, the risks of low arterial blood pressure 
include cerebral thrombosis, hemiplegia (due to 
decreased spinal cord perfusion), acute tubular 
necrosis, massive hepatic necrosis, myocardial 
infarction, cardiac arrest, and blindness (from 
retinal artery thrombosis or ischemic optic neu-
ropathy). These complications are more likely in 
patients with coexisting anemia. Consequently, 
the use of induced or controlled hypotension con-
tinues to decline . 
 What is a safe level of hypotension? 
 This depends on the patient. Healthy young 
individuals tolerate mean arterial pressures as 
low as 50–60 mm Hg without complications. On 
the other hand, chronically hypertensive patients 
have altered autoregulation of cerebral blood 
ﬂ ow and may tolerate a mean arterial pressure 
of no more than 20% to 30% lower than base-
line. Patients with a history of transient ischemic 
attacks may not tolerate any decline in cerebral 
perfusion . 
 263
 Local Anesthetics 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
Sodium (Na) channels are membrane-
bound proteins that are composed of 
one large α subunit, through which 
Na ions pass, and one or two smaller 
β subunits. Voltage-gated Na channels 
exist in (at least) three states—resting 
(nonconducting), open (conducting), 
and inactivated (nonconducting). Local 
anesthetics bind a speciﬁ c region of the 
α subunit and inhibit voltage-gated 
Na channels, preventing channel 
activation and the Na inﬂ ux associated 
with membrane depolarization.  
Sensitivity of nerve ﬁ bers to inhibition by 
local anesthetics is determined by axonal 
diameter, myelination, and other anatomic 
and physiological factors. 
Potency correlates with octanol solubility, 
which in turn reﬂ ects the ability of the local 
anesthetic molecule to permeate lipid 
membranes. Potency is increased by adding 
large alkyl groups to a parent molecule. 
There is no measurement of local anesthetic 
potency that is analogous to the minimum 
alveolar concentration of inhalation 
anesthetics. 
Onset of action depends on many factors, 
including lipid solubility and the relative 
concentration of the nonionized lipid-
soluble form (B) and the ionized water-
soluble form (BH + ), expressed by the p K a . 
The p K a is the pH at which the fraction of 
ionized and nonionized drug is equal. Less 
1
2
3
4
potent, less lipid-soluble agents generally 
have a faster onset than more potent, more 
lipid-soluble agents. 
Duration of action correlates with potency 
and lipid solubility. Highly lipid-soluble local 
anesthetics have a longer duration of action, 
presumably because they more slowly 
diﬀ use from a lipid-rich environment to the 
aqueous bloodstream. 
In regional anesthesia local anesthetics 
are typically injected or applied very 
close to their intended site of action; 
thus their pharmacokinetic proﬁ les are 
much more important determinants of 
elimination and toxicity than of their 
desired clinical eﬀ ect. 
The rate of systemic absorption is 
related to the vascularity of the site of 
injection: intravenous (or intraarterial) > 
tracheal > intercostal > paracervical > 
epidural > brachial plexus > sciatic > 
subcutaneous. 
Ester local anesthetics are predominantly 
metabolized by pseudocholinesterase. 
Amide local anesthetics are metabolized 
(N-dealkylation and hydroxylation) by 
microsomal P-450 enzymes in the liver. 
The central nervous system is vulnerable 
to local anesthetic toxicity and is the 
site of premonitory signs of rising blood 
concentrations in awake patients. 
5
6
7
8
9
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
16
—Continued next page
264 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
True hypersensitivity reactions to local 
anesthetic agents—as distinct from 
systemic toxicity caused by excessive plasma 
concentration—are uncommon. Esters 
appear more likely to induce a true allergic 
reaction (due to IgG or IgE antibodies) 
especially if they are derivatives (eg, procaine 
or benzocaine) of  p -aminobenzoic acid, a 
known allergen. 
12
 Major cardiovascular toxicity usually requires 
about three times the local anesthetic 
concentration in blood as that required to 
produce seizures. 
 Unintentional intravascular injection of 
bupivacaine during regional anesthesia 
may produce severe cardiovascular toxicity, 
including left ventricular depression, 
atrioventricular heart block, and life-
threatening arrhythmias such as ventricular 
tachycardia and ﬁ brillation. 
10
11
 Local and regional anesthesia and analgesia 
techniques depend on a group of drugs—local 
 anesthetics—that transiently inhibit sensory, motor, 
or autonomic nerve function, or a combination 
of these functions, when the drugs are injected or 
applied near neural tissue. This chapter presents the 
mechanism of action, structure–activity relation-
ships, and clinical pharmacology of local anesthetic 
drugs. The more commonly used regional anes-
thetic techniques are presented in Section IV (see 
Chapters 45 and 46). 
 MECHANISMS OF LOCAL 
ANESTHETIC ACTION 
 Neurons (and all other living cells) maintain a rest-
ing membrane potential of −60 to −70 mV by active 
transport and passive diffusion of ions. The electro-
genic, energy-consuming sodium–potassium pump 
(Na + -K + -ATPase) couples the transport of three 
sodium (Na) ions out of the cell for every two potas-
sium (K) ions it moves into the cell. This creates an 
ionic disequilibrium (concentration gradient) that 
favors the movement of K ions from an intracellular 
to an extracellular location, and the movement of Na 
ions in the opposite direction. The cell membrane is 
normally much more “leaky” to K ions than to Na 
ions, so a relative excess of negatively charged ions 
(anions) accumulates intracellularly. This accounts 
Continued—
for the negative resting potential difference (–70 mV 
polarization). 
 Unlike most other types of tissue, excitable cells 
(eg, neurons or cardiac myocytes) have the capabil-
ity of generating  action potentials . Membrane-
bound, voltage-gated Na channels in peripheral 
nerve axons can produce and transmit membrane 
depolarizations following chemical, mechanical, or 
electrical stimuli. When a stimulus is suffi  cient to 
depolarize a patch of membrane, the signal can be 
transmitted as a wave of depolarization along the 
nerve membrane (an impulse). Activation of volt-
age-gated Na channels causes a very brief (roughly 
1 msec) change in the conformation of the channel, 
allowing an infl ux of Na ions and generating an 
action potential ( Figure 16–1 ). Th e increase in Na 
permeability causes temporary depolarization of the 
membrane potential to +35 mV. Th e Na current is 
brief and is terminated by inactivation of voltage-
gated Na channels, which do not conduct Na ions. 
Subsequently the membrane returns to its resting 
potential. Baseline concentration gradients are 
maintained by the sodium–potassium pump, and 
only a minuscule number of Na ions pass into the 
cell during an action potential. 
 Na channels are membrane-bound proteins 
that are composed of one large α subunit, 
through which Na ions pass, and one or two smaller 
β subunits. Voltage-gated Na channels exist in (at 
least) three states—resting (nonconducting), open 
1
 
CHAPTER 16 Local Anesthetics 
265 
 FIGURE 161  Compound Aα, Aδ, and C ﬁ ber action 
potentials recorded after supramaximal stimulation of 
a rat sciatic nerve. Note the diﬀ ering time scale of the 
recordings. In peripheral nerves, Aδ and C ﬁ bers have 
much slower conduction velocities, and their compound 
action potentials are longer and of less amplitude 
when compared with those from Aα ﬁ bers. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Butterworth JF 4th, Strichartz GR: The alpha 
2-adrenergic agonists clonidine and guanfacine produce tonic and 
phasic block of conduction in rat sciatic nerve ﬁ bers. Anesth Analg 
1993;76:295.) 
Aδ
Aα
C
20 ms
40 µv
2 ms
400 µv
Resting
Resting
Local anesthetic
Na+
Local anesthesia
Activated
(open)
Activated
(open)
Inactivated
Normal
Inactivated
 FIGURE 162  Voltage-gated sodium (Na) channels 
exist in (at least) three states—resting, activated (open), 
and inactivated. Note that local anesthetics bind and 
inhibit the voltage-gated Na channel from a site that is not 
directly accessible from outside the cell, interfering with 
the large transient Na inﬂ ux associated with membrane 
depolarization. 
(conducting), and inactivated (nonconducting) 
( Figure 16–2 ). Local anesthetics bind a specific 
region of the α subunit and inhibit voltage-gated 
Na channels, preventing channel activation and 
inhibiting the Na influx associated with membrane 
depolarization. Local anesthetic binding to Na chan-
nels does not alter the resting membrane potential. 
With increasing local anesthetic concentrations, an 
increasing fraction of the Na channels in the mem-
brane bind a local anesthetic molecule and cannot 
conduct Na ions. As a consequence, impulse con-
duction slows, the rate of rise and the magnitude 
of the action potential decrease, and the threshold 
for excitation and impulse conduction increases 
progressively. At high enough local anesthetic con-
centrations and with a sufficient fraction of local 
anesthetic-bound Na channels, an action potential 
can no longer be generated and impulse propagation 
is abolished. Local anesthetics have a greater affin-
ity for the channel in the open or inactivated state 
than in the resting state. Local anesthetic binding to 
open or inactivated channels, or both, is facilitated 
by depolarization. The fraction of Na channels that 
have bound a local anesthetic increases with fre-
quent depolarization (eg, during trains of impulses). 
This phenomenon is termed  use-dependent block . 
Put another way, local anesthetic inhibition is both 
voltage and frequency dependent, and is greater 
when nerve fibers are firing rapidly than with infre-
quent depolarizations. 
 Local anesthetics may also bind and inhibit 
calcium (Ca), K, transient receptor potential 
266 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
larger myelinated fibers. In spinal nerves local anes-
thetic inhibition (and conduction failure) generally 
follows the sequence autonomic > sensory > motor, 
but at steady state if sensory anesthesia is present all 
fibers are inhibited. 
 STRUCTUREACTIVITY 
RELATIONSHIPS 
 Local anesthetics consist of a lipophilic group (usu-
ally an aromatic benzene ring) separated from a 
hydrophilic group (usually a tertiary amine) by an 
intermediate chain that includes an ester or amide 
linkage. Articaine, the most popular local anes-
thetic for dentistry in several European countries, 
is an amide but it contains a thiophene ring rather 
than a benzene ring. Local anesthetics are weak 
bases that usually carry a positive charge at the ter-
tiary amine group at physiological pH. The nature 
of the intermediate chain is the basis of the classifi-
cation of local anesthetics as either esters or amides 
( Table 16–2 ). Physicochemical properties of local 
anesthetics depend on the substitutions in the aro-
matic ring, the type of linkage in the intermediate 
vanilloid 1 (TRPV1), and many other channels and 
receptors. Conversely, other classes of drugs, most 
notably tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline), 
meperidine, volatile anesthetics, Ca channel block-
ers, and ketamine, also may inhibit Na channels. 
Tetrodotoxin is a poison that specifi cally binds Na 
channels but at a site on the exterior of the plasma 
membrane. Human studies are under way with 
similar toxins to determine whether they might 
provide eff ective, prolonged analgesia aft er local 
infi ltration. 
 Sensitivity of nerve fibers to inhibition by local 
anesthetics is determined by axonal diameter, 
myelination, and other anatomic and physiological 
factors.  Table 16–1 lists the most commonly used 
classification for nerve fibers. In comparing nerve 
fibers of the same type, small diameter increases 
sensitivity to local anesthetics. Thus, larger, faster 
Aα fibers are less sensitive to local anesthetics 
than smaller, slower-conducting Aδ fibers, and 
larger unmyelinated fibers are less sensitive than 
smaller unmyelinated fibers. On the other hand, 
small unmyelinated C fibers are relatively resistant 
to inhibition by local anesthetics as compared with 
2
 TABLE 161 Nerve ﬁ ber classiﬁ cation. 1 
Fiber Type
Modality Served
Diameter (mm)
Conduction (m/s)
Myelinated?
Aα
Motor efferent
12–20
70–120
Yes
Aα
Proprioception
12–20
70–120
Yes
Aβ
Touch, pressure
5–12
30–70
Yes
Aγ
Motor efferent (muscle spindle)
3–6
15–30
Yes
Aδ
Pain
Temperature
Touch
2–5
12–30
Yes
B
Preganglionic autonomic fibers
<3
3–14
Some
C
Dorsal root
Pain
Temperature
0.4–1.2
0.5–2
No
C
Sympathetic
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers
0.3–1.3
0.7–2.3
No
1 An alternative numerical system is sometimes used to classify sensory ﬁ bers.
 
CHAPTER 16 Local Anesthetics 
267 
TABLE 162 Physicochemical properties of local anesthetics.
Generic 
(Proprietary)
Structure
Relative Lipid Solubility of 
Unchanged Local Anesthetic
pKa
Protein 
Binding (%)
Amides
Bupivacaine 
(Marcaine, 
Sensorcaine)
O
*
N
N
H
8
8.2
96
Etidocaine 
(Duranest)
N
N
H
O
16
8.1
94
Lidocaine 
(Xylocaine)
N
H
N
O
1
8.2
64
Mepivacaine 
(Carbocaine)
N
N
H
O
0.3
7.9
78
Prilocaine 
(Citanest)
N
H
N
H
O
0.4
8.0
53
Ropivacaine 
(Naropin)
N
H
O
N
*
2.5
8.2
94
(continued)
268 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
TABLE 162 Physicochemical properties of local anesthetics. (continued)
Generic 
(Proprietary)
Structure
Relative Lipid Solubility of 
Unchanged Local Anesthetic
pKa
Protein 
Binding (%)
Esters
Chloroprocaine 
(Nesacaine)
O
N
O
Cl
H2N
2.3
9.1
NA1
Cocaine
O
CH3
O
O
O
N
H3C
NA
8.7
91
Procaine 
(Novocaine)
H2N
N
O
O
0.3
9.1
NA
Tetracaine 
(Pontocaine)
N
H
O
N
O
12
8.6
76
*Carbon atom responsible for optical isomerism.
1NA, not available.
chain, and the alkyl groups attached to the amine 
nitrogen. 
3
 Potency correlates with octanol solubility, 
which in turn reflects the ability of the local 
anesthetic molecule to permeate lipid membranes. 
Potency is increased by adding large alkyl groups to a 
parent molecule (compare tetracaine to procaine or 
bupivacaine to mepivacaine). There is no measure-
ment of local anesthetic potency that is analogous to 
the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of inha-
lation anesthetics. The minimum concentration of 
local anesthetic that will block nerve impulse 
conduction is affected by several factors, including 
fiber size, type, and myelination; pH (acidic pH 
antagonizes block); frequency of nerve stimulation; 
and electrolyte concentra tions (hypokalemia and 
hypercalcemia antagonize blockade). 
 Onset of local anesthetic action depends on 
many factors, including lipid solubility and 
the relative concentration of the nonionized lipid-
soluble form (B) and the ionized water-soluble form 
(BH + ), expressed by the p K a . The p K a is the pH at 
which the fraction of ionized and nonionized drug is 
equal. Less potent, less lipid-soluble agents generally 
4
 
CHAPTER 16 Local Anesthetics
269
of the acidic local anesthetic solution, but data are 
lacking. Some researchers have found that alkalini-
zation of local anesthetic solutions (particularly 
commercially prepared, epinephrine-containing 
ones) by the addition of sodium bicarbonate (eg, 
1 mL 8.4% sodium bicarbonate per 10 mL local 
anesthetic) speeds the onset and improves the 
quality of the block by increasing the amount of 
free base available. Interestingly, alkalinization also 
decreases pain during subcutaneous infi ltration. 
5
 Duration of action correlates with potency 
and lipid solubility. Highly lipid-soluble local 
anesthetics have a longer duration of action, pre-
sumably because they more slowly diffuse from a 
lipid-rich environment to the aqueous bloodstream. 
Lipid solubility of local anesthetics is correlated 
with plasma protein binding. Local anesthetics are 
mostly bound by α 1 -acid glycoprotein and to a lesser 
extent to albumin. Sustained-release systems using 
liposomal encapsulation or microspheres for deliv-
ery of local anesthetics can significantly prolong 
their duration of action, but these approaches are 
not yet being used for prolonged anesthesia in the 
way that extended-duration epidural morphine is 
being used for single-shot, prolonged epidural 
analgesia. 
 Diff erential block of sensory rather than motor 
function would be desirable. Unfortunately, only 
bupivacaine and ropivacaine display  some selectively 
(mostly during onset and off set of block) for sen-
sory nerves; however, the concentrations required 
for surgical anesthesia almost always result in some 
motor blockade. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 Pharmacokinetics 
6
 In regional anesthesia local anesthetics are 
typically injected or applied very close to their 
intended site of action; thus their pharmacokinetic 
profiles are much more important determinants of 
elimination and toxicity than of their desired clinical 
effect. 
 A. Absorption 
 Most mucous membranes (eg, ocular conjunctiva, 
tracheal mucosa) provide a minimal barrier to local 
have a faster onset than more potent, more lipid-
soluble agents. 
 Local anesthetics with a p K a closest to physi-
ological pH will have (at physiological pH) a 
greater fraction of nonionized base that more read-
ily permeates the nerve cell membrane, generally 
facilitating a more rapid onset of action. It is the 
lipid-soluble form that more readily diff uses across 
the neural sheath (epineurium) and passes through 
the nerve membrane. Curiously, once the local anes-
thetic molecule gains access to the cytoplasmic side 
of the Na channel, it is the charged cation (rather 
than the nonionized base) that more avidly binds 
the Na channel. For instance, the p K a of lidocaine 
exceeds physiological pH. Th us, at physiological pH 
(7.40) more than half the lidocaine will exist as the 
charged cation form (BH + ). 
 It is oft en stated that the onset of action of local 
anesthetics directly correlates with p K a . Th is asser-
tion is not supported by actual data; in fact, the agent 
of fastest onset (2-chloroprocaine) has the greatest 
p K a of all clinically used agents. Other factors, such 
as ease of diff usion through connective tissue, can 
aff ect the onset of action in vivo. Moreover, not 
all local anesthetics exist in a charged form (eg, 
benzocaine). 
 Th e importance of the ionized and nonion-
ized forms has many clinical implications, at least 
for those agents that exist in both forms. Local 
anesthetic solutions are prepared commercially 
as water-soluble hydrochloride salts (pH 6–7). 
Because epinephrine is unstable in alkaline envi-
ronments, commercially formulated, epinephrine- 
containing, local anesthetic solutions are generally 
more acidic (pH 4–5) than the comparable “plain” 
solutions lacking epinephrine. As a direct conse-
quence, these commercially formulated, epineph-
rine-containing preparations may have a lower 
concentration of free base and a slower onset than 
when the epinephrine is added by the clinician at 
the time of use. Similarly, the extracellular base-
to-cation ratio is decreased and onset is delayed 
when local anesthetics are injected into acidic (eg, 
infected) tissues. Tachyphylaxis—the decreased 
effi  cacy of repeated doses—could be partly 
explained by the eventual consumption of the local 
extracellular buff ering capacity by repeat injections 
270 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
can also augment analgesia through activation of 
α 2 -adrenergic receptors. 
 3. Local anesthetic agent —More lipid-soluble local 
anesthetics that are highly tissue bound are also 
more slowly absorbed. Th e agents also vary in their 
intrinsic vasodilator properties. 
 B. Distribution 
 Distribution depends on organ uptake, which is 
determined by the following factors. 
 1. Tissue perfusion —Th e highly perfused organs 
(brain, lung, liver, kidney, and heart) are respon-
sible for the initial rapid uptake (α phase), which 
is followed by a slower redistribution (β phase) to 
moderately perfused tissues (muscle and gut). In 
particular, the lung extracts signifi cant amounts of 
local anesthetic; consequently, the threshold for sys-
temic toxicity involves much lower doses following 
arterial injections than venous injections (and chil-
dren with right-to-left  shunts are more susceptible 
to toxic side eff ects of lidocaine injected as an antiar-
rhythmic agent). 
 2. Tissue/blood partition coeffi  cient —Increasing 
lipid solubility is associated with greater plasma pro-
tein binding and also greater tissue uptake from an 
aqueous compartment. 
 3. Tissue mass —Muscle provides the greatest reser-
voir for distribution of local anesthetic agents in the 
bloodstream because of its large mass. 
 C. Biotransformation and Excretion 
 The biotransformation and excretion of local anes-
thetics is defined by their chemical structure. 
8
 1. Esters —Ester local anesthetics are predom-
inantly metabolized by pseudocholinesterase 
(plasma cholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase). 
Ester hydrolysis is very rapid, and the water-soluble 
metabolites are excreted in the urine. Procaine and 
benzocaine are metabolized to  p -aminobenzoic 
acid (PABA), which has been associated with rare 
anaphylactic reactions. Patients with genetically 
abnormal pseudocholinesterase would theoretically 
be at increased risk for toxic side eff ects, as metabo-
lism is slower, but clinical evidence for this is 
 lacking. Cerebrospinal fl uid lacks esterase enzymes, 
so the termination of action of intrathecally injected 
ester local anesthetics, eg, tetracaine, depends on 
anesthetic penetration, leading to a rapid onset of 
action. Intact skin, on the other hand, requires a 
high concentration of lipid-soluble local anesthetic 
base to ensure permeation and analgesia. EMLA 
cream consists of a 1:1 mixture of 5% lidocaine 
and 5% prilocaine bases in an oil-in-water emul-
sion. Dermal analgesia sufficient for beginning an 
intravenous line requires a contact time of at least 
1 h under an occlusive dressing. Depth of penetra-
tion (usually 3–5 mm), duration of action (usually 
1–2 h), and amount of drug absorbed depend on 
application time, dermal blood flow, keratin thick-
ness, and total dose administered. Typically, 1–2 g 
of cream is applied per 10-cm 2 area of skin, with a 
maximum application area of 2000 cm 2 in an adult 
(100 cm 2 in children weighing less than 10 kg). Split-
thickness skin-graft harvesting, laser removal of 
portwine stains, lithotripsy, and circumcision have 
been successfully performed with EMLA cream. 
Side effects include skin blanching, erythema, 
and edema. EMLA cream should not be used on 
mucous membranes, broken skin, infants younger 
than 1 month of age, or patients with a predisposi-
tion to methemoglobinemia (see Biotransformation 
and Excretion, below). 
 Systemic absorption of injected local anes-
thetics depends on blood fl ow , which is determined 
by the following factors. 
7
 1. Site of injection —Th e rate of systemic 
absorption is related to the vascularity of the 
site of injection: intravenous (or intraarterial) > 
tracheal > intercostal > paracervical > epidural > 
brachial plexus > sciatic > subcutaneous. 
 2. Presence of vasoconstrictors —Addition of epi-
nephrine—or less commonly phenylephrine—
causes vasoconstriction at the site of administration. 
Th e consequent decreased absorption reduces 
the peak local anesthetic concentration in blood, 
facilitates neuronal uptake, enhances the qual-
ity of analgesia, prolongs the duration of action, 
and limits toxic side eff ects. Vasoconstrictors have 
more pronounced eff ects on shorter-acting than 
longer-acting agents. For example, addition of epi-
nephrine to lidocaine usually extends the duration 
of anesthesia by at least 50%, but epinephrine has 
little or no eff ect on the duration of bupivacaine 
peripheral nerve blocks. Epinephrine and clonidine 
 
CHAPTER 16 Local Anesthetics
271
potentials in neurons throughout the body as well 
as impulse generation and conduction in the heart, 
it is not surprising that local anesthetics in high cir-
culating concentrations could have the propensity 
for systemic toxicity. Although organ system effects 
are discussed for these drugs as a group, individual 
drugs differ. 
 Potency at most toxic side eff ects correlates with 
potency at nerve blocks. Maximum safe doses are 
listed in  Table 16–3 , but it must be recognized that 
the maximum safe dose depends on the patient, the 
specifi c nerve block, the rate of injection, and a long 
list of other factors. In other words, tables of pur-
ported maximal safe doses are nearly nonsensical. 
Mixtures of local anesthetics should be considered 
to have additive toxic eff ects; therefore, a solution 
containing 50% of the toxic dose of lidocaine and 
50% of the toxic dose of bupivacaine if injected by 
accident intravenously will produce toxic eff ects. 
 A. Neurological 
9
 The central nervous system is vulnerable to 
local anesthetic toxicity and is the site of pre-
monitory signs of rising blood concentrations in 
awake patients. Early symptoms include circumoral 
numbness, tongue paresthesia, dizziness, tinnitus, 
and blurred vision. Excitatory signs include restless-
ness, agitation, nervousness, garrulousness, and a 
feeling of “impending doom.” Muscle twitching her-
alds the onset of tonic–clonic seizures. Still higher 
blood concentrations may produce central nervous 
system depression (eg, coma and respiratory arrest). 
The excitatory reactions are thought to be the result 
of selective blockade of inhibitory pathways. Potent, 
highly lipid-soluble local anesthetics produce sei-
zures at lower blood concentrations than less potent 
agents. Benzodiazepines and hyperventilation raise 
the threshold of local anesthetic-induced seizures. 
Both respiratory and metabolic acidosis reduce the 
seizure threshold. Propofol (0.5–2 mg/kg) quickly 
and reliably terminates seizure activity (as do com-
parable doses of benzodiazepines or barbiturates). 
Maintaining a clear airway with adequate ventilation 
and oxygenation is of key importance. 
 Infused local anesthetics have a variety of 
actions. Systemically administered local anesthetics 
such as lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) can decrease cerebral 
their redistribution into the bloodstream, as it does 
for all other nerve blocks. In contrast to other 
ester anesthetics, cocaine is partially metabolized 
(N-methylation and ester hydrolysis) in the liver 
and partially excreted unchanged in the urine. 
 2. Amides —Amide local anesthetics are metabo-
lized (N-dealkylation and hydroxylation) by micro-
somal P-450 enzymes in the liver. Th e rate of amide 
metabolism depends on the specifi c agent (prilo-
caine > lidocaine > mepivacaine > ropivacaine >
bupivacaine) but overall is consistently slower than 
ester hydrolysis of ester local anesthetics. Decreases 
in hepatic function (eg, cirrhosis of the liver) or liver 
blood fl ow (eg, congestive heart failure, β blockers, or 
H 2 -receptor blockers) will reduce the metabolic rate 
and potentially predispose patients to having greater 
blood concentrations and a greater risk of systemic 
toxicity. Very little unmetabolized local anesthetic 
is excreted by the kidneys, although water-soluble 
metabolites are dependent on renal clearance. 
 Prilocaine is the only local anesthetic that is 
metabolized to  o -toluidine, which produces met-
hemoglobinemia in a dose-dependent fashion. 
Classical teaching was that a defi ned minimal 
dose of prilocaine was needed to produce clini-
cally important methemoglobinemia (in the range 
of 10 mg/kg); however, recent studies have shown 
that younger, healthier patients develop medically 
important methemoglobinemia aft er lower doses of 
prilocaine (and at lower doses than needed in older, 
sicker patients). Prilocaine is generally not used for 
epidural anesthesia during labor or in larger doses 
in patients with limited cardiopulmonary reserve. 
 Benzocaine, a common ingredient in topical 
local anesthetic sprays, can also cause danger-
ous levels of methemoglobinemia . For this rea-
son, many hospitals no longer permit benzocaine 
spray during endoscopic procedures. Treatment of 
medically important methemoglobinemia includes 
intravenous methylene blue (1–2  mg/kg of a 1% 
solution over 5 min). Methylene blue reduces met-
hemoglobin (Fe 3+ ) to hemoglobin (Fe 2+ ). 
 Eﬀ ects on Organ Systems 
 Because inhibition of voltage-gated Na channels 
from circulating local anesthetics might affect action 
272 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Cocaine stimulates the central nervous system 
and at moderate doses usually causes a sense of 
euphoria. An overdose is heralded by restlessness, 
emesis, tremors, convulsions, arrhythmias, respira-
tory failure, and cardiac arrest. 
 Local anesthetics temporarily inhibit neuro-
nal function.  In the past, unintentional injection 
of large volumes of chloroprocaine into the sub-
arachnoid space (during attempts at epidural 
anesthesia), produced total spinal anesthesia 
and marked hypotension, and caused prolonged 
blood fl ow and attenuate the rise in intracranial 
pressure that may accompany intubation in patients 
with decreased intracranial compliance. Infusions 
of lidocaine and procaine have been used to sup-
plement general anesthetic techniques, as they are 
capable of reducing the MAC of volatile anesthetics 
by up to 40%. Infusions of lidocaine inhibit infl am-
mation and reduce postoperative pain. Infused lido-
caine reduces postoperative opioid requirements 
suffi  ciently to reduce length of stay aft er colorectal 
or open prostate surgery. 
 TABLE 163 Clinical use of local anesthetic agents. 
Agent
Techniques
Concentrations 
Available
Maximum 
Dose (mg/kg)
Typical Duration 
of Nerve Blocks 1 
 Esters 
Benzocaine
Topical 2 
20%
NA 3 
NA
Chloroprocaine
Epidural, infiltration, peripheral 
nerve block, spinal 4 
1%, 2%, 3%
12
Short
Cocaine
Topical
4%, 10%
3
NA
Procaine
Spinal, local infiltration
1%, 2%, 10%
12
Short
Tetracaine 
(amethocaine)
Spinal, topical (eye)
0.2%, 0.3%, 0.5%, 1%, 2%
3
Long
 Amides 
Bupivacaine
Epidural, spinal, infiltration, 
peripheral nerve block
0.25%, 0.5%, 0.75%
3
Long
Lidocaine 
(lignocaine)
Epidural, spinal, infiltration, 
peripheral nerve block, 
intravenous regional, topical
0.5%, 1%, 1.5%, 2%, 4%, 5%
 4.5 
 7 (with epinephrine) 
Medium
Mepivacaine
Epidural, infiltration, peripheral 
nerve block, spinal
1%, 1.5%, 2%, 3%
 4.5 
 7 (with epinephrine) 
Medium
Prilocaine
EMLA (topical), epidural, 
intravenous regional (outside 
North America)
0.5%, 2%, 3%, 4%
8
Medium
Ropivacaine
Epidural, spinal, infiltration, 
peripheral nerve block
0.2%, 0.5%, 0.75%, 1%
3
Long
 1 Wide variation depending on concentration, location, technique, and whether combined with a vasoconstrictor (epinephrine). Generally the 
shortest duration is with spinal anesthesia and the longest with peripheral nerve blocks.
 2 No longer recommended for topical anesthesia.
 3 NA, not applicable.
 4 Recent literature describes this agent for short-duration spinal anesthesias.
 
CHAPTER 16 Local Anesthetics
273
anesthetics 
relax 
bronchial 
smooth 
muscle. 
Intravenous lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) may be effective 
in blocking the reflex bronchoconstriction some-
times associated with intubation. Lidocaine (or any 
other inhaled agent) administered as an aerosol can 
lead to bronchospasm in some patients with reac-
tive airway disease. 
 C. Cardiovascular 
 All local anesthetics depress myocardial automa-
ticity (spontaneous phase IV depolarization). 
Myocardial contractility and conduction velocity 
are also depressed at higher concentrations. These 
effects result from direct cardiac muscle membrane 
changes (ie, cardiac Na channel blockade) and in 
intact organisms from inhibition of the autonomic 
nervous system. All local anesthetics except cocaine 
produce smooth muscle relaxation at higher con-
centrations, which may cause some degree of arte-
riolar vasodilation. At low concentrations all local 
anesthetics inhibit nitric oxide, causing vasocon-
striction. At increased blood concentrations the 
combination of arrhythmias, heart block, depres-
sion of ventricular contractility, and hypotension 
may culminate in cardiac arrest.  Major car-
diovascular toxicity usually requires about 
three times the local anesthetic concentration in 
blood as that required to produce seizures. Cardiac 
arrhythmias or circulatory collapse are the usual 
presenting signs of local anesthetic overdose dur-
ing general anesthesia. Particularly in awake sub-
jects, signs of transient cardiovascular stimulation 
(tachycardia and hypertension) may occur with 
central nervous system excitation at local anes-
thetic concentrations producing central nervous 
system toxic side effects. 
 Intravenous amiodarone provides eff ective 
treatment for some forms of ventricular arrhyth-
mias. Myocardial contractility and arterial blood 
pressure are generally unaff ected by the usual 
intravenous doses. Th e hypertension associated 
with laryngoscopy and intubation is attenuated 
in some patients by intravenous administration of 
lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) 1–3 min prior to instrumen-
tation. On the other hand, overdoses of lidocaine 
can lead to marked left  ventricular contractile 
dysfunction. 
10
neurological defi cits . Th e cause of this neural tox-
icity may be direct neurotoxicity or a combination 
of the low pH of chloroprocaine and a preserva-
tive, sodium bisulfi te. Th e latter has been replaced 
in some formulations by an antioxidant, a deriva-
tive of disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
(EDTA). Chloroprocaine has also been occasion-
ally associated with severe back pain following 
epidural administration. Th e etiology is unclear. 
Chloroprocaine is available in a preservative-free 
formulation, which has been used in recent studies 
safely and successfully for short duration, outpatient 
spinal anesthetics. 
 Administration of 5% lidocaine has been asso-
ciated with neurotoxicity (cauda equina syndrome) 
following infusion through small-bore catheters 
used in continuous spinal anesthesia. Th is may be 
due to pooling of drug around the cauda equina, 
resulting in high concentrations and permanent 
neuronal damage. Animal data suggest that the 
extent of histological evidence of neurotoxicity fol-
lowing repeat intrathecal injection is lidocaine =
 tetracaine > bupivacaine > ropivacaine. 
 Transient neurological symptoms, which con-
sist of dysesthesia, burning pain, and aching in the 
lower extremities and buttocks, have been reported 
following spinal anesthesia with a variety of local 
anesthetic agents, most commonly aft er use of 
lidocaine for outpatient spinal anesthesia in men 
undergoing surgery in the lithotomy position. Th ese 
symptoms have been attributed to radicular irrita-
tion and typically resolve within 1–4 weeks. Many 
clinicians have substituted 2-chloroprocaine, mepi-
vacaine, or small doses of bupivacaine for lidocaine 
in spinal anesthesia in the hope of avoiding these 
transient symptoms. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Lidocaine depresses hypoxic drive (the ventila-
tory response to low Pa O 2 ). Apnea can result from 
phrenic and intercostal nerve paralysis or depres-
sion of the medullary respiratory center following 
direct exposure to local anesthetic agents (as may 
occur after retrobulbar blocks; see Chapter  36). 
Apnea after administration of a “high” spinal or 
epidural anesthetic is nearly always the result of 
hypotension, rather than phrenic block. Local 
274 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
include hypertension and ventricular ectopy. Th e 
latter contraindicated its use in patients anesthetized 
with halothane.  Cocaine-induced arrhythmias
have been successfully treated with adrenergic and 
Ca channel antagonists. Cocaine produces vasocon-
striction when applied topically and is a useful agent 
to reduce pain and epistaxis related to nasal intuba-
tion in awake patients. 
 D. Immunological 
12
 True hypersensitivity reactions to local anes-
thetic agents—as distinct from systemic tox-
icity caused by excessive plasma concentration—are 
uncommon. Esters appear more likely to induce a 
true allergic reaction (due to IgG or IgE antibodies) 
especially if they are derivatives (eg, procaine or 
benzocaine) of  p -aminobenzoic acid, a known 
allergen. Commercial multidose preparations of 
amides often contain  methylparaben , which has a 
chemical structure vaguely similar to that of PABA. 
As a consequence, generations of anesthesiologists 
have speculated whether this preservative may be 
responsible for most of the apparent allergic 
responses to amide agents. The signs and treatment 
of allergic drug reactions are discussed in 
Chapter 55. 
 E. Musculoskeletal 
 When directly injected into skeletal muscle (eg, 
trigger-point injection treatment of myofas-
cial pain), local anesthetics are mildly myotoxic. 
Regeneration usually occurs 3–4 weeks after local 
anesthetic injection into muscle. Concomitant 
steroid or epinephrine injection worsens the 
myonecrosis. 
 F. Hematological 
 Lidocaine mildly depresses normal blood coagula-
tion (reduced thrombosis and decreased platelet 
aggregation) and enhances fibrinolysis of whole 
blood as measured by thromboelastography. These 
effects may underlie the reduced efficacy of an epi-
dural autologous blood patch shortly after local 
anesthetic administration and the lower incidence 
of embolic events in patients receiving epidural 
anesthetics (in older studies of patients not receiving 
prophylaxis against deep vein thrombosis). 
11
 Unintentional intravascular injection of bupi-
vacaine during regional anesthesia may pro-
duce severe cardiovascular toxicity, including left 
ventricular depression, atrioventricular heart block, 
and life-threatening arrhythmias such as ventricular 
tachycardia and fibrillation. Pregnancy, hypoxemia, 
and respiratory acidosis are predisposing risk fac-
tors. Young children may also be at increased risk of 
toxicity. Multiple studies have demonstrated that 
bupivacaine is associated with more pronounced 
changes in conduction and a greater risk of terminal 
arrhythmias than comparable doses of lidocaine. 
Mepivacaine, ropivacaine, and bupivacaine have 
chiral carbons and therefore can exist in either of 
two optical isomers (enantiomers). The R(+) optical 
isomer of bupivacaine blocks more avidly and dis-
sociates more slowly from cardiac Na channels than 
does the S(−) optical isomer. Resuscitation from 
bupivacaine-induced cardiac toxicity is often diffi-
cult and resistant to standard resuscitation drugs. 
Recent reports suggest that bolus administration of 
nutritional lipid solutions at 1.5 mL/kg can resusci-
tate bupivacaine-intoxicated patients who do not 
respond to standard therapy. Ropivacaine shares 
many physicochemical properties with bupivacaine. 
Onset time and duration of action are similar, but 
ropivacaine produces less motor block when injected 
at the same volume and concentration as bupiva-
caine (which may reflect an overall lower potency as 
compared with bupivacaine). Ropivacaine appears 
to have a greater therapeutic index than bupivacaine. 
This improved safety profile likely reflects its formu-
lation as a pure S(−) isomer—that is, having no R(+) 
isomer—as opposed to racemic bupivacaine. 
Levobupivacaine, the S(−) isomer of bupivacaine, 
which is no longer available in the United States, was 
reported to have fewer cardiovascular and cerebral 
side effects than the racemic mixture; studies sug-
gest its cardiovascular effects may approximate 
those of ropivacaine. 
 Cocaine’s cardiovascular reactions are unlike 
those of any other local anesthetic. Adrenergic 
nerve terminals normally reabsorb norepineph-
rine aft er its release. Cocaine inhibits this reup-
take, thereby potentiating the eff ects of adrenergic 
stimulation. Cardiovascular responses to cocaine 
 
CHAPTER 16 Local Anesthetics 
275 
 What prophylactic measures should be 
immediately taken? 
 The patient should already be receiving sup-
plemental oxygen. She should be closely observed 
for a possible (but unlikely) seizure . 
 If symptoms progress to a generalized 
convulsion, what treatment should be initiated? 
 The laboring patient is always considered to 
be at risk for aspiration (see Chapter 41). Therefore, 
protecting the airway is an important concern. 
Immediate 
administration 
of 
succinylcholine 
should be followed by a rapid-sequence intubation 
(see Case Discussion, Chapter 17). Although the 
succinylcholine will eliminate tonic–clonic activity, 
it will not address the underlying cerebral excitabil-
ity. An anticonvulsant such as midazolam (1–2 mg) 
or propofol (20–50 mg) should be administered 
with or before succinylcholine. It is clear from this 
sequence of events that wherever conduction 
anesthetics are administered, comparable resusci-
tation drugs and equipment must be available as 
for a general anesthetic . 
 What could have been expected if a large dose 
of bupivacaine (eg, 15 mL 0.5% bupivacaine)—
instead of lidocaine—had been given 
intravascularly? 
 When administered at “comparably anesthe-
tizing” doses bupivacaine is more cardiotoxic than 
lidocaine. Acute acidosis (nearly universal after a 
seizure) tends to potentiate local anesthetic toxic-
ity. Ventricular arrhythmias and conduction dis-
turbances may lead to cardiac arrest and death. 
Bupivacaine is considered a more potent cardiac Na 
channel inhibitor because Na channels unbind bupi-
vacaine more slowly than lidocaine. Amiodarone 
should be considered the preferred alternative 
to lidocaine in the treatment of local anesthetic-
induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Vasopressors 
may include epinephrine and vasopressin. The 
reason for the apparent greater susceptibility to 
local anesthetic cardiotoxicity during pregnancy is 
unclear. Although total dose (not concentration) of 
local anesthetic determines toxicity, the Food and 
 Drug Interactions 
 Local anesthetics potentiate nondepolarizing mus-
cle relaxant blockade in laboratory experiments, 
but the clinical importance of this observation is 
unknown (and probably nil). 
 Succinylcholine and ester local anesthetics 
depend on pseudocholinesterase for metabolism. 
Concurrent administration might conceivably 
increase the time that both drugs remain unmetabo-
lized in the bloodstream. Th ere is likely no actual 
clinical importance of this potential interaction. 
 Dibucaine, an amide local anesthetic, inhib-
its pseudocholinesterase, and the extent of inhibi-
tion by dibucaine defi nes one family of genetically 
abnormal pseudocholinesterases (see Chapter 11). 
Pseudocholinesterase inhibitors (eg, organophos-
phate poisons) can prolong the metabolism of ester 
local anesthetics (see  Table 11–3 ). 
 Histamine (H 2 ) receptor blockers and β block-
ers (eg, propranolol) decrease hepatic blood fl ow 
and lidocaine clearance. Opioids potentiate epidural 
and spinal analgesia produced by local anesthet-
ics. Similarly α 2 -adrenergic agonists (eg, clonidine) 
potentiate local anesthetic analgesia produced 
aft er epidural or peripheral nerve block injections. 
Epidural chloroprocaine may interfere with the 
analgesic actions of neuraxial morphine, notably 
aft er cesarean delivery. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Local Anesthetic Overdose 
 An 18-year-old woman in the active stage of labor 
requests an epidural anesthetic. Immediately 
following the epidural injection of 2 mL and 
5 mL test doses of 2% lidocaine, the patient 
complains of lip numbness and becomes very 
apprehensive . 
 What is your presumptive diagnosis? 
 Circumoral 
numbness 
and 
apprehension 
imme diately following administration of lidocaine 
suggest an intravascular injection. These signs will 
not always be followed by a seizure . 
276 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology
 Hadzic A (editor):  Textbook of Regional Anesthesia 
and Acute Pain Management . McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
Includes discussions of the selection of local 
anesthetic agents. 
 Hardman J, Limbird L, Gilman A:  Goodman and Gilman’s 
The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics , 12th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Rosenblatt MA, Abel M, Fischer GW, et al: Successful 
use of a 20% lipid emulsion to resuscitate a patient 
after a presumed bupivacaine–related cardiac arrest. 
Anesthesiology 2006;105:217-218. 
 Strichartz GR, Sanchez V, Arthur GR, et al: Fundamental 
properties of local anesthetics. II. Measured octanol: 
buffer partition coefficients and pKa values of 
clinically used drugs. Anesth Analg 1990;71:158. 
 WEB SITE 
 http://www.lipidrescue.org 
 This web site provides up-to-date information about 
the use of lipid for rescue from local anesthetic 
toxicity. 
Drug Administration recommends against use of 
0.75% bupivacaine in pregnant and elderly patients . 
 What could have prevented the toxic 
reaction described? 
 The risk from an accidental intravascular injec-
tion of local anesthetic during attempted epi-
dural anesthesia is reduced by using test doses 
and administering the anesthetic dose in smaller, 
safer aliquots. Finally, one should administer only 
the minimum appropriate total dose of local anes-
thetic for a given regional anesthetic procedure . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Cousins MJ, Carr DB, Horlocker TT, Bridenbaugh PO 
(editors):  Cousins & Bridenbugh’s Neural Blockade 
in Clinical Anesthesia and Pain Medicine , 4th ed. 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2009. 
 277
 Adjuncts to Anesthesia 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
Diphenhydramine is one of a diverse 
group of drugs that competitively blocks 
H 1 receptors. Many drugs with H 1 -receptor 
antagonist properties have considerable 
antimuscarinic, or atropine-like, activity 
(eg, dry mouth), or antiserotonergic activity 
(antiemetic) . 
H 2 blockers reduce the perioperative risk of 
aspiration pneumonia by decreasing gastric 
ﬂ uid volume and raising the pH of gastric 
contents . 
Metoclopramide increases lower esophageal 
sphincter tone, speeds gastric emptying, and 
lowers gastric ﬂ uid volume by enhancing 
the stimulatory eﬀ ects of acetylcholine on 
intestinal smooth muscle . 
Ondansetron, granisetron, and dolasetron 
selectively block serotonin 5-HT 3 receptors, 
with little or no eﬀ ect on dopamine 
receptors. 5-HT 3 receptors, which are located 
peripherally and centrally, appear to play 
an important role in the initiation of the 
vomiting reﬂ ex . 
Ketorolac is a parenterally administered 
nonsteroidal antiinﬂ ammatory drug 
that provides analgesia by inhibiting 
prostaglandin synthesis . 
Clonidine is a commonly used 
antihypertensive agent but in anesthesia 
it is used as an adjunct for epidural 
1
2
3
4
5
6
and peripheral nerve block anesthesia 
and analgesia. It is often used in the 
management of patients with chronic 
neuropathic pain to increase the eﬃ  cacy 
of epidural opioid infusions . 
Dexmedetomidine is a parenteral selective 
α 2 agonist with sedative properties. 
It appears to be more selective for the 
α 2 receptor than clonidine . 
 Selective activation of carotid 
chemoreceptors by low doses of doxapram 
stimulates hypoxic drive, producing an 
increase in tidal volume and a slight increase 
in respiratory rate. However, doxapram is 
not a speciﬁ c reversal agent and should 
not replace standard supportive therapy 
(ie, mechanical ventilation) . 
Naloxone reverses the agonist activity 
associated with endogenous or exogenous 
opioid compounds . 
Flumazenil is useful in the reversal of 
benzodiazepine sedation and the treatment 
of benzodiazepine overdose . 
Aspiration does not necessarily result in 
aspiration pneumonia. The seriousness of 
the lung damage depends on the volume 
and composition of the aspirate. Patients are 
at risk if their gastric volume is greater than 
25 mL (0.4 mL/kg) and their gastric pH is less 
than 2.5 . 
7
8
9
10
11
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
17
278 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
acid histidine. Histaminergic neurons are primarily 
located in the posterior hypothalamus but have wide 
projections in the brain. Histamine also normally 
plays a major role in the secretion of hydrochloric 
acid by parietal cells in the stomach ( Figure 17–1 ). 
Th e highest concentrations of histamine are found 
in the storage granules of circulating basophils and 
mast cells throughout the body. Mast cells tend to 
be concentrated in connective tissue just beneath 
epithelial (mucosal) surfaces. Histamine release 
(degranulation) from these cells can be triggered by 
chemical, mechanical, or immunological stimulation 
 Multiple receptors mediate the eff ects of hista-
mine. Th e H 1 receptor activates phospholipase C, 
whereas the H 2 receptor increases intracellular cyclic 
 Many drugs are routinely administered by anesthe-
tists perioperatively to protect against aspiration 
pneumonitis, to prevent or reduce the incidence of 
perianesthetic nausea and vomiting, and to reverse 
respiratory depression secondary to narcotics or 
benzodiazepines. Th is chapter discusses these agents 
along with other unique classes of drugs that are 
oft en administered as adjuvants during anesthesia 
or analgesia. 
 Aspiration 
 Aspiration of gastric contents is a rare, potentially 
fatal, and oft en litigious event that can complicate 
anesthesia. Based on an animal study, it is oft en stated 
that aspiration of 25 mL of volume at a pH of less than 
2.5 will be suffi  cient to produce aspiration pneumo-
nia. Many factors place patients at risk for aspiration, 
including “full” stomach, intestinal obstruction, hiatal 
hernia, obesity, pregnancy, refl ux disease, emergency 
surgery, and inadequate depth of anesthesia. 
 Many approaches are employed to reduce the 
potential for aspiration perioperatively. Many of these 
interventions, such as the holding of cricoid pressure 
(Sellick’s maneuver) and rapid sequence induction, 
may only off er limited protection. Cricoid pressure 
can be applied incorrectly and fail to occlude the 
esophagus. Whether it has  any benefi cial eff ect on 
outcomes even when it is applied correctly remains 
unproven. Anesthetic agents can decrease lower 
esophageal sphincter tone and decrease or obliterate 
the gag refl ex, theoretically increasing the risk for pas-
sive aspiration. Additionally, inadequately anesthe-
tized patients can vomit with an unprotected airway, 
likewise leading to aspiration. Diff erent combinations 
of premedications have been advocated to reduce gas-
tric volume, increase gastric pH, or augment lower 
esophageal sphincter tone. Th ese agents include anti-
histamines, antacids, and metoclopramide. 
 HISTAMINERECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS 
 Histamine Physiology 
 Histamine is found in the central nervous system, in 
the gastric mucosa, and in other peripheral tissues. 
It is synthesized by decarboxylation of the amino 
 FIGURE 171  Secretion of hydrochloric acid is 
normally mediated by gastrin-induced histamine release 
from enterochromaﬃ  n-like cells (ECL) in the stomach. 
Note that acid secretion by gastric parietal cells can 
also be increased indirectly by acetylcholine (AC) via 
stimulation of M 3 receptors and directly by gastrin 
through an increase in intracellular Ca 2+ concentration. 
Prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) can inhibit acid secretion by 
decreasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
activity. ATP, adenosine triphosphate; G i , G inhibitory 
protein; G s , G stimulatory protein. 
Gastrin
ECL
Histamine
Gastrin
Acetyl-
choline
Protein kinases
ATP
cAMP
Ca2+
PGE2
Gs
AC
Gi
Ca2+
H+
K+
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia
279
 C. Gastrointestinal 
 Activation of H 2 receptors in parietal cells increases 
gastric acid secretion. Stimulation of H 1 receptors 
leads to contraction of intestinal smooth muscle. 
 D. Dermal 
 Th e classic wheal-and-fl are response of the skin to 
histamine results from increased capillary perme-
ability and vasodilation, primarily via H 1 -receptor 
activation. 
 E. Immunological 
 Histamine is a major mediator of type 1 hypersen-
sitivity reactions. H 1 -Receptor stimulation attracts 
leukocytes and induces synthesis of prostaglandin. 
In contrast, the H 2 receptor appears to activate sup-
pressor T lymphocytes. 
 1. H 1 -Receptor Antagonists 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Diphenhydramine (an ethanolamine) is one 
of a diverse group of drugs that competitively 
blocks H 1 receptors ( Table 17–1 ). Many drugs with 
1
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). An H 3 receptor 
is primarily located on histamine-secreting cells and 
mediates negative feedback, inhibiting the synthesis 
and release of additional histamine. Histamine- N -
methyltransferase metabolizes histamine to inactive 
metabolites that are excreted in the urine. 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Histamine reduces arterial blood pressure but 
increases heart rate and myocardial contractility. 
H 1 -Receptor stimulation increases capillary perme-
ability and enhances ventricular irritability, whereas 
H 2 -receptor stimulation increases heart rate and 
increases contractility. Both types of receptors medi-
ate peripheral  arteriolar dilation and some coronary 
vasodilation. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Histamine constricts bronchiolar smooth muscle via 
the H 1 receptor. H 2 -Receptor stimulation may pro-
duce mild bronchodilation. Histamine has variable 
eff ects on the pulmonary vasculature; the H 1 recep-
tor appears to mediate some pulmonary vasodila-
tion, whereas the H 2 receptor may be responsible for 
histamine-mediated pulmonary vasoconstriction. 
 TABLE 171 Properties of commonly used H 1 -receptor antagonists. 1 
Drug
Route
Dose (mg)
Duration (h)
Sedation
Antiemesis
Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
PO, IM, IV
25–50
3–6
+++
++
Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine)
PO, IM, IV
50–100
3–6
+++
++
Chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton)
PO
IM, IV
2–12
5–20
4–8
++
0
Hydroxyzine (Atarax, Vistaril)
PO, IM
25–100
4–12
+++
++
Promethazine (Phenergan)
PO, IM, IV
12.5–50
4–12
+++
+++
Cetirizine (Zyrtec)
PO
5–10
24
+
Cyproheptadine (Periactin)
PO
4
6–8
++
Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine)
PO
50
6–12
++
Fexofenadine (Allegra)
PO
30–60
12
0
Meclizine (Antivert)
PO
12.5–50
8–24
+
Loratadine (Claritin)
PO
10
24
0
 1 0, no eﬀ ect; ++, moderate activity; +++, marked activity.
280 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
management of Cushing’s Disease, carcinoid syn-
drome, and vascular (cluster) headaches. 
 Dosage 
 Th e usual adult dose of diphenhydramine is 25–
50 mg (0.5–1.5 mg/kg) orally, intramuscularly, or 
intravenously every 4–6 h. Th e doses of other H 1 -
receptor antagonists are listed in  Table 17–1 . 
 Drug Interactions 
 Th e sedative eff ects of H 1 -receptor antagonists can 
potentiate other central nervous system depressants 
such as barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and opioids. 
 2. H 2 -Receptor Antagonists 
 Mechanism of Action 
 H 2 -Receptor antagonists include cimetidine, famoti-
dine, nizatidine, and ranitidine ( Table 17–2 ). Th ese 
agents competitively inhibit histamine binding to 
H 2 receptors, thereby reducing gastric acid output 
and raising gastric pH. 
 Clinical Uses 
 All H 2 -receptor antagonists are equally eff ective in 
the treatment of peptic duodenal and gastric ulcers, 
hypersecretory states (Zollinger–Ellison syndrome), 
and gastroesophageal refl ux disease (GERD). 
Intravenous preparations are also used to prevent 
stress ulceration in critically ill patients. Duodenal 
and gastric ulcers are usually associated with 
Helicobacter pylori infection, which is treated with 
combinations of bismuth, tetracycline, and metroni-
dazole.  By decreasing gastric fl uid volume and 
hydrogen ion content, H 2 blockers reduce the 
perioperative risk of aspiration pneumonia. Th ese 
drugs aff ect the pH of only those gastric secretions 
that occur aft er their administration. 
 Th e combination of H 1 - and H 2 -receptor 
antagonists provides some protection against drug-
induced allergic reactions (eg, intravenous radio-
contrast, chymopapain injection for lumbar disk 
disease, protamine, vital blue dyes used for sentinel 
node biopsy). Although pretreatment with these 
agents does not reduce histamine release, it may 
decrease subsequent hypotension. 
2
H 1 -receptor antagonist properties have considerable 
antimuscarinic, or atropine-like, activity (eg, dry 
mouth), or antiserotonergic activity (antiemetic). 
Promethazine is a phenothiazine derivative with H 1 -
receptor antagonist activity as well as antidopami-
nergic and α-adrenergic–blocking properties. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Like other H 1 -receptor antagonists, diphenhydr-
amine has a multitude of therapeutic uses: suppres-
sion of allergic reactions and symptoms of upper 
respiratory tract infections (eg, urticaria, rhinitis, 
conjunctivitis); vertigo, nausea, and vomiting (eg, 
motion sickness, Ménière’s disease); sedation; sup-
pression of cough; and dyskinesia (eg, parkinson-
ism, drug-induced extrapyramidal side eff ects). 
Some of these actions are predictable from an 
understanding of histamine physiology, whereas 
others are the result of the drugs’ antimusca-
rinic and antiserotonergic eff ects ( Table 17–1 ). 
Although H 1 blockers prevent the bronchocon-
strictive response to histamine, they are ineff ective 
in treating bronchial asthma, which is primar-
ily due to other mediators. Likewise, H 1 blockers 
will not completely prevent the hypotensive eff ect 
of histamine unless an H 2 blocker is administered 
concomitantly. 
 Th e antiemetic and mild hypnotic eff ects of 
antihistaminic drugs (particularly diphenhydr-
amine, promethazine, and hydroxyzine) have led 
to their use for premedication. Although many H 1
blockers cause signifi cant sedation, ventilatory drive 
is usually unaff ected in the absence of other sedative 
medications. Promethazine and hydroxyzine were 
oft en combined with opioids to potentiate analge-
sia. Newer (second-generation) antihistamines tend 
to produce little or no sedation because of limited 
penetration across the blood–brain barrier. Th is 
group of drugs is used primarily for allergic rhini-
tis and urticaria. Th ey include loratadine, fexofena-
dine, and cetirizine. Many preparations for allergic 
rhinitis oft en also contain vasoconstrictors such as 
pseudoephedrine. Meclizine and dimenhydrinate 
are used primarily as an antiemetic, particularly for 
motion sickness, and in the management of ver-
tigo. Cyproheptadine, which also has signifi cant 
serotonin antagonist activity, has been used in the 
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia 
281 
are eliminated primarily by the kidneys, the dose 
should be reduced in patients with signifi cant renal 
dysfunction. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Cimetidine may reduce hepatic blood fl ow and binds 
to the cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidases. 
Th ese eff ects slow the metabolism of a multitude of 
drugs, including lidocaine, propranolol, diazepam, 
theophylline, phenobarbital, warfarin, and phenyt-
oin. Ranitidine is a weak inhibitor of the cytochrome 
P-450 system, and no signifi cant drug interactions 
have been demonstrated. Famotidine and nizatidine 
do not appear to aff ect the cytochrome P-450 system. 
 ANTACIDS 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Antacids neutralize the acidity of gastric fl uid by 
providing a base (usually hydroxide, carbonate, 
bicarbonate, citrate, or trisilicate) that reacts with 
hydrogen ions to form water. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Common uses of antacids include the treatment of 
gastric and duodenal ulcers, GERD, and Zollinger–
Ellison syndrome. In anesthesiology, antacids 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Rapid intravenous injection of cimetidine or raniti-
dine has been rarely associated with hypotension, 
bradycardia, arrhythmias, and cardiac arrest. Th ese 
adverse cardiovascular eff ects have been reported 
following the administration of cimetidine to criti-
cally ill patients. In contrast, famotidine can be 
safely injected intravenously over a 2-min period. 
H 2 -Receptor antagonists change the gastric fl ora by 
virtue of their pH eff ects. Complications of long-
term cimetidine therapy include hepatotoxicity (ele-
vated serum transaminases), interstitial nephritis 
(elevated serum creatinine), granulocytopenia, and 
thrombocytopenia. Cimetidine also binds to andro-
gen receptors, occasionally causing gynecomastia 
and impotence. Finally, cimetidine has been asso-
ciated with changes in mental status ranging from 
lethargy and hallucinations to seizures, particularly 
in elderly patients. In contrast, ranitidine, nizatidine, 
and famotidine do not aff ect androgen receptors and 
penetrate the blood–brain barrier poorly. 
 Dosage 
 As a premedication to reduce the risk of aspira-
tion pneumonia, H 2 -receptor antagonists should 
be administered at bedtime and again at least 2 h 
before surgery ( Table 17–2 ). Because all four drugs 
 TABLE 172 Pharmacology of aspiration pneumonia prophylaxis. 1 
Drug
Route
Dose
Onset
Duration
Acidity
Volume
LES Tone
Cimetidine (Tagamet)
PO
IV
300–800 mg
300 mg
1–2 h
4–8 h
↓↓↓
↓↓
0
Ranitidine (Zantac)
PO
IV
150–300 mg
50 mg
1–2 h
10–12 h
↓↓↓
↓↓
0
Famotidine (Pepcid)
PO
IV
20–40 mg
20 mg
1–2 h
10–12 h
↓↓↓
↓↓
0
Nizatidine (Axid)
PO
150–300 mg
0.5–1 h
10–12 h
↓↓↓
↓↓
0
Nonparticulate antacids 
(Bicitra, Polycitra)
PO
15–30 mL
5–10 min
30–60 min
↓↓↓
↑
0
Metoclopramide (Reglan)
IV
PO
10 mg
10–15 mg
1–3 min
1–2 h
30–60 min 2 
0
↓↓
↑↑
 1 0, no eﬀ ect; ↓↓, moderate decrease; ↓↓↓, marked decrease; ↑, slight increase; ↑↑, moderate increase; LES, lower esophageal sphincter.
 2 Oral metoclopramide has a quite variable onset of action and duration of action.
282 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
volume. Th ese properties account for its effi  cacy in 
the treatment of patients with diabetic gastroparesis 
and GERD, as well as prophylaxis for those at risk 
for aspiration pneumonia. Metoclopramide does not 
aff ect the secretion of gastric acid or the pH of gas-
tric fl uid. 
 Metoclopramide produces an antiemetic eff ect 
by blocking dopamine receptors in the chemore-
ceptor trigger zone of the central nervous system. 
However, at doses used clinically during the periop-
erative period, the drug’s ability to reduce postop-
erative nausea and vomiting is negligible. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Rapid intravenous injection may cause abdominal 
cramping, and metoclopramide is contraindicated in 
patients with complete intestinal obstruction. It can 
induce a hypertensive crisis in patients with pheo-
chromocytoma by releasing catecholamines from the 
tumor. Sedation, nervousness, and extrapyramidal 
signs from dopamine antagonism (eg, akathisia) are 
uncommon and reversible. Nonetheless, metoclo-
pramide is best avoided in patients with Parkinson’s 
disease. Metoclopramide-induced increases in aldo-
sterone and prolactin secretion are probably inconse-
quential during short-term therapy. Metoclopramide 
may rarely result in hypotension and arrhythmias. 
 Dosage 
 An adult dose of 10–20 mg of metoclopramide 
(0.25 mg/kg) is eff ective orally, intramuscularly, or 
intravenously (injected over 5 min). Larger doses 
(1–2 mg/kg) have been used to prevent emesis 
during chemotherapy. Th e onset of action is much 
more rapid following parenteral (3–5 min) than oral 
(30–60 min) administration. Because metoclo-
pramide is excreted in the urine, its dose should be 
decreased in patients with renal dysfunction. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Antimuscarinic drugs (eg, atropine, glycopyr-
rolate) block the GI eff ects of metoclopramide. 
Metoclopramide decreases the absorption of orally 
administered cimetidine. Concurrent use of pheno-
thiazines or butyrophenones (droperidol) increases 
the likelihood of extrapyramidal side eff ects. 
provide protection against the harmful eff ects of 
aspiration pneumonia by raising the pH of gastric 
contents. Unlike H 2 -receptor antagonists, antac-
ids have an immediate eff ect. Unfortunately, they 
increase intragastric volume. Aspiration of particu-
late antacids (aluminum or magnesium hydroxide) 
produces abnormalities in lung function compa-
rable to those that occur following acid aspiration. 
Nonparticulate antacids (sodium citrate or sodium 
bicarbonate) are much less damaging to lung alveoli 
if aspirated. Furthermore, nonparticulate antacids 
mix with gastric contents better than particulate 
solutions. Timing is critical, as nonparticulate antac-
ids lose their eff ectiveness 30–60 min aft er ingestion. 
 Dosage 
 Th e usual adult dose of a 0.3 M solution of sodium 
citrate—Bicitra (sodium citrate and citric acid) or 
Polycitra (sodium citrate, potassium citrate, and 
citric acid)—is 15–30 mL orally, 15–30 min prior to 
induction. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Because antacids alter gastric and urinary pH, they 
change the absorption and elimination of many 
drugs. Th e rate of absorption of digoxin, cimetidine, 
and ranitidine is slowed, whereas the rate of pheno-
barbital elimination is quickened. 
 METOCLOPRAMIDE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Metoclopramide acts peripherally as a cholinomi-
metic (ie, facilitates acetylcholine transmission at 
selective muscarinic receptors) and centrally as a 
dopamine receptor antagonist. Its action as a proki-
netic agent in the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract 
is not dependent on vagal innervation but is abol-
ished by anticholinergic agents. It does not stimulate 
secretions. 
 Clinical Uses 
 By enhancing the stimulatory eff ects of acetyl-
choline on intestinal smooth muscle, metoclo-
pramide increases lower esophageal sphincter tone, 
speeds gastric emptying, and lowers gastric fl uid 
3
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia 
283 
 Postoperative Nausea 
& Vomiting PONV 
 Without any prophylaxis, PONV occurs in approx-
imately 20–30% of the general surgical population 
and up to 70–80% in patients with predisposing 
risk factors ( Table 17–3 ). As anesthetic duration 
increases, so, too, does PONV risk. When the 
risk is suffi  ciently great, prophylactic antiemetic 
medications are administered and strategies to 
reduce its incidence are initiated. Th e Society of 
Ambulatory Anesthesia (SAMBA) provides sim-
plifi ed risk scoring systems, which assign points 
for specifi c risk factors, as well as guidelines 
that assist in the management of at-risk patients 
( Table 17–4 ). Obesity, anxiety, and reversal of 
neuromuscular blockade are not independent risk 
factors for PONV. 
 Drugs used in the prophylaxis and treatment 
of PONV include 5-HT 3 antagonists, butyrophe-
nones, dexamethasone, neurokinin-1 receptor 
antagonists (aprepitant, Emend); antihistamines 
and transdermal scopolamine may also be used. 
At-risk patients oft en benefi t from one or more 
prophylactic measures. 
 PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Th ese agents, including omeprazole (Prilosec), lan-
soprazole (Prevacid), rabeprazole (Aciphex), esome-
prazole (Nexium), and pantoprazole (Protonix), 
bind to the proton pump of parietal cells in the gas-
tric mucosa and inhibit secretion of hydrogen ions. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are indicated for the 
treatment of duodenal ulcer, GERD, and Zollinger–
Ellison syndrome. Th ey may promote healing of 
peptic ulcers and erosive GERD more quickly than 
H 2 -receptor blockers. Th ere are ongoing ques-
tions regarding the safety of PPIs in patients taking 
clopidogrel (Plavix) because of concerns of inad-
equate antiplatelet therapy when these drugs are 
combined. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 PPIs are generally well tolerated, causing few side 
eff ects. Adverse side eff ects primarily involve the 
GI system (nausea, abdominal pain, constipation, 
diarrhea). On rare occasions, these drugs have been 
associated with myalgias, anaphylaxis, angioedema, 
and severe dermatological reactions. Long-term use 
of PPIs has also been associated with gastric entero-
chromaffi  n-like cell hyperplasia and an increased 
risk of pneumonia secondary to bacterial coloniza-
tion in the higher-pH environment. 
 Dosage 
 Recommended oral doses for adults are omeprazole, 
20 mg; lansoprazole, 15 mg; rabeprazole, 20 mg; and 
pantoprazole, 40 mg. Because these drugs are pri-
marily eliminated by the liver, repeat doses should be 
decreased in patients with severe liver impairment. 
 Drug Interactions 
 PPIs can interfere with hepatic P-450 enzymes, 
potentially decreasing the clearance of diazepam, 
warfarin, and phenytoin. Concurrent administra-
tion can decrease clopidogrel (Plavix) eff ectiveness, 
as the latter medication is dependent on hepatic 
enzymes for activation. 
 TABLE 173 Risk factors for postoperative 
nausea and vomiting (PONV). 1,2 
 Patient-specific risk factors: 
 Female gender 
 Nonsmoking status 
 History of PONV/motion sickness 
 Anesthetic risk factors: 
 Use of volatile anesthetics 
 Use of nitrous oxide 
 Use of intraoperative and postoperative opioids 
 Surgical risk factors: 
  Duration of surgery (each 30-min increase in duration 
increases PONV risk by 60%, so that a baseline risk of 
10% is increased by 16% after 30 min) 
 Type of surgery 
 1 Reproduced, with permission, from Gan TJ, Meyer TA, Apfel CC, 
et al: Society for ambulatory anesthesia guidelines for management 
of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 2007;105:1615.
 2 Risk factors are assigned points and an increasing number of points 
increases the likelihood of PONV. Refer to the Society of Ambulatory 
Anesthesia (SAMBA) guidelines.
284 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
dependent. When the myocardial endothelium is 
damaged following injury, serotonin produces vaso-
constriction. Th e pulmonary and renal vasculatures 
are very sensitive to the arterial vasoconstrictive 
eff ects of serotonin. Modest and transient increases 
in cardiac contractility and heart rate may occur 
immediately following serotonin release; refl ex bra-
dycardia oft en follows. Vasodilation in skeletal mus-
cle can subsequently cause hypotension. 
 B. Respiratory 
 Contraction of smooth muscle increases airway 
resistance. Bronchoconstriction from released sero-
tonin is oft en a prominent feature of carcinoid 
syndrome 
 C. Gastrointestinal 
 Direct smooth muscle contraction (via 5-HT 2 recep-
tors) and serotonin-induced release of acetylcholine 
in the myenteric plexus (via 5-HT 3 receptors) greatly 
augment peristalsis. Secretions are unaff ected. 
 D. Hematological 
 Activation of 5-HT 2 receptors causes platelet 
aggregation. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Ondansetron (Zofran), granisetron (Kytril), 
and dolasetron (Anzemet) selectively block 
serotonin 5-HT 3 receptors, with little or no eff ect 
on dopamine receptors ( Figure 17–2 ). 5-HT 3
4
 5HT 3 RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Serotonin Physiology 
 Serotonin, 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), is present 
in large quantities in platelets and the GI tract (entero-
chromaffi  n cells and the myenteric plexus). It is also 
an important neurotransmitter in multiple areas of 
the central nervous system. Serotonin is formed by 
hydroxylation and decarboxylation of tryptophan. 
Monoamine oxidase inactivates serotonin into 
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). Th e physiol-
ogy of serotonin is very complex because there are 
at least seven receptor types, most with  multiple sub-
types. Th e 5-HT 3 receptor mediates  vomiting and is 
found in the GI tract and the brain (area postrema). 
Th e 5-HT 2A receptors are responsible for smooth 
muscle contraction and platelet aggregation, the 
5-HT 4 receptors in the GI tract mediate secretion 
and peristalsis, and the 5-HT 6 and 5-HT 7 receptors 
are located primarily in the limbic system where they 
appear to play a role in depression. All except the 
5-HT 3 receptor are coupled to G proteins and aff ect 
either adenylyl cyclase or phospholipase C; eff ects of 
the 5-HT 3 receptor are mediated via an ion channel. 
 A. Cardiovascular 
 Except in the heart and skeletal muscle, serotonin is 
a powerful vasoconstrictor of arterioles and veins. 
Its vasodilator eff ect in the heart is endothelium 
 TABLE 174 SAMBA guidelines to reduce 
the risk of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting (PONV). 1 
 1. Identify patients at risk for PONV. 
 2. Employ management strategies to reduce PONV risk. 
 3.  Employ one to two prophylactic measures in adults at 
moderate PONV risk. 
 4. Use multiple interventions in patients at high PONV risk. 
 5.  Administer prophylactic antiemetic therapy to children 
at high risk using combination therapy. 
 6.  Provide antiemetic therapy to patients with PONV 
who did not receive prophylactic therapy or in whom 
prophylaxis failed. Therapy should be with a drug 
from a different class than that which failed to provide 
prophylaxis. 
 1 Data based on guidelines from the Society of Ambulatory Anesthesia 
(SAMBA). Refer to Gan TJ, Meyer TA, Apfel CC, et al: Society for 
ambulatory anesthesia guidelines for management of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 2007;105:1615.
 FIGURE 172  Ondansetron is structurally related to 
serotonin. 
Ondansetron
5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
C
OH
H
H
H
C
H
H
NH2
N
O
CH3
CH3
N
N
N
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia 
285 
 BUTYROPHENONES 
 Droperidol (0.625–1.25 mg) was previously used 
routinely for PONV prophylaxis. Given at the end 
of the procedure it blocks dopamine receptors that 
contribute to the development of PONV. Despite 
its eff ectiveness, many practitioners no longer rou-
tinely administer this medication because of a U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) black box 
warning related to concerns that doses described 
in the product labeling (“package insert”) may lead 
to QT prolongation and development of torsades 
des pointes dysrhythmia. However, the doses rel-
evant to the FDA warning, as acknowledged by 
the FDA, were those used for neurolept anesthesia 
(5–15 mg), not the much smaller doses employed 
for PONV. Cardiac monitoring is warranted when 
large doses of the drug are used. Th ere is no evi-
dence that use of droperidol at the doses routinely 
employed for PONV management increases the 
risk of sudden cardiac death in the perioperative 
population. 
 As with other drugs that antagonize dopamine, 
droperidol use in patients with Parkinson’s disease 
and in patients manifesting extrapyramidal signs 
should be carefully considered. 
 Th e phenothiazine, prochlorperazine (Com-
pazine), which aff ects multiple receptors (hista-
minergic, dopaminergic, muscarinic), may be used 
for PONV management. It may cause extrapyrami-
dal and anticholinergic side eff ects. Promethazine 
(Phenergan) works primarily as an anticholinergic 
agent and antihistamine and likewise can be used 
to treat PONV. As with other agents of this class, 
anticholinergic eff ects (sedation, delirium, confu-
sion, vision changes) can complicate the postop-
erative period. 
 DEXAMETHASONE 
 Dexamethasone (Decadron) in doses as small as 
4 mg has been shown to be as eff ective as ondan-
setron in reducing the incidence of PONV. 
Dexamethasone should be given at induction as 
opposed to the end of surgery, and its mechanism 
of action is unclear. Th ere appear to be no signifi -
cant or long-lasting systemic eff ects from this dose 
of glucocorticoid. 
receptors, which are located peripherally (abdomi-
nal vagal aff erents) and centrally (chemoreceptor 
trigger zone of the area postrema and the nucleus 
tractus solitarius), appear to play an important role 
in the initiation of the vomiting refl ex. Th e 5-HT 3 
receptors of the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the 
area postrema reside outside the blood–brain bar-
rier. Th e trigger zone is activated by substances such 
as anesthetics and opioids and signals the nucleus 
tractus solitarius, resulting in PONV. Emetogenic 
stimuli from the GI tract similarly stimulate the 
development of PONV. 
 Clinical Uses 
 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists are generally admin-
istered at the end of surgery. All these agents are 
eff ective antiemetics in the postoperative period. 
In comparison with other antiemetic agents such as 
droperidol (1.25 mg) and dexamethasone (4 mg), 
ondansetron appears equally eff ective. A new agent, 
palonosetron (Aloxi), has an extended duration of 
action and may reduce the incidence of postdis-
charge nausea and vomiting (PDNV). 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 5-HT 3 receptor antagonists are essentially devoid 
of serious side eff ects, even in amounts several 
times the recommended dose. Th ey do not appear 
to cause sedation, extrapyramidal signs, or respi-
ratory depression. Th e most commonly reported 
side eff ect is headache. All three drugs can slightly 
prolong the QT interval on the electrocardiogram. 
Th is eff ect may be more frequent with dolasetron, 
although it has not been associated with any adverse 
arrhythmias. Nonetheless, these drugs, particularly 
dolasetron, should be used cautiously in patients 
who are taking antiarrhythmic drugs or who have a 
prolonged QT interval. 
 Ondansetron undergoes extensive metabo-
lism in the liver via hydroxylation and conjuga-
tion by cytochrome P-450 enzymes. Liver failure 
impairs clearance several-fold, and the dose should 
be reduced accordingly. Th e recommended intrave-
nous dose is 12.5 mg for dolasetron and 1 mg for 
granisetron. All three drugs are available in oral for-
mulations for PONV prophylaxis. 
286 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
 Ketorolac, a peripherally acting drug, has 
become a popular alternative to opioids for postop-
erative analgesia because of its minimal central ner-
vous system side eff ects. Specifi cally, ketorolac does 
not cause respiratory depression, sedation, or nau-
sea and vomiting. In fact, ketorolac does not cross 
the blood–brain barrier to any signifi cant degree. 
Numerous studies have shown that oral and paren-
teral NSAIDs have an opioid-sparing eff ect. Th ey 
may be most benefi cial in patients at increased risk 
for postoperative respiratory depression or emesis. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 As with other NSAIDs, ketorolac inhibits platelet 
aggregation and prolongs bleeding time. It and other 
NSAIDs should therefore be used with caution in 
patients at risk for postoperative hemorrhage. Long-
term administration may lead to renal toxicity (eg, 
papillary necrosis) or GI tract ulceration with bleed-
ing and perforation. Because ketorolac depends 
on elimination, it should not be given to patients 
with kidney failure. Ketorolac is contraindicated in 
patients allergic to aspirin or NSAIDs. Patients with 
asthma have an increased incidence of aspirin sensi-
tivity (approximately 10%), particularly if they also 
have a history of nasal polyps (approximately 20%). 
 Dosage 
 Ketorolac has been approved for administration as 
either a 60 mg intramuscular or 30 mg intravenous 
loading dose; a maintenance dose of 15–30 mg every 
6 h is recommended. Elderly patients clear ketorolac 
more slowly and should receive reduced doses. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Aspirin decreases the protein binding of ketoro-
lac, increasing the amount of active unbound drug. 
Ketorolac does not aff ect minimum alveolar con-
centration of inhalation anesthetic agents, and its 
administration does not alter the hemodynamics of 
anesthetized patients. It decreases the postoperative 
requirement for opioid analgesics. 
 Other NSAID Adjuvant Drugs 
 Other NSAID agents are used perioperatively. 
Ketorolac and other NSAIDs inhibit cyclooxygenase 
 NEUROKININ1 RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST 
 Substance P is a neuropeptide that interacts at neu-
rokinin-1 (NK 1 ) receptors. NK 1 antagonists inhibit 
substance P at central and peripheral receptors. 
Aprepitant (Emend), an NK 1 antagonist, has been 
found to reduce PONV perioperatively and is addi-
tive with ondansetron for this indication. 
 OTHER PONV STRATEGIES 
 Several other agents and techniques have been 
employed to reduce the incidence of PONV. 
Transdermal scopolamine has been used eff ec-
tively, although it may produce central anticho-
linergic eff ects (confusion, blurred vision, and dry 
mouth). Acupuncture, acupressure, and transcuta-
neous electrical stimulation of the P6 acupuncture 
point can reduce PONV incidence and medication 
requirements. 
 As no single agent will both treat and prevent 
PONV, perioperative management centers on iden-
tifying patients at greatest risk so that prophylaxis, 
oft en with multiple agents, may be initiated. 
 Other Drugs Used as 
Adjuvants to Anesthesia 
 KETOROLAC 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Ketorolac is a parenteral nonsteroidal antiin-
fl ammatory drug (NSAID) that provides anal-
gesia by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Ketorolac is indicated for the short-term (<5 days) 
management of pain, and appears to be particularly 
useful in the immediate postoperative period. A 
standard dose of ketorolac provides analgesia equiv-
alent to 6–12 mg of morphine administered by the 
same route. Its time to onset is also similar to mor-
phine, but ketorolac has a longer duration of action 
(6–8 h). 
5
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia
287
peripheral nerves and is frequently added to local 
anesthetic solutions. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Clonidine is a commonly used antihyper-
tensive agent that reduces sympathetic tone, 
decreasing systemic vascular resistance, heart rate, 
and blood pressure. In anesthesia, clonidine is used 
as an adjunct for epidural, caudal, and peripheral 
nerve block anesthesia and analgesia. It is oft en used 
in the management of patients with chronic neuro-
pathic pain to increase the effi  cacy of epidural opioid 
infusions. When given epidurally, the analgesic eff ect 
of clonidine is segmental, being localized to the level 
at which it is injected or infused. When added to 
local anesthetics of intermediate duration (eg, mepi-
vacaine or lidocaine) administered for epidural or 
peripheral nerve block, clonidine will markedly pro-
long both the anesthetic and analgesic eff ects. 
 Unlabeled/investigational uses of clonidine 
include serving as an adjunct in premedication, 
control of withdrawal syndromes (nicotine, opioids, 
alcohol, and vasomotor symptoms of menopause), 
and treatment of glaucoma as well as various psychi-
atric disorders. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Sedation, dizziness, bradycardia, and dry mouth are 
common side eff ects. Less commonly, bradycardia, 
orthostatic hypotension, nausea, and diarrhea may 
be observed. Abrupt discontinuation of clonidine 
following long-term administration (>1 mo) can 
produce a withdrawal phenomenon characterized 
by rebound hypertension, agitation, and sympa-
thetic overactivity. 
 Dosage 
 Epidural clonidine is usually started at 30 mcg/h in 
a mixture with an opioid or a local anesthetic. Oral 
clonidine is readily absorbed, has a 30–60 min onset, 
and lasts 6–12 h. In the treatment of acute hyperten-
sion, 0.1 mg can be given orally every hour until the 
blood pressure is controlled, or up to a maximum of 
0.6 mg; the maintenance dose is 0.1–0.3 mg twice 
daily. Transdermal preparations of clonidine can also 
be used for maintenance therapy. Th ey are available 
as 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 mg/d patches that are replaced 
6
(COX) isoenzymes. COX-1 maintains gastric 
mucosa and stimulates platelet aggregation. COX-2 
is expressed during infl ammation. Whereas ketoro-
lac is a nonselective COX inhibitor, other agents such 
as parecoxib (Dynastat), celecoxib (Celebrex), and 
rofecoxib (Vioxx) are specifi c for COX-2. COX-2 
inhibitors spare both the gastric mucosa and platelet 
function. However, their use is associated with an 
increased risk of cardiovascular thromboembolic 
events. Because nonspecifi c NSAIDs such as ketoro-
lac also inhibit COX-2, their use following cardiac 
bypass surgery is contraindicated. 
 Intravenous acetaminophen (Ofi rmev) has 
recently become available for perioperative use in 
the United States. Acetaminophen is a centrally act-
ing analgesic with likely central COX inhibition and 
with weak peripheral COX eff ects resulting in a lack 
of gastric irritation and clotting abnormalities. A 
maximal adult (>50 kg weight) dose of 1 g is infused 
to a maximum total dose of 4 g/d. Patients weigh-
ing 50 kg or less should receive a maximal dose of 
15 mg/kg and a maximal total dose of 75 mg/kg/d. 
Hepatoxicity is a known risk of overdosage, and the 
drug should be used with caution in patients with 
hepatic disease or undergoing hepatic surgery. 
 CLONIDINE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Clonidine (Catapres, Duraclon) is an imidazoline 
derivative with predominantly α 2 -adrenergic ago-
nist activity. It is highly lipid soluble and readily 
penetrates the blood–brain barrier and the placenta. 
Studies indicate that binding of clonidine to recep-
tors is highest in the rostral ventrolateral medulla in 
the brainstem (the fi nal common pathway for sym-
pathetic outfl ow) where it activates inhibitory neu-
rons. Th e overall eff ect is to decrease sympathetic 
activity, enhance parasympathetic tone, and reduce 
circulating catecholamines. Th ere is also evidence 
that much of clonidine’s antihypertensive action 
occurs via binding to a nonadrenergic (imidazo-
line) receptor. In contrast, its analgesic eff ects, par-
ticularly in the spinal cord, are mediated entirely via 
pre- and possibly postsynaptic α 2 -adrenergic recep-
tors that block nociceptive transmission. Clonidine 
also has local anesthetic eff ects when applied to 
288 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
infusion rate of 0.2–0.7 mcg/kg/h. Dexmedetomi-
dine has a rapid onset and terminal half-life of 2 h. 
Th e drug is metabolized in the liver and its metab-
olites are eliminated in the urine. Dosage should 
be reduced in patients with renal insuffi  ciency or 
hepatic impairment. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Caution should be used when dexmedetomidine is 
administered with vasodilators, cardiac depressants, 
and drugs that decrease heart rate. Reduced require-
ments of hypnotics/anesthetic agents should prevent 
excessive hypotension. 
 DOXAPRAM 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Doxapram (Dopram) is a peripheral and central 
nervous system stimulant.  Selective activation 
of carotid chemoreceptors by low doses of 
doxapram stimulates hypoxic drive, producing an 
increase in tidal volume and a slight increase in 
respiratory rate. At larger doses, the central respira-
tory centers in the medulla are stimulated. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Because doxapram mimics a low Pa o 2 , it may be 
useful in patients with chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease who are dependent on hypoxic drive 
yet require supplemental oxygen. Drug-induced 
respiratory and central nervous system depression, 
including that seen immediately postoperatively, can 
be  temporarily overcome. Doxapram is not a specifi c 
reversal agent, however, and should not replace stan-
dard supportive therapy (mechanical ventilation). 
For example, doxapram will not reverse paralysis 
caused by muscle relaxants, although it may tran-
siently mask respiratory failure. Th e most common 
cause of postoperative hypoventilation—airway 
obstruction—will not be alleviated by doxapram. 
For these reasons, many anesthesiologists believe 
that the usefulness of doxapram is very limited. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Stimulation of the central nervous system leads to 
a variety of possible side eff ects: changes in mental 
8
every 7 days. Clonidine is metabolized by the liver 
and excreted renally. Dosages should be reduced for 
patients with renal insuffi  ciency. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Clonidine enhances and prolongs sensory and 
motor blockade from local anesthetics. Additive 
eff ects with hypnotic agents, general anesthetics, and 
sedatives can potentiate sedation, hypotension, and 
bradycardia. Th e drug should be used cautiously, if 
at all, in patients who take β-adrenergic blockers and 
in those with signifi cant cardiac conduction system 
abnormalities. Lastly, clonidine can mask the symp-
toms of hypoglycemia in diabetic patients. 
 DEXMEDETOMIDINE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Dexmedetomidine (Precedex) is a parenteral 
selective α 2 agonist with sedative properties. It 
appears to be more selective for the α 2 receptor than 
clonidine. At higher doses it loses its selectivity and 
also stimulates α 1 -adrenergic receptors. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Dexmedetomidine causes dose-dependent sedation 
anxiolysis and some analgesia and blunts the sym-
pathetic response to surgery and other stress. Most 
importantly, it has an opioid-sparing eff ect and does 
not signifi cantly depress respiratory drive; excessive 
sedation, however, may cause airway obstruction. 
Th e drug is used for short-term (<24 h), intrave-
nous sedation of mechanically ventilated patients. 
Discontinuation aft er more prolonged use can 
potentially cause a withdrawal phenomenon simi-
lar to that of clonidine. It has also been used for 
intraoperative sedation and as an adjunct to general 
anesthetics. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Th e principal side eff ects are bradycardia, heart 
block, and hypotension. It may also cause nausea. 
 Dosage 
 Th e recommended initial loading dose is 1 mcg/kg 
intravenously over 10 min with a maintenance 
7
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia
289
of naloxone is limited to the minimum required to 
maintain adequate ventilation. Low doses of intra-
venous naloxone reverse the side eff ects of epidural 
opioids without necessarily reversing the analgesia. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Abrupt reversal of opioid analgesia can result in 
sympathetic stimulation (tachycardia, ventricular 
irritability, hypertension, pulmonary edema) caused 
by severe, acute pain, and an acute withdrawal syn-
drome in patients who are opioid-dependent. Th e 
extent of these side eff ects is proportional to the 
amount of opioid being reversed and the speed of 
the reversal. 
 Dosage 
 In postoperative patients experiencing respira-
tory depression from excessive opioid administra-
tion, intravenous naloxone (0.4 mg/mL vial diluted 
in 9 mL saline to 0.04 mg/mL) can be titrated in 
increments of 0.5–1 mcg/kg every 3–5 min until 
adequate ventilation and alertness are achieved. 
Doses in excess of 0.2 mg are rarely indicated. Th e 
brief duration of action of intravenous naloxone 
(30–45 min) is due to rapid redistribution from 
the central nervous system. A more prolonged eff ect 
is almost always necessary to prevent the recurrence 
of respiratory depression from longer-acting opi-
oids. Th erefore, intramuscular naloxone (twice the 
required intravenous dose) or a continuous infu-
sion (4–5 mcg/kg/h) is recommended. Neonatal 
respiratory depression resulting from maternal 
opioid administration is treated with 10  mcg/kg, 
repeated in 2 min if necessary. Neonates of opioid-
dependent mothers will exhibit withdrawal symp-
toms if given naloxone. Th e primary treatment of 
respiratory depression is always establishment of an 
adequate airway to permit spontaneous, assisted, or 
controlled ventilation. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Th e eff ect of naloxone on nonopioid anesthetic 
agents such as nitrous oxide is insignifi cant. 
Naloxone may antagonize the antihypertensive 
eff ect of clonidine. 
status (confusion, dizziness, seizures), cardiac abnor-
malities (tachycardia, dysrhythmias, hypertension), 
and pulmonary dysfunction (wheezing, tachypnea). 
Vomiting and laryngospasm are of particular con-
cern to the anesthesiologist in the postoperative 
period. Doxapram should not be used in patients 
with a history of epilepsy, cerebrovascular disease, 
acute head injury, coronary artery disease, hyperten-
sion, or bronchial asthma. 
 Dosage 
 Bolus intravenous administration (0.5–1 mg/kg) 
results in transient increases in minute ventilation 
(the onset of action is 1 min; the duration of action 
is 5–12 min). Continuous intravenous infusions 
(1–3 mg/min) provide longer-lasting eff ects (the 
maximum dose is 4 mg/kg). 
 Drug Interactions 
 Th e sympathetic stimulation produced by doxa-
pram may exaggerate the cardiovascular eff ects of 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors or adrenergic agents. 
Doxapram should probably not be used in patients 
awakening from halothane anesthesia, as halothane 
sensitizes the myocardium to catecholamines. 
 NALOXONE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Naloxone (Narcan) is a competitive opioid receptor 
antagonist. Its affi  nity for opioid µ receptors appears 
to be much greater than for opioid κ or δ receptors 
Naloxone has no signifi cant agonist activity. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Naloxone reverses the agonist activity asso-
ciated 
with 
endogenous 
(enkephalins, 
endorphins) or exogenous opioid compounds. A 
dramatic example is the reversal of unconsciousness 
that occurs in a patient with opioid overdose who 
has received naloxone. Perioperative respiratory 
depression caused by excessive opioid administra-
tion is rapidly antagonized (1–2 min). Some degree 
of opioid analgesia can oft en be spared if the dose 
9
290 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
fl umazenil. Th e reversal eff ect of fl umazenil is based 
on its strong antagonist affi  nity for benzodiazepine 
receptors. Flumazenil does not aff ect the minimum 
alveolar concentration of inhalation anesthetics. 
 Dosage 
 Gradual titration of fl umazenil is usually accom-
plished by intravenous administration of 0.2 mg/
min until reaching the desired degree of reversal. 
Th e usual total dose is 0.6–1.0 mg. Because of fl u-
mazenil’s rapid hepatic clearance, repeat doses may 
be required aft er 1–2 h to avoid resedation and pre-
mature recovery room or outpatient discharge. A 
continuous infusion (0.5 mg/h) may be helpful in 
the case of an overdose of a longer-acting benzodi-
azepine. Liver failure prolongs the clearance of fl u-
mazenil and benzodiazepines. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Management of Patients at 
Risk for Aspiration Pneumonia 
 A 58-year-old man is scheduled for elective 
inguinal hernia repair. His past history reveals a 
persistent problem with heartburn and passive 
regurgitation of gastric contents into the phar-
ynx. He has been told by his internist that these 
symptoms are due to a hiatal hernia . 
 Why would a history of hiatal hernia 
concern the anesthesiologist? 
 Perioperative aspiration of gastric contents 
(Mendelson’s syndrome) is a potentially fatal 
complication of anesthesia. Hiatal hernia is com-
monly associated with symptomatic GERD, which 
is considered a predisposing factor for aspiration. 
Mild or occasional heartburn may not signiﬁ cantly 
increase the risk of aspiration. In contrast, symp-
toms related to passive reﬂ ux of gastric ﬂ uid, such 
as acid taste or sensation of reﬂ uxing liquid into 
the mouth, should alert the clinician to a high risk 
of pulmonary aspiration. Paroxysms of coughing or 
wheezing, particularly at night or when the patient 
is ﬂ at, may be indicative of chronic aspiration. 
Aspiration can occur on induction, during mainte-
nance, or upon emergence from anesthesia . 
 NALTREXONE 
 Naltrexone is also a pure opioid antagonist with a 
high affi  nity for the µ receptor, but with a signifi -
cantly longer half-life than naloxone. Naltrexone 
is used orally for maintenance treatment of opioid 
addicts and for ethanol abuse. In the latter instance, 
it appears to block some of the pleasant eff ects of 
alcohol in some individuals. 
 FLUMAZENIL 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Flumazenil (Romazicon), an imidazobenzodiaze-
pine, is a specifi c and competitive antagonist of ben-
zodiazepines at benzodiazepine receptors. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Flumazenil is useful in the reversal of benzo-
diazepine sedation and the treatment of ben-
zodiazepine overdose. Although it promptly (onset 
<1 min) reverses the hypnotic eff ects of benzodiaz-
epines, amnesia has proved to be less reliably pre-
vented. Some evidence of respiratory depression 
may linger despite an alert and awake appearance. 
Specifi cally, tidal volume and minute ventilation 
return to normal, but the slope of the carbon diox-
ide response curve remains depressed. Eff ects in 
elderly patients appear to be particularly diffi  cult to 
reverse fully, and these patients are more prone to 
resedation. 
 Side Eﬀ ects & Drug Interactions 
 Rapid administration of fl umazenil may cause anxi-
ety reactions in previously sedated patients and 
symptoms of withdrawal in those on long-term 
benzodiazepine therapy. Flumazenil reversal has 
been associated with increases in intracranial pres-
sure in patients with head injuries and abnormal 
intracranial compliance. Flumazenil may induce 
seizure activity if benzodiazepines have been given 
as anticonvulsants or in conjunction with an over-
dose of tricyclic antidepressants. Flumazenil rever-
sal following a midazolam–ketamine anesthetic 
technique may increase the incidence of emergence 
dysphoria and hallucinations. Nausea and vomit-
ing are not uncommon following administration of 
10
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia
291
contents already in the stomach, they will inhibit 
further acid production. Both gastric pH and vol-
ume are aﬀ ected. In addition, the long duration of 
action of ranitidine and famotidine may provide 
protection in the recovery room . 
 Metoclopramide shortens gastric emptying 
time and increases lower esophageal sphincter 
tone. It does not aﬀ ect gastric pH, and it can-
not clear large volumes of food in a few hours. 
Nonetheless, metoclopramide with ranitidine 
is a good combination for most at-risk patients. 
Antacids usually raise gastric ﬂ uid pH, but, at the 
same time, they increase gastric volume. Although 
antacid administration technically removes a 
patient from the at-risk category, aspiration of a 
substantial volume of particulate matter will lead 
to serious physiological damage. For this reason, 
clear antacids (eg, sodium citrate) are strongly 
preferred. In contrast to H 2 antagonists, antacids 
are immediately eﬀ ective and alter the acidity of 
existing gastric contents. Thus, they are useful in 
emergency situations and in patients who have 
recently eaten . 
 Anticholinergic drugs, particularly glycopyrro-
late, decrease gastric secretions if large doses are 
administered; however, lower esophageal sphinc-
ter tone is reduced. Overall, anticholinergic drugs 
do not reliably reduce the risk of aspiration pneu-
monia and can reverse the protective eﬀ ects of 
metoclopramide. Proton pump inhibitors are gen-
erally as eﬀ ective as H 2 antagonists . 
 What anesthetic techniques are used 
in full-stomach patients? 
 If the full stomach is due to recent food intake 
and the surgical procedure is elective, the opera-
tion should be postponed. If the risk factor is not 
reversible (eg, large hiatal hernia) or the case is 
emergent, proper anesthetic technique can mini-
mize the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Regional 
anesthesia with minimal sedation should be con-
sidered in patients at increased risk for aspiration 
pneumonia. If local anesthetic techniques are 
impractical, the patient’s airway must be pro-
tected. Delivering anesthesia by mask or laryn-
geal mask airway is contraindicated. As in every 
 Which patients are predisposed to aspiration? 
 Patients with altered airway reﬂ exes (eg, drug 
intoxication, general anesthesia, encephalopathy, 
neuromuscular disease) or abnormal pharyngeal 
or esophageal anatomy (eg, large hiatal hernia, 
Zenker’s diverticulum, scleroderma, pregnancy, 
obesity) are prone to pulmonary aspiration . 
11
Does aspiration consistently result 
in aspiration pneumonia? 
 Not necessarily. The seriousness of the lung 
damage depends on the volume and composition 
of the aspirate. Traditionally, patients are consid-
ered to be at risk if their gastric volume is greater 
than 25 mL (0.4 mL/kg) and their gastric pH is less 
than 2.5. Some investigators believe that control-
ling acidity is more important than volume and 
that the criteria should be revised to a pH less than 
3.5 with a volume greater than 50 mL . 
 Patients who have eaten immediately prior to 
emergency surgery are obviously at risk. Tradition-
ally, “NPO after midnight” implied a preoperative fast 
of at least 6 h. Current opinion allows clear liquids 
until 2–4 h before induction of anesthesia, although 
solids are still taboo for 6 h in adult patients. Some 
patients who have fasted for 8 h or more before elec-
tive surgery also meet the at-risk criteria, however. 
Certain patient populations are particularly likely to 
have large volumes of acidic gastric ﬂ uid: patients 
with an acute abdomen or peptic ulcer disease, 
children, the elderly, diabetic patients, pregnant 
women, and obese patients. Furthermore, pain, 
anxiety, or opioid-agonists may delay gastric empty-
ing. Note that pregnancy and obesity place patients 
in double jeopardy by increasing the chance of 
aspiration (increased intraabdominal pressure and 
distortion of the lower esophageal sphincter) and 
the risk of aspiration pneumonia (increased acidity 
and volume of gastric contents). Aspiration is more 
common in patients undergoing esophageal, upper 
abdominal, or emergency laparoscopic surgery . 
 Which drugs lower the risk of 
aspiration pneumonia? 
 H 2 -Receptor antagonists decrease gastric acid 
secretion. Although they will not aﬀ ect gastric 
292 
SECTION II Clinical Pharmacology 
 • 
 The patient is not artiﬁ cially ventilated, to 
avoid ﬁ lling the stomach with gas and thereby 
increasing the risk of emesis. Once spontane-
ous eﬀ orts have ceased or muscle response 
to nerve stimulation has disappeared, the 
patient is rapidly intubated. Cricoid pressure is 
maintained until the endotracheal tube cuﬀ  is 
inﬂ ated and tube position is conﬁ rmed. A mod-
iﬁ cation of the classic rapid-sequence induc-
tion allows gentle ventilation as long as cricoid 
pressure is maintained . 
 • 
 If the intubation proves diﬃ  cult, cricoid pres-
sure is maintained and the patient is gently 
ventilated with oxygen until another intuba-
tion attempt can be performed. If intubation 
is still unsuccessful, spontaneous ventilation 
should be allowed to return and an awake intu-
bation performed . 
 • 
 After surgery, the patient should remain intu-
bated until airway reﬂ exes have returned and 
consciousness has been regained . 
 What are the relative contraindications 
to rapid-sequence inductions? 
 Rapid-sequence inductions are usually associ-
ated with increases in intracranial pressure, arterial 
blood pressure, and heart rate. Contraindications 
to succinylcholine also apply (eg, thermal burns) . 
 Describe the pathophysiology and clinical 
ﬁ ndings associated with aspiration pneumonia. 
 The pathophysiological changes depend on 
the composition of the aspirate. Acid solutions 
cause atelectasis, alveolar edema, and loss of 
surfactant. Particulate aspirate will also result in 
small-airway obstruction and alveolar necrosis. 
Granulomas may form around food or antacid par-
ticles. The earliest physiological change following 
aspiration is intrapulmonary shunting, resulting in 
hypoxia. Other changes may include pulmonary 
edema, pulmonary hypertension, and hypercapnia . 
 Wheezing, rhonchi, tachycardia, and tachy-
pnea are common physical ﬁ ndings. Decreased 
lung compliance can make ventilation diﬃ  cult. 
Hypotension signals signiﬁ cant ﬂ uid shifts into the 
alveoli and is associated with massive lung injury. 
anesthetic case, the availability of suction must 
be conﬁ rmed before induction. If there are signs 
suggesting a diﬃ  cult airway, intubation should 
precede induction. Otherwise, a rapid-sequence 
induction is indicated . 
 How does a rapid-sequence induction 
diﬀ er from a routine induction? 
 • 
 The patient is always preoxygenated prior to 
induction. Patients with lung disease require 
3–5 min of preoxygenation . 
 • 
 Prior curarization with a nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxant may prevent the increase in 
intraabdominal pressure that accompanies 
the fasciculations caused by succinylcholine. 
This step is often omitted, however, as it can 
decrease lower esophageal sphincter tone. If 
rocuronium has been selected for relaxation, a 
small priming dose (0.1 mg/kg) given 2–3 min 
prior to induction may speed its onset of action . 
 • 
 A wide assortment of blades, video laryngo-
scopes, and endotracheal tubes are prepared 
in advance . 
 • 
 An assistant may apply ﬁ rm pressure over the 
cricoid cartilage prior to induction (Sellick’s 
maneuver). Because the cricoid cartilage forms 
an uninterrupted and incompressible ring, 
pressure over it is transmitted to underlying 
tissue. The esophagus is collapsed, and pas-
sively regurgitated gastric ﬂ uid cannot reach 
the hypopharynx. Excessive cricoid pressure 
(beyond what can be tolerated by a conscious 
person) applied during active regurgitation 
has been associated with rupture of the poste-
rior wall of the esophagus. The eﬀ ectiveness of 
Sellick’s maneuver has been questioned . 
 • 
 A propofol induction dose is given as a bolus. 
Obviously, this dose must be modiﬁ ed if there 
is any indication that the patient’s cardiovas-
cular system is unstable. Other rapid-acting 
induction agents can be substituted (eg, 
etomidate, ketamine) . 
 • 
 Succinylcholine (1.5 mg/kg) or rocuronium 
(0.9–1.2 mg/kg) is administered immediately 
following the induction dose, even if the 
patient has not yet lost consciousness . 
 
CHAPTER 17 Adjuncts to Anesthesia 
293 
 Ferrari LR, Rooney FM, Rockoff  MA: Preoperative 
fasting practices in pediatrics. Anesthesiology 
1999;90:978. 
 Gan T, Apfel C, Kovac A, et al: A randomized double 
blind comparison of the NK 1 antagonist, aprepitant, 
versus ondansetron for the prevention of post 
operative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 
2007;104:1082. 
 Gan T, Coop A, Philip B, et al: A randomized double 
blind study of granisetron plus dexamethasone 
versus ondansetron plus dexamethasone to prevent 
postoperative nausea and vomiting in patients 
undergoing abdominal hysterectomy. Anesth Analg 
2005;101:1323. 
 Glass P: Postoperative nausea and vomiting: We don’t 
know everything yet. Anesth Analg 2010;110:299. 
 Glass P, White P: Practice guidelines for the management 
of postoperative nausea and vomiting: Past, present 
and future. Anesth Analg 2007;105:1528. 
 George E, Hornuss C, Apfel C: Neurokinin 1 and 
novel serotonin antagonists for postoperative and 
postdischarge nausea and vomiting. Curr Opin 
Anesth 2010;23:714. 
 Joshi GP, Gertler R, Fricer R: Cardiovascular 
thromboembolic adverse eff ects associated with 
cyclooxygenase 2 selective inhibitors and nonselective 
anti infl ammatory drugs. Anesth Analg 2007;105:1793. 
 Lipp A, Kaliappan A: Focus on quality: managing pain 
and PONV in day surgery. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 
2007;18:200. 
 Schug S, Joshi G, Camu F, et al: Cardiovascular 
safety of the cyclooxygenase 2 selective inhibitors 
parecoxib and valdecoxib in the postoperative 
setting; an analysis of integrated data. Anesth 
Analg 2009;108:299. 
 Smith H: Perioperative intravenous acetaminophen and 
NSAIDS. Pain Medicine 2011;12:961. 
 Steeds C, Orme R: Premedication. Anaesth Intensive 
Care Med 2006;7:393–396 .
 Warner MA, Warner ME, Warner DO, et al: Clinical 
signifi cance of pulmonary aspiration during the 
perioperative period. Anesthesiology 1993;78:56. 
 Young A, Buvanendran A: Multimodal systemic and 
intra articular analgesics. Int Anesth Clin 2011;49:117. 
Chest roentgenography may not demonstrate 
diﬀ use bilateral inﬁ ltrates for several hours after 
the event. Arterial blood gases reveal hypoxemia, 
hypercapnia, and respiratory acidosis . 
 What is the treatment for aspiration pneumonia? 
 As soon as regurgitation is suspected, the 
patient should be placed in a head-down position 
so that gastric contents drain out of the mouth 
instead of into the trachea. The pharynx and, if pos-
sible, the trachea should be thoroughly suctioned. 
The mainstay of therapy in patients who subse-
quently become hypoxic is positive-pressure ven-
tilation. Intubation and the institution of positive 
end-expiratory pressure or continuous positive 
airway pressure are often required. Bronchoscopy 
and pulmonary lavage are usually indicated when 
particulate aspiration has occurred. Use of cortico-
steroids is generally not recommended and anti-
biotics are administered depending upon culture 
results . 
GUIDELINES
 Gan TJ, Meyer TA, Apfel CC, et al: Society for 
ambulatory anesthesia guidelines for management 
of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 
2007;105:1615. 
 Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of 
pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary 
aspiration: Application to healthy patients undergoing 
elective procedures. A report by the American Society 
of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative 
Fasting. Anesthesiology 1999;90:896. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 De Souza D, Doar L, Mehta S, et al: Aspiration 
prophylaxis and rapid sequence induction for elective 
cesarean delivery; time to reassess old dogma. Anesth 
Analg 2010;110:1503. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 295
295
replaced by intravenous heparin or, more 
commonly, by intramuscular heparinoids to 
minimize the risk. 
 Current guidelines recommend postponing 
all but mandatory emergency surgery 
until at least 1 month after any coronary 
intervention and suggest that treatment 
options  other than a drug-eluting stent 
(which requires prolonged dual antiplatelet 
therapy) be used in patients expected 
to undergo a surgical procedure within 
12 months after the intervention. 
 There are no good outcomes data to 
support restricting ﬂ uid intake (of any 
kind or any amount) more than 2 h before 
induction of general anesthesia in healthy 
patients undergoing elective procedures; 
indeed, there is evidence that nondiabetic 
patients should be encouraged to drink 
glucose-containing ﬂ uids up to 2 h before 
induction of anesthesia. 
 To be valuable, preoperative testing must 
discriminate: an increased perioperative 
risk exists when the results are abnormal 
(and unknown); a reduced risk exists when 
the abnormality is absent or detected (and 
perhaps corrected). 
7
8
9
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 The cornerstones of an eﬀ ective 
preoperative evaluation are the history and 
physical examination, which should include 
a complete account of all medications 
taken by the patient in the recent past, 
all pertinent drug and contact allergies, 
and responses and reactions to previous 
anesthetics. 
 The anesthesiologist should not be 
expected to provide the risk-versus-beneﬁ t 
discussion for the proposed procedure; 
this is the responsibility and purview of the 
responsible surgeon or “proceduralist.” 
 By convention physicians in many 
countries use the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists’ classiﬁ cation to identify 
relative risk prior to conscious sedation and 
surgical anesthesia. 
 In general, the indications for cardiovascular 
investigations are the same in surgical 
patients as in any other patient. 
 Adequacy of long-term blood glucose 
control can be easily and rapidly assessed by 
measurement of hemoglobin A 1c . 
 In patients deemed at high risk for thrombosis 
(eg, those with certain mechanical heart valve 
implants or with atrial ﬁ brillation and a prior 
thromboembolic stroke), warfarin should be 
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Preoperative Assessment, 
Premedication, & 
Perioperative Documentation 18
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
S E C T I O N I I I
Anesthetic Management
—Continued next page
296 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Premedication should be given purposefully, 
not as a mindless routine. 
 Incomplete, inaccurate, or illegible records 
unnecessarily complicate defending a 
physician against otherwise unjustiﬁ ed 
allegations of malpractice. 
11
12
 The utility of a test depends on its sensitivity 
and speciﬁ city. Sensitive tests have a low 
rate of false-negative results and rarely 
fail to identify an abnormality when one 
is present, whereas speciﬁ c tests have a 
low rate of false-positive results and rarely 
identify an abnormality when one is not 
present. 
10
Continued—
 PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION 
 Th e cornerstones of an eff ective preoperative 
evaluation are the medical history and physi-
cal examination, which should include a complete 
account of all medications taken by the patient in 
the recent past, all pertinent drug and contact aller-
gies, and responses and reactions to previous anes-
thetics. Additionally, this evaluation should include 
any indicated diagnostic tests, imaging procedures, 
or consultations from other physicians. Th e pre-
operative evaluation guides the anesthetic plan: 
inadequate preoperative planning and incomplete 
patient preparation are commonly associated with 
anesthetic complications. 
 Th e preoperative evaluation serves multiple 
purposes. One purpose is to identify those few 
patients whose outcomes likely will be improved 
by implementation of a specifi c medical treatment 
(which in rare circumstances may require that the 
planned surgery be rescheduled). For example, a 
60-year-old patient scheduled for elective total hip 
arthroplasty who also has unstable angina from 
left  main coronary artery disease would more 
likely survive if coronary artery bypass graft ing is 
performed before the elective procedure. Another 
purpose is to identify patients whose condition is 
so poor that the proposed surgery might only has-
ten death without improving the quality of life. For 
example, a patient with severe chronic lung disease, 
end-stage kidney failure, liver failure, and heart 
failure likely would not survive to derive benefi t 
from an 8-hour, complex, multilevel spinal fusion 
with instrumentation. 
1
 Th e preoperative evaluation can identify 
patients with specifi c characteristics that likely will 
infl uence the proposed anesthetic plan ( Table 18–1 ). 
For example, the anesthetic plan may need to be 
reassessed for a patient whose trachea appears diffi  -
cult to intubate, one with a family history of malig-
nant hyperthermia, or one with an infection near 
where a proposed regional anesthetic would be 
 TABLE 181 The anesthetic plan. 
Will sedative-hypnotic premedication be useful? 
 What type(s) of anesthesia will be employed? 
 General 1 
 Airway management 
 Induction drugs 
 Maintenance drugs 
 Regional 
 Technique(s) 
 Agent(s) 
 Sedation and monitored anesthesia care 
 Supplemental oxygen 
 Speciﬁ c sedative drugs 
 Are there special intraoperative management issues? 
 Nonstandard monitors 
 Positions other than supine 
 Relative or absolute contraindications to speciﬁ c 
anesthetic drugs 
 Fluid management 
 Special techniques 
 Site (anesthetizing location) concerns 
 How will the patient be managed postoperatively? 
 Management of acute pain 
 Intensive care 
 Postoperative ventilation 
 Hemodynamic monitoring 
1 Including need for (or need for avoidance of) muscle relaxation.
 
CHAPTER 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation
297
American Heart Association and from the European 
Society of Cardiology (see Guidelines). A more 
complete discussion of cardiovascular assessment is 
provided in Chapter 21. Th e focus of preoperative 
cardiac assessment should be on determining 
whether the patient’s condition can and must be 
improved prior to the scheduled procedure, and 
whether the patient meets criteria for further cardiac 
evaluation prior to the scheduled surgery. Clearly 
the criteria for what must be done before elective 
arthroplasty will diff er from what must be done 
before an operation for resectable pancreatic cancer, 
given the benign results of a delay in the former pro-
cedure and the potential life-shortening eff ects of a 
delay in the latter procedure.  In general, the 
indications for cardiovascular investigations 
are the same in surgical patients as in any other 
patient. Put another way, the fact that a patient is 
scheduled to undergo surgery does not change the 
indications for such measures as noninvasive stress 
testing to diagnose coronary artery disease. 
4
administered. Another purpose of the evaluation is 
to provide the patient with an estimate of anesthetic 
risk.  However, the anesthesiologist should not 
be expected to provide the risk-versus-benefi t 
discussion for the proposed procedure; this is the 
responsibility and purview of the responsible sur-
geon or “proceduralist.” For example, a discussion of 
the risks and benefi ts of robotic prostatectomy ver-
sus radiation therapy versus “watchful waiting” 
requires knowledge of both the medical literature 
and the morbidity–mortality statistics of an individ-
ual surgeon, and it would be most unusual for an 
anesthesiologist to have access to the necessary data 
for this discussion. Finally, the preoperative evalua-
tion is an opportunity for the anesthesiologist to 
describe the proposed anesthetic plan in the context 
of the overall surgical and postoperative plan, pro-
vide the patient with psychological support, and 
obtain informed consent for the proposed anesthetic 
plan from the surgical patient. 
 By convention, physicians in many coun-
tries use the American Society of Anesthesi-
ologists’ (ASA) classifi cation to defi ne relative risk 
prior to conscious sedation and surgical anesthesia 
( Table 18–2 ). Th e ASA physical status classifi cation 
has many advantages over all other risk classifi cation 
tools: it is time honored, simple, reproducible, and, 
most importantly, it has been shown to be strongly 
associated with perioperative risk. But, many other 
risk assessment tools are available. 
 Elements of the 
Preoperative History 
 Patients presenting for elective surgery and anesthe-
sia typically require a focused preoperative medical 
history emphasizing cardiac and pulmonary func-
tion, kidney disease, endocrine and metabolic dis-
eases, musculoskeletal and anatomic issues relevant 
to airway management and regional anesthesia, and 
responses and reactions to previous anesthetics. Th e 
ASA publishes and periodically updates general 
guidelines for preoperative assessment (see Guide-
lines at end of Chapter). 
 A. Cardiovascular Issues 
 Guidelines for preoperative cardiac assessment are 
available from the American College of Cardiology/
2
3
 TABLE 182 American Society of 
Anesthesiologists’ physical status 
classiﬁ cation of patients. 1 
Class
Deﬁ nition
1
Normal healthy patient
2
Patient with mild systemic disease (no 
functional limitations)
3
Patient with severe systemic disease (some 
functional limitations)
4
Patient with severe systemic disease that 
is a constant threat to life (functionality 
incapacitated)
5
Moribund patient who is not expected to 
survive without the operation
6
Brain-dead patient whose organs are being 
removed for donor purposes
E
If the procedure is an emergency, the physical 
status is followed by “E” (for example, “2E”)
1 Data from Committee on Standards and practice Parameters, 
Apfelbaum JL, Connis RT, et al: Practice advisory for preanesthesia 
evaluation: An updated report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. 
Anesthesiology 2012;116:522.
298 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
presenting for elective surgery do not maintain 
blood glucose within the desired range. Other 
patients, who may be unaware that they have type 2 
diabetes, present with blood glucose measurements 
above the normal range.  Adequacy of long-
term blood glucose control can be easily and 
rapidly assessed by measurement of hemoglobin A 1c . 
In patients with abnormally elevated hemoglobin 
A 1c , referral to a diabetology service for education 
about the disease and adjustment of diet and medi-
cations to improve metabolic control may be benefi -
cial. Elective surgery should be delayed in patients 
presenting with marked hyperglycemia; this delay 
might consist only of rearranging the order of sched-
uled cases to allow insulin infusion to bring the 
blood glucose concentration closer to the normal 
range before surgery begins. A more complete dis-
cussion of diabetes mellitus and other perioperative 
endocrine concerns is provided in Chapter 34. 
 D. Coagulation Issues 
 Th ree important coagulation issues that must be 
addressed during the preoperative evaluation are 
(1) how to manage patients who are taking warfarin 
on a long-term basis; (2) how to manage patients 
who are taking clopidogrel and related agents; and 
(3) how to safely provide regional anesthesia to 
patients who either are receiving long-term antico-
agulation therapy or who will receive anticoagula-
tion perioperatively. In the fi rst circumstance, most 
patients who undergoing anything more involved 
than minor surgery will require discontinuation of 
warfarin 5 days in advance of surgery to avoid exces-
sive blood loss. Th e key question to be answered is 
whether the patient will require “bridging” therapy 
with another agent while warfarin is discontinued. 
 In patients deemed at high risk for thrombosis 
(eg, those with certain mechanical heart valve 
implants or with atrial fi brillation and a prior throm-
boembolic stroke), warfarin should be replaced by 
intravenous heparin or, more commonly, by intra-
muscular heparinoids to minimize the risk. In 
patients receiving bridging therapy for a high risk of 
thrombosis, the risk of death from excessive bleed-
ing is an order of magnitude lower than the risk of 
death or disability from stroke if the bridging ther-
apy is omitted. Patients at lower risk for thrombosis 
may have warfarin discontinued and then reinitiated 
5
6
 B. Pulmonary Issues 
 Perioperative pulmonary complications, most 
notably postoperative respiratory depression and 
respiratory failure, are vexing problems that have 
become seemingly more common as severe obe-
sity and obstructive sleep apnea have increased 
in incidence. A recent guideline developed by the 
American College of Physicians takes an aggres-
sive stance; it identifi es patients 60 years of age or 
older, those with chronic obstructive lung disease, 
those with markedly reduced exercise tolerance and 
functional dependence, and those with heart failure 
as potentially requiring preoperative and postop-
erative interventions to avoid complications. Th e 
risk of postoperative pulmonary complications is 
closely associated with these factors, and with the 
following: ASA class (class 3 and 4 patients have a 
markedly increased risk of pulmonary complica-
tions relative to class 1 patients), cigarette smok-
ing, longer surgeries (>4 h), certain types of surgery 
(abdominal, thoracic, aortic aneurysm, head and 
neck, and emergency surgery), and general anes-
thesia (compared with cases in which general anes-
thesia was not used). 
 Eff orts at prevention of pulmonary complica-
tions should focus on cessation of cigarette smoking 
prior to surgery and on lung expansion techniques 
(eg, incentive spirometry) aft er surgery in patients 
at risk. Patients with asthma, particularly those 
receiving suboptimal medical management, have 
a greater risk for bronchospasm during airway 
manipulation. Appropriate use of analgesia and 
monitoring are key strategies for avoiding post-
operative respiratory depression in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Further discussion of this 
topic appears in Chapter 44. 
 C. Endocrine and Metabolic Issues 
 Appropriate targets for control of diabetes mellitus 
and of blood glucose in critically ill patients have 
been subjects of great debate over the past decade. 
“Tight” control of blood glucose, with a target level 
in the normal range, was shown in the Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial to improve out-
comes in ambulatory patients with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus. It has become the usual practice to obtain a 
blood glucose measurement on the morning of elec-
tive surgery. Unfortunately, many diabetic patients 
 
CHAPTER 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation
299
 Although there is a consensus that pregnant 
women and those who have recently (within 6 h) 
consumed a full meal should be treated as if they 
have “full” stomachs, there is less consensus as to the 
necessary period of time in which patients must fast 
before elective surgery. Proof of the lack of consen-
sus is the fact that the ASA’s guideline on this topic 
was voted down by the ASA House of Delegates sev-
eral years in a row before it was presented in a form 
that received majority approval. Th e guideline as 
approved is more permissive of fl uid intake than 
many anesthesiologists would prefer, and many 
medical centers have policies that are more restric-
tive than the ASA guideline on this topic.  Th e 
truth is that there are no good outcomes data 
to support restricting fl uid intake (of any kind or any 
amount) more than 2 h before induction of general 
anesthesia in healthy patients undergoing elective 
procedures; indeed, there is evidence that nondia-
betic patients should be encouraged to drink 
 glucose-containing fl uids up to 2 h before induc-
tion of anesthesia. 
 Patients with a history of GERD present vex-
ing problems. Some of these patients will clearly be 
at increased risk for aspiration; others may carry 
this “self-diagnosis” based on television advertise-
ments or conversations with friends and family, or 
may have been given this diagnosis by a physician 
who did not follow the standard diagnostic crite-
ria. Our approach is to treat patients who have only 
occasional symptoms like any other patient without 
GERD, and to treat patients with consistent symp-
toms (multiple times per week) with medications 
(eg, nonparticulate antacids such as sodium citrate) 
and techniques (eg, tracheal intubation rather than 
laryngeal mask airway) as if they were at increased 
risk for aspiration. 
 Elements of the Preoperative 
Physical Examination 
 Th e preoperative history and physical examination 
complement one another: Th e physical examina-
tion may detect abnormalities not apparent from 
the history, and the history helps focus the physical 
examination. Examination of healthy asymptomatic 
patients should include measurement of vital signs 
(blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and 
8
aft er successful surgery. Decisions regarding bridg-
ing therapy oft en require consultation with the phy-
sician who initiated the warfarin therapy. 
 Clopidogrel and related agents are most oft en 
administered with aspirin (so-called dual antiplate-
let therapy) to patients with coronary artery dis-
ease who have received intracoronary stenting. 
Immediately aft er stenting, such patients are at 
increased risk of acute myocardial infarction if 
clopidogrel (or related agents) and aspirin are 
abruptly discontinued for a surgical procedure. 
 Th erefore, current guidelines recommend 
postponing all but mandatory emergency 
surgery until at least 1 month aft er any coronary 
intervention and suggest that treatment options 
other than a drug-eluting stent (which will require 
prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy) be used in 
patients expected to undergo a surgical procedure 
within 12 months aft er the intervention (eg, in a 
patient with colon cancer who requires treatment 
for coronary disease). As the available drugs, treat-
ment options, and consensus guidelines are 
updated relatively frequently, we recommend con-
sultation with a cardiologist regarding safe man-
agement of patients receiving these agents who 
require a surgical procedure. 
 Th e third circumstance—when it may be safe to 
perform regional (particularly neuraxial) anesthesia 
in patients who are or will be receiving anticoagu-
lation therapy—has also been the subject of debate 
among hematologists and regional anesthetists. Th e 
American Society of Regional Anesthesia publishes 
a periodically updated consensus guideline on this 
topic, and other prominent societies (eg, the Euro-
pean Society of Anaesthesiologists) also provide 
guidance on this topic. Th is topic is considered in 
greater detail in Chapter 45. 
 E. Gastrointestinal Issues 
 Since Mendelson’s 1946 report, aspiration of gastric 
contents has been recognized as a potentially disas-
trous pulmonary complication of surgical anesthe-
sia. It has also been long recognized that the risk of 
aspiration is increased in certain groups of patients: 
pregnant women in the second and third trimes-
ters, those whose stomachs have not emptied aft er 
a recent meal, and those with serious gastroesopha-
geal refl ux disease (GERD). 
7
300 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
detected (or it has been corrected). Th is requires that 
the test have a very low rate of false-positive and 
10
false-negative results.  Th e utility of a test 
depends on its sensitivity and specifi city. Sen-
sitive tests have a low rate of false-negative results 
and rarely fail to identify an abnormality when one 
is present, whereas specifi c tests have a low rate of 
false-positive results and rarely identify an abnor-
mality when one is not present . Th e prevalence of a 
disease or of an abnormal test result varies with the 
population tested. Testing is therefore most eff ective 
when sensitive and specifi c tests are used in patients 
in whom the abnormality will be detected frequently 
enough to justify the expense and inconvenience of 
the test procedure. Accordingly, laboratory testing 
should be based on the presence or absence of under-
lying diseases and drug therapy as detected by the 
history and physical examination. Th e nature of the 
proposed surgery or procedure should also be taken 
into consideration. Th us, a baseline hemoglobin or 
hematocrit measurement is desirable in any patient 
about to undergo a procedure that may result in 
extensive blood loss and require transfusion, particu-
larly when there is suffi  cient time to correct anemia 
preoperatively (eg, with iron supplements). 
 Testing fertile women for an undiagnosed early 
pregnancy is controversial and should not be done 
without the permission of the patient; pregnancy 
testing involves detection of chorionic gonadotropin 
in urine or serum. Routine testing for HIV antibody 
is not indicated. Routine coagulation studies and uri-
nalysis are not cost-eff ective in asymptomatic healthy 
patients; nevertheless, a preoperative urinalysis is 
required by state law in at least one U.S. jurisdiction. 
 PREMEDICATION 
 A classic study showed that a preoperative visit from 
an anesthesiologist resulted in a greater reduction in 
patient anxiety than preoperative sedative drugs. 
Yet, there was a time when virtually every patient 
received premedication before arriving in the preop-
erative area in anticipation of surgery. Despite the 
evidence, the belief was that all patients benefi tted 
from sedation and anticholinergics, and most 
patients would benefi t from a preoperative opioid. 
Aft er such premedication, some patients arrived 
temperature) and examination of the airway, heart, 
lungs, and musculoskeletal system using standard 
techniques of inspection, auscultation, palpation, 
and percussion. Before procedures such as a nerve 
block, regional anesthesia, or invasive monitoring 
the relevant anatomy should be examined; evidence 
of infection near the site or of anatomic abnormali-
ties may contraindicate the planned procedure (see 
Chapters 5, 45, and 46). An abbreviated neurological 
examination is important when regional anesthesia 
will likely be used. Th e preoperative neurological 
examination serves to document whether any neu-
rological defi cits may be present  before the block is 
performed. 
 Th e anesthesiologist must examine the patient’s 
airway before every anesthetic procedure. Th e 
patient’s dentition should be inspected for loose or 
chipped teeth, caps, bridges, or dentures. Poor fi t of 
the anesthesia mask should be expected in edentu-
lous patients and those with signifi cant facial abnor-
malities. Micrognathia (a short distance between the 
chin and the hyoid bone), prominent upper incisors, 
a large tongue, limited range of motion of the tem-
poromandibular joint or cervical spine, or a short 
or thick neck suggest that diffi  culty may be encoun-
tered in direct laryngoscopy for tracheal intubation 
(see Chapter 19). 
 Preoperative Laboratory Testing 
 Routine laboratory testing when patients are fi t and 
asymptomatic is not recommended. Testing should 
be guided by the history and physical examination. 
“Routine” testing is expensive and rarely alters peri-
operative management; moreover, abnormal values 
oft en are overlooked or if recognized may result in 
unnecessary delays. Nonetheless, despite the lack of 
evidence of benefi t, many physicians order a hema-
tocrit or hemoglobin concentration, urinalysis, 
serum electrolyte measurements, coagulation stud-
ies, an electrocardiogram, and a chest radiograph for 
all patients, perhaps in the misplaced hope of reduc-
ing their exposure to litigation. 
9
 To be valuable, preoperative testing must dis-
criminate: there must be an increased periop-
erative risk when the results are abnormal (and 
unknown when the test is not performed), and there 
must be a reduced risk when the abnormality is not 
 
CHAPTER 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation
301
history, anesthetic history, current medications (and 
whether they were taken on the day of surgery), 
physical examination, ASA physical status class, 
laboratory results, interpretation of imaging, electro-
cardiograms, and recommendations of any consul-
tants. A comment is particularly important when the 
consultant’s recommendation will not be followed. 
As most North American hospitals are transitioning 
to electronic medical records, the preanesthetic note 
will oft en appear as a standardized form. 
 Th e preoperative note should briefl y describe 
the anesthetic plan and include a statement regard-
ing informed consent from the patient (or guardian). 
Th e plan should indicate whether regional or general 
anesthesia (or sedation) will be used, and whether 
invasive monitoring or other advanced techniques 
will be employed. Documentation of the informed 
consent discussion sometimes takes the form of a 
narrative indicating that the plan, alternative plans, 
and their advantages and disadvantages (including 
their relative risks) were presented, understood, and 
accepted by the patient. Alternatively, the patient may 
be asked to sign a special anesthesia consent form 
that contains the same information. A sample pre-
anesthetic report form is illustrated in  Figure 18–1 . 
 In the United States, Th e Joint Commission 
(TJC) requires an immediate preanesthetic reevalu-
ation to determine whether the patient’s status has 
changed in the time since the preoperative evalu-
ation was performed. Even when the elapsed time 
is less than a minute, the bureaucracy will not be 
denied: the “box” must be checked to indicate that 
there has been no interval change. 
 Intraoperative Anesthesia Record 
 Th e intraoperative anesthesia record ( Figure 18–2 ) 
serves many purposes. It functions as documenta-
tion of intraoperative monitoring, a reference for 
future anesthetics for that patient, and a source of 
data for quality assurance. Th is record should be 
terse, pertinent, and accurate. Increasingly, parts 
of the anesthesia record are generated automati-
cally and recorded electronically. Such anesthe-
sia information management systems (commonly 
abbreviated AIMS) have many theoretical and 
practical advantages over the traditional paper 
record but also introduce all the common pitfalls of 
in a nearly anesthetized state. With the move to out-
patient surgery and “same-day” hospital admission, 
the practice has shift ed. Today, preoperative 
 sedative-hypnotics or opioids are almost never 
administered before patients arrive in the preopera-
tive holding area (other than for intubated patients 
who have been previously sedated in the intensive 
care unit). Children, especially those aged 2–10 years 
who will experience separation anxiety on being 
removed from their parent, may benefi t from pre-
medication administered in the preoperative holding 
area. Th is topic is discussed in Chapter 42. Mid-
azolam, administered either intravenously or orally, 
is a common method. Adults oft en receive intrave-
nous midazolam (2–5 mg) once an intravenous line 
has been established, and if a painful procedure (eg, 
regional block or a central venous line) will be per-
formed while the patient remains awake, small doses 
of opioid (typically fentanyl) will oft en be given. 
Patients who will undergo airway surgery or exten-
sive airway manipulations benefi t from preoperative 
administration of an anticholinergic agent (glyco-
pyrrolate or atropine) to reduce airway secretions 
before and during surgery.  Th e fundamental 
message here is that premedication should be 
given purposefully, not as a mindless routine. 
 DOCUMENTATION 
 Physicians should fi rst and foremost provide high-
quality and effi  cient medical care. Secondly, they 
must document the care that has been provided. 
Adequate documentation provides guidance to 
those who may encounter the patient in the future. 
It permits others to assess the quality of the care 
that was given and to provide risk adjustment of 
outcomes. Adequate documentation is required for 
a physician to submit a bill for his or her services. 
Finally, adequate and well-organized documenta-
tion (as opposed to inadequate and sloppy docu-
mentation) supports a potential defense case should 
a claim for medical malpractice be fi led. 
 Preoperative Assessment Note 
 Th e preoperative assessment note should appear in 
the patient’s permanent medical record and should 
describe pertinent fi ndings, including the medical 
11
302 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 181  A sample preoperative note. 
ANESTHESIOLOGY PREOPERATIVE NOTE
DATE:
AGE:
MEDICAL HISTORY
ALLERGIES:
INTOLERANCES:
DRUG USE:
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
HEART
LUNGS
AIRWAY
TEETH
LABORATORY
Hct/Hgb
URINE
LYTES:
PLAN
BP
P
R
T
PRESENT PROBLEM:
CARDIOVASCULAR
RESPIRATORY
DIABETES
NEUROLOGIC
ARTHRITIS/MUSCULO-SKELETAL
PREVIOUS ANESTHETICS:
FAMILY HISTORY
LAST ORAL INTAKE
TOBACCO:
RENAL
HEPATIC
OTHER
EXTREMITIES
NEUROLOGIC
OTHER
INVASIVE MONITORS
SPECIAL TECHNIQUES
Na
K
CO2
ECG
Cl
GLUCOSE
BUN: CREATININE
CHEST X-RAY
OTHER
ETOH:
TIME:
SEX:    M    F
HT.
WT.
PREOP DIAGNOSIS:
PROPOSED OPERATION:
MEDICATIONS: 
GENERAL
REGIONAL
MONITORED ANESTHESIA CARE
ASA CLASS
PATIENT CONSENT
ANESTHETIC ALTERNATIVES AND RISKS RANGING FROM TOOTH DAMAGE
TO LIFE-THREATENING EVENTS HAVE BEEN EXPLAINED AND ACCEPTED.
PATIENT’S SIGNATURE
SIGNATURE
PATIENT
NAME
#
(RESIDENT)
(STAFF)
M.D.
 
CHAPTER 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation 
303 
 FIGURE 182  A representative intraoperative anesthesia record. These paper “charts” are rapidly being replaced by 
computerized anesthesia information management systems. 
ANESTHESIA RECORD
PATIENT
NAME
#
AGE:
SEX:
PRE MED:
ASA
M
OXYGEN
NITROUS OXIDE
HALO/ENFL/ISOFL/DES/SEVO   
TEMP
URINE
FLUIDS/BLOOD
S
F
U
DENTITION
NPO
PROPOSED SURGERY
PT. IDED
OPERATION PERFORMED
PRE OP:
ALLERGIES
BP
TIME
TOTALS
MACHINE      ED
OXIMETER
BP. SITE
EKG
FLUID WARMER
PRECORDIAL
TEMP
HUMIDIFIER
BLANKET 
WARM/COOL
RAPID 
TRANSFER
FORCED AIR
WARMER
FiO2
EtCO2
ESOPH
NERVE STIM
CVP
A-LINE
PA CATHETER
CHART REVIEWED
SURGEON
CONSENT     ED
P
R
T
Hct
IV #
ASSISTED
SPONT.
CONTROLLED
BP
PULSE •
RESP.
ECG
FiO2
EtCO2
SaO2
EtA
Temp
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
SYS
DIA
MONITORS:
MONITORED
ANESTHESIA CARE
REGIONAL
GENERAL
BLADE
ETT#
BBS
CUFF
ATRAUMATIC
CO2
COMMENTS:
EYE PROTECTION:
ANESTH. START
ANESTH. INDUC
SURG. START
SURG. END
ANESTH. END
ANESTH. NET
VT/RR
AIRWAY              P
BLOOD LOSS
POSITION
VENT.
M.D.
REMARKS:
RECOVERY ROOM
CONDITION
B.P.
P.
R.R.
TIME
O2 SAT.
SIGNED (RESIDENT)
M.D.
SIGNED (STAFF)
DATE
PAGE
OF
cc.
304 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
blood pressure and heart rate are recorded graphi-
cally no less frequently than at 5-min intervals. Data 
from other monitors are also usually entered graphi-
cally, whereas descriptions of techniques or compli-
cations are described in text. In some anesthetizing 
locations of most hospitals the computerized AIMS 
will be unavailable. Unfortunately, the conventional, 
handwritten intraoperative anesthetic record oft en 
proves inadequate for documenting critical inci-
dents, such as a cardiac arrest. In such cases, a sepa-
rate text note inserted in the patient’s medical record 
may be necessary. Careful recording of the timing of 
events is needed to avoid discrepancies between 
multiple simultaneous records (anesthesia record, 
nurses’ notes, cardiopulmonary resuscitation record, 
and other physicians’ entries in the medical record). 
Such discrepancies are frequently targeted by mal-
practice attorneys as evidence of incompetence, 
inaccuracy, or deceit.  Incomplete, inaccurate, 
or illegible records unnecessarily complicate 
defending a physician against otherwise unjustifi ed 
allegations of malpractice. 
 Postoperative Notes 
 Th e anesthesiologist’s immediate responsibility to 
the patient does not end until the patient has recov-
ered from the eff ects of the anesthetic. Aft er accom-
panying the patient to the postanesthesia care unit 
(PACU), the anesthesiologist should remain with the 
patient until normal vital signs have been measured 
and the patient’s condition is deemed stable. Before 
discharge from the PACU, a note should be written 
by the anesthesiologist to document the patient’s 
recovery from anesthesia, any apparent anesthesia-
related complications, the immediate postoperative 
condition of the patient, and the patient’s disposition 
(discharge to an outpatient area, an inpatient ward, 
an intensive care unit, or home). In the United States, 
as of 2009, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services require that certain elements be included in 
all postoperative notes ( Table 18–3 ). Recovery from 
anesthesia should be assessed at least once within 48 
h aft er discharge from the PACU in all inpatients. 
Postoperative notes should document the general 
condition of the patient, the presence or absence of 
any anesthesia-related complications, and any mea-
sures undertaken to treat such complications. 
12
computerization, including the potential for unrec-
ognized recording of artifactual data, the possibility 
that practitioners will fi nd attending to the com-
puter more interesting than attending to the patient, 
and the inevitable occurrence of device and soft ware 
shutdowns. Regardless of whether the record is on 
paper or electronic it should document the anes-
thetic care in the operating room by including the 
following elements: 
•  Whether there has been a preoperative check 
of the anesthesia machine and other relevant 
equipment. 
•  Whether there has been a reevaluation of the 
patient immediately prior to induction of 
anesthesia (a TJC requirement); this generally 
includes a review of the medical record to 
search for any new laboratory results or 
consultation reports. 
•  Time of administration, dosage, and route of 
drugs given intraoperatively. 
•  Intraoperative estimates of blood loss and 
urinary output. 
•  Results of laboratory tests obtained during the 
operation. 
•  Intravenous fl uids and any blood products 
administered. 
•  Pertinent procedure notes (such as for tracheal 
intubation or insertion of invasive monitors). 
•  A notation regarding specialized 
intraoperative techniques such as the mode 
of ventilation, or special techniques such as 
the use of hypotensive anesthesia, one-lung 
ventilation, high-frequency jet ventilation, 
or cardiopulmonary bypass. 
•  Timing and conduct of intraoperative events 
such as induction, positioning, surgical 
incision, and extubation. 
•  Unusual events or complications 
(eg, arrhythmias). 
•  Condition of the patient at the time of release to 
the postanesthesia or intensive care unit nurse. 
 By tradition and convention (and, in the United 
States, according to practice guidelines) arterial 
 
CHAPTER 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation 
305 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Medical Malpractice 
(also see Chapter 54) 
 A healthy 45-year-old man has a cardiac arrest 
during an elective laparoscopic inguinal hernia 
repair. Although cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
is successful, the patient is left with permanent 
changes in mental status that preclude his return 
to work. One year later, the patient ﬁ les a com-
plaint against the anesthesiologist, surgeon, and 
hospital . 
 What four elements must be proved by 
the plaintiﬀ  (patient) to establish negligence 
on the part of the defendant (physician or 
hospital)? 
 1. Duty:  Once a physician establishes a profes-
sional relationship with a patient, the physician 
owes that patient certain obligations, such as 
adhering to the “standard of care.” 
 2. Breach of Duty:  If these obligations are not ful-
ﬁ lled, the physician has breached his duties to 
the patient . 
 3. Injury:  An injury must result. The injury may 
result in general damages (eg, pain and suﬀ er-
ing) or special damages (eg, loss of income) . 
 4. Causation:  The plaintiﬀ  must demonstrate that 
the breach of duty was causally related to the 
injury. But for the breach of duty, the injury 
 TABLE 183 Elements required by the 
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services in 
all postoperative notes. 1 
 Respiratory function, including respiratory rate, airway 
patency, and oxygen saturation 
 Cardiovascular function, including pulse rate and blood 
pressure 
 Mental status 
 Temperature 
 Pain 
 Nausea and vomiting 
 Postoperative hydration 
 1 Data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS): 
 Revised Anesthesia Services Interpretive Guidelines , issued December 
2009. Available at:  http://www.kdheks.gov/bhfr/download/
Appendix_L.pdf (accessed September 1, 2012).
should not have occurred. This proximate 
cause does not have to be the most important 
or immediate cause of the injury . 
 How is the standard of care deﬁ ned and 
established? 
 Individual physicians are expected to perform 
as any prudent and reasonable physician would in 
similar circumstances. This does not  require “best” 
care or optimal care, only that the care meet the 
minimum standard of a prudent and reasonable 
physician. As a specialist, the anesthesiologist is 
held to a higher standard of knowledge and skill 
with respect to the subject matter of that specialty 
than would a general practitioner or a physician 
in another specialty. Expert witnesses usually pro-
vide testimony to deﬁ ne the standard of care in 
legal proceedings. Although most jurisdictions 
have extended the “locality rule” to encompass 
a national standard of care, medical malpractice 
cases are governed by the laws of the jurisdiction 
in which the event took place and these may dif-
fer from state to state. The speciﬁ c circumstances 
pertaining to each individual case are taken into 
account. The law recognizes that there are diﬀ er-
ences of opinion and varying schools of thought 
within the medical profession . 
 How is causation determined? 
 It is usually the plaintiﬀ  who bears the burden 
of proving that the injury would not have occurred 
“but for” the negligence of the physician, or that 
the physician’s action was a “substantial factor” in 
causing the injury. An exception is the doctrine 
of res ipsa loquitur  (“the thing speaks for itself”), 
which permits a ﬁ nding of negligence based 
solely on the evidence. For example, if a set of car 
keys were visualized inside a patient on a chest 
radiograph after a thoracotomy, the doctrine of 
res ipsa loquitur would apply. Res ipsa loquitur 
could not be used in the case under discussion 
because the plaintiﬀ  would have to establish that 
cardiac arrest could not occur in the absence of 
negligence and that cardiac arrest could not have 
been due to something outside the control of the 
anesthesiologist. An important concept is that 
causation in civil cases need only be established 
306 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
GUIDELINES
 American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines; 
American Society of Echocardiography; American 
Society of Nuclear Cardiology; et al: 2009 ACCF/
AHA focused update on perioperative beta blockade 
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care for 
noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;54:e13. 
 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee: 
Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the 
use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration: Application to healthy patients 
undergoing elective procedures: An updated report by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee 
on Standards and Practice Parameters. Anesthesiology 
2011;114:495. 
 Committee on Standards and practice Parameters, 
Apfelbaum JL, Connis RT, et al: Practice advisory 
for preanesthesia evaluation: An updated report 
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Anesthesiology 
2012;116:522. 
 Gogarten W, Vandermeulen E, Van Aken H, et al: 
Regional anaesthesia and antithrombotic agents: 
Recommendations of the European Society of 
Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2010;27:999. 
 Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, et al: Regional 
anesthesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic or 
thrombolytic therapy: American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine evidence-based 
guidelines (third edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2010;35:64. 
 Keeling D, Baglin T, Tait C, et al: British Committee 
for Standards in Haematology: Guidelines on oral 
anticoagulation with warfarin—fourth edition. Br J 
Haematol 2011;154:311. 
 Korte W, Cattaneo M, Chassot PG, et al: Peri-operative 
management of antiplatelet therapy in patients with 
coronary artery disease: Joint position paper by 
members of the working group on Perioperative 
Haemostasis of the Society on Th rombosis and 
Haemostasis Research (GTH), the working group on 
Perioperative Coagulation of the Austrian Society 
for Anesthesiology, Resuscitation and Intensive Care 
(ÖGARI) and the Working Group Th rombosis of 
the European Society for Cardiology (ESC). Th romb 
Haemost 2011;105:743. 
 Qaseem A, Snow V, Fitterman N, et al: Risk assessment 
for and strategies to reduce perioperative 
pulmonary complications for patients undergoing 
by a preponderance of the evidence (“more likely 
than not”)—as opposed to criminal cases, in which 
all elements of a charged oﬀ ense must be proved 
“beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
 What factors inﬂ uence the likelihood of a 
malpractice suit? 
 1. The Physician–Patient Relationship:  This is par-
ticularly important for the anesthesiologist, 
who usually does not meet the patient until 
immediately before the operation. Another 
problem is that the patient is unconscious 
while under the anesthesiologist’s care. Thus, 
the preoperative and postoperative visits with 
the patient are often the only opportunities to 
establish a good relationship with the patient. 
Family members should also be included dur-
ing these meetings with patients (provided 
the patient does not object), particularly dur-
ing the postoperative visit if there has been an 
intraoperative complication . 
 2. Adequacy of Informed Consent:  Rendering care 
to a competent patient who does not con-
sent constitutes assault and battery. Consent 
is not enough, however. The patient should 
be informed of the contemplated procedure, 
including its reasonably anticipated risks, its 
possible beneﬁ ts, and the therapeutic alterna-
tives. The physician may be liable for a compli-
cation—even if it is not due to the negligent 
performance of a procedure—if a jury is con-
vinced that a reasonable person would have 
refused treatment if properly informed of the 
possibility of the complication. This does not 
mean, of course, that a documented consent 
relieves from liability physicians who violate 
the standard of care . 
 3. Quality of Documentation:  Careful documen-
tation of the perioperative visits, informed 
consent, consultations with other specialists, 
intraoperative events, and postoperative care 
is essential. The viewpoint of many courts and 
juries, reinforced by plaintiﬀ ’s attorneys, is that 
“if it isn’t written, it wasn’t done.” It goes with-
out saying that medical records should never 
be intentionally destroyed or altered . 
 
CHAPTER 18 Preoperative Assessment, Premedication, & Perioperative Documentation 
307 
 Douketis JD: Perioperative management of patients who 
are receiving warfarin therapy: An evidence-based 
and practical approach. Blood 2011;117:5044. 
 Egbert LD, Battit G, Turndorf H, Beecher HK: Th e value 
of the preoperative visit by an anesthetist. A study of 
doctor-patient rapport. JAMA 1963;185:553. 
 Mendelson CL: Th e aspiration of stomach contents into 
the lungs during obstetric anesthesia. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1946;52:191. 
noncardiothoracic surgery: A guideline from the 
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 
2006;144:575. 
Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, et al: Perioperative fasting in 
adults and children: Guidelines from the European 
Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2011;28:556.
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS): CMS 
Manual System. Pub 100-07 State Operations Provider 
Certifi cation. DHHS. Available at: http://www.kdheks.
gov/bhfr/download/Appendix_L.pdf (accessed 
September 1, 2012). 
This page intentionally left blank 
 309
19
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Airway Management 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Improper face mask technique can result 
in continued deﬂ ation of the anesthesia 
reservoir bag when the adjustable pressure-
limiting valve is closed, usually indicating a 
substantial leak around the mask. In contrast, 
the generation of high breathing circuit 
pressures with minimal chest movement and 
breath sounds implies an obstructed airway 
or obstructed tubing . 
 The laryngeal mask airway partially protects 
the larynx from pharyngeal secretions, but 
not gastric regurgitation . 
 After insertion of a tracheal tube (TT), the 
cuﬀ  is inﬂ ated with the least amount of air 
necessary to create a seal during positive-
pressure ventilation to minimize the pressure 
transmitted to the tracheal mucosa . 
 Although the persistent detection of CO 2 
 by a capnograph is the best conﬁ rmation of 
tracheal placement of a TT, it cannot exclude 
bronchial intubation .  The earliest evidence of 
bronchial intubation often is an increase in 
peak inspiratory pressure . 
 After intubation, the cuﬀ  of a TT should 
not be felt above the level of the 
cricoid cartilage, because a prolonged 
intralaryngeal location may result in 
1
2
3
4
5
postoperative hoarseness and increases the 
risk of accidental extubation . 
 Unrecognized esophageal intubation can 
produce catastrophic results. Prevention 
of this complication depends on direct 
visualization of the tip of the TT passing 
through the vocal cords, careful auscultation 
for the presence of bilateral breath sounds 
and the absence of gastric gurgling 
while ventilating through the TT, analysis 
of exhaled gas for the presence of CO 2 
 (the most reliable automated method), 
chest radiography, or use of ﬁ beroptic 
bronchoscopy . 
 Clues to the diagnosis of bronchial 
intubation include unilateral breath sounds, 
unexpected hypoxia with pulse oximetry 
(unreliable with high inspired oxygen 
concentrations), inability to palpate the TT 
cuﬀ  in the sternal notch during cuﬀ  inﬂ ation, 
and decreased breathing bag compliance 
(high peak inspiratory pressures) . 
 The large negative intrathoracic pressures 
generated by a struggling patient in 
laryngospasm can result in the development 
of negative-pressure pulmonary edema even 
in healthy patients . 
6
7
8
 Expert airway management is an essential skill in 
anesthetic practice. Th is chapter reviews the anat-
omy of the upper respiratory tract: describes the 
 necessary equipment for successful management, 
presents various management techniques: and dis-
cusses complications of laryngoscopy, intubation, 
and extubation. Patient safety depends on a thor-
ough understanding of each of these topics. 
310 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Th e epiglottis prevents aspiration by covering the 
 glottis—the opening of the larynx—during swal-
lowing. Th e larynx is a cartilaginous skeleton held 
together by ligaments and muscle. Th e larynx is 
composed of nine cartilages ( Figure 19–2 ): thyroid, 
cricoid, epiglottic, and (in pairs) arytenoid, cornicu-
late, and cuneiform. Th e thyroid cartilage shields the 
conus elasticus, which forms the vocal cords. 
 Th e sensory supply to the upper airway is 
derived from the cranial nerves ( Figure 19–3 ). Th e 
mucous membranes of the nose are innervated by 
the ophthalmic division (V 1 ) of the trigeminal nerve 
anteriorly (anterior ethmoidal nerve) and by the 
maxillary division (V 2 ) posteriorly (sphenopala-
tine nerves). Th e palatine nerves provide sensory 
fi bers from the trigeminal nerve (V) to the supe-
rior and inferior surfaces of the hard and soft  pal-
ate. Th e  olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I) innervates 
the nasal mucosa to provide the sense of smell. Th e 
lingual nerve (a branch of the mandibular division 
[V 3 ] of the trigeminal nerve) and the glossopharyn-
geal nerve (the ninth cranial nerve) provide general 
sensation to the anterior two-thirds and posterior 
one-third of the tongue, respectively. Branches of 
the facial nerve (VII) and glossopharyngeal nerve 
provide the sensation of taste to those areas, respec-
tively. Th e  glossopharyngeal nerve also innervates 
the roof of the pharynx, the tonsils, and the under-
surface of the soft  palate. Th e  vagus nerve (the tenth 
cranial nerve) provides sensation to the airway 
below the epiglottis. Th e superior laryngeal branch 
of the vagus divides into an external (motor) nerve 
and an internal (sensory) laryngeal nerve that pro-
vide sensory supply to the larynx between the epi-
glottis and the vocal cords. Another branch of the 
vagus, the  recurrent laryngeal nerve , innervates the 
larynx below the vocal cords and the trachea. 
 Th e muscles of the larynx are innervated by the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve, with the exception of the 
cricothyroid muscle, which is innervated by the exter-
nal (motor) laryngeal nerve, a branch of the superior 
laryngeal nerve. Th e posterior cricoarytenoid mus-
cles abduct the vocal cords, whereas the lateral crico-
arytenoid muscles are the principal adductors. 
 Phonation involves complex simultaneous 
actions by several laryngeal muscles. Damage to 
the motor nerves innervating the larynx leads 
 ANATOMY 
 Th e upper airway consists of the pharynx, nose, 
mouth, larynx, trachea, and main-stem bronchi. Th e 
mouth and pharynx are also a part of the upper gas-
trointestinal tract. Th e laryngeal structures in part 
serve to prevent aspiration into the trachea. 
 Th ere are two openings to the human airway: 
the nose, which leads to the nasopharynx, and the 
mouth, which leads to the oropharynx. Th ese pas-
sages are separated anteriorly by the palate, but they 
join posteriorly in the pharynx ( Figure 19–1 ). Th e 
pharynx is a U-shaped fi bromuscular structure that 
extends from the base of the skull to the cricoid car-
tilage at the entrance to the esophagus. It opens ante-
riorly into the nasal cavity, the mouth, the larynx, 
and the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngo-
pharynx, respectively. Th e nasopharynx is separated 
from the oropharynx by an imaginary plane that 
extends posteriorly. At the base of the tongue, 
the epiglottis functionally separates the orophar-
ynx from the laryngopharynx (or hypopharynx). 
Hard palate
Soft palate
Tongue
Vocal cords
Larynx
Trachea
Epiglottis
Nasopharynx
Oropharynx
Hypopharynx
 FIGURE 191  Anatomy of the airway. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
311 
 FIGURE 192  Cartilaginous structures comprising the larynx.  (With permission, from The Mayo Foundation.) 
Anterior
Epiglottis
Hyoid bone
Thyrohyoid membrane
Cuneiform cartilage (paired)
Thyroid cartilage lamina
Corniculate cartilage (paired)
Arytenoid cartilage (paired)
Cricothyroid ligament
Cricoid cartilage
Inferior cornu of
thyroid cartilage
Trachea
Superior cornu of
thyroid cartilage
Posterior
V1
V1
V2
V2
IX
IX
X
X
Ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve
(anterior ethmoidal nerve)
Maxillary division of trigeminal nerve
(sphenopalatine nerves)
Mandibular division of trigeminal nerve
(lingual nerve)
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
SL
IL
RL
Superior laryngeal nerve
Internal laryngeal nerve
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
RL
V3
V3
SL
IL
 FIGURE 193  Sensory nerve supply of the airway. 
312 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
to a spectrum of speech disorders ( Table 19–1 ). 
Unilateral denervation of a cricothyroid muscle 
causes very subtle clinical fi ndings. Bilateral palsy of 
the superior laryngeal nerve may result in hoarse-
ness or easy tiring of the voice, but airway control is 
not jeopardized. 
 Unilateral paralysis of a recurrent laryngeal 
nerve results in paralysis of the ipsilateral vocal cord, 
causing deterioration in voice quality. Assuming 
intact superior laryngeal nerves,  acute bilateral 
recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy can result in stri-
dor and respiratory distress because of the remain-
ing unopposed tension of the cricothyroid muscles. 
Airway problems are less frequent in  chronic bilat-
eral recurrent laryngeal nerve loss because of the 
development of various compensatory mechanisms 
(eg, atrophy of the laryngeal musculature). 
 Bilateral injury to the vagus nerve aff ects both 
the superior and the recurrent laryngeal nerves. 
Th us, bilateral vagal denervation produces fl accid, 
midpositioned vocal cords similar to those seen aft er 
administration of succinylcholine. Although phona-
tion is severely impaired in these patients, airway 
control is rarely a problem. 
 Th e blood supply of the larynx is derived from 
branches of the thyroid arteries. Th e cricothyroid 
artery arises from the superior thyroid artery itself, 
the fi rst branch given off  from the external carotid 
artery, and crosses the upper cricothyroid membrane 
(CTM), which extends from the cricoid cartilage to 
the thyroid cartilage. Th e superior thyroid artery is 
found along the lateral edge of the CTM. 
 Th e trachea begins beneath the cricoid cartilage 
and extends to the carina, the point at which the right 
and left  main-stem bronchi divide ( Figure 19–4 ). 
Anteriorly, the trachea consists of cartilaginous 
rings; posteriorly, the trachea is membranous. 
 ROUTINE AIRWAY 
MANAGEMENT 
 Routine airway management associated with gen-
eral anesthesia consists of: 
•  Airway assessment 
•  Preparation and equipment check 
•  Patient positioning 
•  Preoxygenation 
•  Bag and mask ventilation (BMV) 
•  Intubation (if indicated) 
•  Confi rmation of endotracheal tube placement 
•  Intraoperative management and 
troubleshooting 
•  Extubation 
 AIRWAY ASSESSMENT 
 Airway assessment is the fi rst step in successful 
airway management. Several anatomical and func-
tional maneuvers can be performed to estimate 
the diffi  culty of endotracheal intubation; however, 
it is important to note that successful ventilation 
(with or without intubation) must be achieved by 
 TABLE 191 The eﬀ ects of laryngeal nerve 
injury on the voice. 
Nerve
Eﬀ ect of Nerve Injury
Superior laryngeal nerve
 Unilateral
 Bilateral
Minimal effects
Hoarseness, tiring of voice
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
 Unilateral
 Bilateral
  Acute
  Chronic
Hoarseness
Stridor, respiratory distress
Aphonia
Vagus nerve
 Unilateral
 Bilateral
Hoarseness
Aphonia
 FIGURE 194  Carina. 
Right
Left
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
313 
the anesthetist if mortality and morbidity are to be 
avoided. Assessments include: 
•  Mouth opening: an incisor distance of 3 cm or 
greater is desirable in an adult. 
•  Upper lip bite test: the lower teeth are 
brought in front of the upper teeth. Th e 
degree to which this can be done estimates 
the range of motion of the temperomandibular 
joints .
•  Mallampati classifi cation: a frequently 
performed test that examines the size of 
the tongue in relation to the oral cavity. Th e 
greater the tongue obstructs the view of the 
pharyngeal structures, the more diffi  cult 
intubation may be ( Figure 19–5 ).
■  Class I: the entire palatal arch, including the 
bilateral faucial pillars, are visible down to 
their bases. 
■  Class II: the upper part of the 
faucial pillars and most of the uvula 
are visible. 
■  Class III: only the soft  and hard palates are 
visible. 
■  Class IV: only the hard palate is visible. 
•  Th yromental distance: the distance between 
the mentum and the superior thyroid notch. 
A distance greater than 3 fi ngerbreadths is 
desirable. 
•  Neck circumference: a neck circumference 
of greater than 27 in is suggestive of 
diffi  culties in visualization of the glottic 
opening. 
 Although the presence of these fi ndings may 
not be particularly sensitive for detecting a diffi  cult 
intubation, the absence of these fi ndings is predic-
tive for relative ease of intubation. 
 FIGURE 195  A: Mallampati classiﬁ cation of oral 
opening.  B: Grading of the laryngeal view. A diﬃ  cult 
orotracheal intubation (grade III or IV) may be predicted 
by the inability to visualize certain pharyngeal structures 
(class III or IV) during the preoperative examination of a 
seated patient.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Mallampati SR: 
Clinical signs to predict diﬃ  cult tracheal intubation [hypothesis]. Can 
Anaesth Soc J 1983;30:316.) 
A
B
CLASS I
GRADE I
GRADE II
GRADE III
GRADE IV
CLASS II
CLASS III
CLASS IV
Epiglottis
Hard palate
Hard palate
Soft palate
Uvula
Pillars
Vocal cords
314 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Oral & Nasal Airways 
 Loss of upper airway muscle tone (eg, weakness of the 
genioglossus muscle) in anesthetized patients allows 
the tongue and epiglottis to fall back against the pos-
terior wall of the pharynx. Repositioning the head 
or a jaw thrust is the preferred technique for open-
ing the airway. To maintain the opening, an artifi cial 
airway can be inserted through the mouth or nose 
to maintain an air passage between the tongue and 
the posterior pharyngeal wall ( Figure 19–6 ). Awake 
or lightly anesthetized patients with intact laryngeal 
refl exes may cough or even develop laryngospasm 
during airway insertion. Placement of an oral air-
way is sometimes facilitated by suppressing airway 
refl exes, and, in addition, sometimes by depressing 
the tongue with a tongue blade. Adult oral airways 
typically come in small (80 mm [Guedel No.  3]), 
medium (90 mm [Guedel No. 4]), and large (100 mm 
[Guedel No. 5]) sizes. 
 Th e length of a nasal airway can be estimated 
as the distance from the nares to the meatus of the 
ear and should be approximately 2–4 cm longer 
than oral airways. Because of the risk of epistaxis, 
nasal airways are less desirable in anticoagulated 
or thrombocytopenic patients. Also, nasal air-
ways (and nasogastric tubes) should be used with 
caution in patients with basilar skull fractures, 
where there has been a case report of a nasogastric 
tube entering the cranial vault. All tubes inserted 
through the nose (eg, nasal airways, nasogastric 
 FIGURE 196  A: The oropharyngeal airway in place. 
The airway follows the curvature of the tongue, pulling 
it and the epiglottis away from the posterior pharyngeal 
wall and providing a channel for air passage.  B: The 
nasopharyngeal airway in place. The airway passes 
through the nose and extends to just above the epiglottis. 
 (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from Face masks and 
airways. In:  Understanding Anesthesia Equipment , 4th ed. Dorsch JA, 
Dorsch SE, eds. Williams & Wilkins, 1999.) 
A
B
 Increasingly, patients present with morbid obe-
sity and body mass indices of 30 kg/m 2 or greater. 
Although some morbidly obese patients have rela-
tively normal head and neck anatomy, others have 
much redundant pharyngeal tissue and increased 
neck circumference. Not only may these patients 
prove to be diffi  cult to intubate, but routine ventilation 
with bag and mask also may be problematic. 
 EQUIPMENT 
 Preparation is mandatory for all airway manage-
ment scenarios. Th e following equipment is rou-
tinely needed in airway management situations: 
•  An oxygen source 
•  BMV capability 
•  Laryngoscopes (direct and video) 
•  Several endotracheal tubes of diff erent sizes 
•  Other (not endotracheal tube) airway devices 
(eg, oral, nasal airways) 
•  Suction 
•  Oximetry and CO 2 detection 
•  Stethoscope 
•  Tape 
•  Blood pressure and electrocardiography (ECG) 
monitors 
•  Intravenous access 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management
315
 If the mask is held with the left  hand, the right 
hand can be used to generate positive-pressure ven-
tilation by squeezing the breathing bag. Th e mask is 
held against the face by downward pressure on the 
mask body exerted by the left  thumb and index fi n-
ger ( Figure 19–9 ). Th e middle and ring fi nger grasp 
the mandible to facilitate extension of the atlanto-
occipital joint. Th is is a maneuver that is easier to 
teach than to describe. Finger pressure should be 
placed on the bony mandible and not on the soft  tis-
sues supporting the base of the tongue, which may 
obstruct the airway. Th e little fi nger is placed under 
the angle of the jaw and used to thrust the jaw ante-
riorly, the most important maneuver to allow venti-
lation to the patient. 
catheters, nasotracheal tubes) should be lubricated 
before being advanced along the fl oor of the nasal 
passage. 
 Face Mask Design & Technique 
 Th e use of a face mask can facilitate the delivery of 
oxygen or an anesthetic gas from a breathing sys-
tem to a patient by creating an airtight seal with 
the patient’s face ( Figure 19–7 ). Th e rim of the 
mask is contoured and conforms to a variety of 
facial features. Th e mask’s 22-mm orifi ce attaches 
to the breathing circuit of the anesthesia machine 
through a right-angle connector. Several mask 
designs are available. Transparent masks allow 
observation of exhaled humidifi ed gas and imme-
diate recognition of vomitus. Retaining hooks 
surrounding the orifi ce can be attached to a head 
strap so that the mask does not have to be continu-
ally held in place. Some pediatric masks are spe-
cially designed to minimize apparatus dead space 
( Figure 19–8 ). 
 Eff ective mask ventilation requires both a gas-
tight mask fi t and a patent airway.  Improper 
face mask technique can result in continued 
defl ation of the anesthesia reservoir bag when the 
adjustable pressure-limiting valve is closed, usually 
indicating a substantial leak around the mask. In 
contrast, the generation of high breathing circuit 
pressures with minimal chest movement and breath 
sounds implies an obstructed airway or obstructed 
tubing. 
1
 FIGURE 197  Clear adult face mask. 
Retaining
hooks
Rim
Body
Orifice
 FIGURE 198  The Rendell–Baker–Soucek pediatric 
face mask has a shallow body and minimal dead space. 
Orifice
Body
Rim
 FIGURE 199  One-handed face mask technique. 
316 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 In diffi  cult situations, two hands may be needed 
to provide adequate jaw thrust and to create a 
mask seal. Th erefore, an assistant may be needed to 
squeeze the bag, or the machine’s ventilator can be 
used. In such cases, the thumbs hold the mask down, 
and the fi ngertips or knuckles displace the jaw for-
ward ( Figure 19–10 ). Obstruction during expira-
tion may be due to excessive downward pressure 
from the mask or from a ball-valve eff ect of the jaw 
thrust. Th e former can be relieved by decreasing the 
pressure on the mask, and the latter by releasing the 
jaw thrust during this phase of the respiratory cycle. 
It is oft en diffi  cult to form an adequate mask fi t with 
the cheeks of edentulous patients. Positive-pressure 
ventilation using a mask should normally be limited 
to 20 cm of H 2 O to avoid stomach infl ation. 
 Most patients’ airways can be maintained with a 
face mask and an oral or nasal airway. Mask ventila-
tion for long periods may result in pressure injury to 
branches of the trigeminal or facial nerves. Because 
of the absence of positive airway pressures dur-
ing spontaneous ventilation, only minimal down-
ward force on the face mask is required to create an 
adequate seal. If the face mask and mask straps are 
used for extended periods, the position should be 
regularly changed to prevent injury. Care should be 
used to avoid mask or fi nger contact with the eye, 
and the eyes should be taped shut to minimize the 
risk of corneal abrasions. 
 POSITIONING 
 When manipulating the airway, correct patient posi-
tioning is required. Relative alignment of the oral and 
pharyngeal axes is achieved by having the patient in 
the “sniffi  ng” position. When cervical spine pathol-
ogy is suspected, the head must be kept in a neutral 
position during all airway manipulations. In-line 
stabilization of the neck must be maintained dur-
ing airway management in these patients, unless 
appropriate fi lms have been reviewed and cleared 
by a radiologist or neurological or spine surgeon. 
Patients with morbid obesity should be positioned 
on a 30° upward ramp, as the functional residual 
capacity (FRC) of obese patients deteriorates in the 
supine position, leading to more rapid deoxygen-
ation should ventilation be impaired. 
 PREOXYGENATION 
 When possible, preoxygenation with face mask oxy-
gen should precede all airway management inter-
ventions. Oxygen is delivered by mask for several 
minutes prior to anesthetic induction. In this way, 
the functional residual capacity, the patient’s oxy-
gen reserve, is purged of nitrogen. Up to 90% of the 
normal FRC of 2 L following preoxygenation is fi lled 
with O 2 . Considering the normal oxygen demand 
of 200–250 mL/min, the preoxygenated patient 
may have a 5–8 min oxygen reserve. Increasing the 
duration of apnea without desaturation improves 
safety, if ventilation following anesthetic induction 
is delayed. Conditions that increase oxygen demand 
(eg, sepsis, pregnancy) and decrease FRC (eg, mor-
bid obesity, pregnancy) reduce the apneic period 
before desaturation ensues. 
 BAG AND MASK VENTILATION 
 Bag and mask ventilation (BMV) is the fi rst step 
in airway management in most situations, with the 
exception of patients undergoing rapid sequence 
 FIGURE 1910  A diﬃ  cult airway can often be 
managed with a two-handed technique. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management
317
intubation. Rapid sequence inductions avoid BMV 
to avoid stomach infl ation and to reduce the poten-
tial for the aspiration of gastric contents in nonfasted 
patients and those with delayed gastric emptying. 
In emergency situations, BMV precedes attempts 
at intubation in an eff ort to oxygenate the patient, 
with the understanding that there is an implicit risk 
of aspiration. 
 As noted above, the anesthetist’s left  hand sup-
ports the mask on the patient’s face. Th e face is lift ed 
into the mask with the third, fourth, and fi ft h fi ngers 
of the anesthesia provider’s left  hand. Th e fi ngers are 
placed on the mandible, and the jaw is thrust for-
ward, lift ing the base of the tongue away from the 
posterior pharynx opening the airway. Th e thumb 
and index fi nger sit on top of the mask. If the air-
way is patent, squeezing the bag will result in the rise 
of the chest. If ventilation is ineff ective (no sign of 
chest rising, no end-tidal CO 2 detected, no mist in 
the clear mask), oral or nasal airways can be placed 
to relieve airway obstruction secondary to redun-
dant pharyngeal tissues. Diffi  cult mask ventilation is 
oft en found in patients with morbid obesity, beards, 
and craniofacial deformities. 
 In years past, anesthetics were routinely 
delivered solely by mask administration. In 
recent decades, a variety of supraglottic devices 
has permitted both airway rescue (when BMV is 
not possible) and routine anesthetic airway man-
agement (when intubation is not thought to be 
necessary). 
 SUPRAGLOTTIC 
AIRWAY DEVICES 
 Supraglottic airway devices (SADs) are used with 
both spontaneously and ventilated patients dur-
ing anesthesia. Th ey have also been employed as 
conduits to aid endotracheal intubation when both 
BMV and endotracheal intubation have failed. All 
SADs consist of a tube that is connected to a respira-
tory circuit or breathing bag, which is attached to 
a hypopharyngeal device that seals and directs air-
fl ow to the glottis, trachea, and lungs. Additionally, 
these airway devices occlude the esophagus with 
varying degrees of eff ectiveness, reducing gas dis-
tension of the stomach. Diff erent sealing devices to 
prevent airfl ow from exiting through the mouth are 
also available. Some are equipped with a port to suc-
tion gastric contents. None off er the protection from 
aspiration pneumonitis off ered by a properly sited, 
cuff ed endotracheal tube. 
Laryngeal Mask Airway
 A laryngeal mask airway (LMA) consists of a wide-
bore tube whose proximal end connects to a breath-
ing circuit with a standard 15-mm connector, and 
whose distal end is attached to an elliptical cuff  that 
can be infl ated through a pilot tube. Th e defl ated cuff  
is lubricated and inserted blindly into the hypophar-
ynx so that, once infl ated, the cuff  forms a low-pres-
sure seal around the entrance to the larynx. Th is 
requires anesthetic depth and muscle relaxation 
slightly greater than that required for the insertion 
of an oral airway. Although insertion is relatively 
simple ( Figure 19–11 ), attention to detail will 
improve the success rate ( Table 19–2 ). An ideally 
positioned cuff  is bordered by the base of the tongue 
superiorly, the pyriform sinuses laterally, and 
the upper esophageal sphincter inferiorly. If the 
esophagus lies within the rim of the cuff , gastric dis-
tention 
and 
regurgitation 
become 
possible. 
Anatomic variations prevent adequate functioning 
in some patients. However, if an LMA is not func-
tioning properly aft er attempts to improve the “fi t” 
of the LMA have failed, most practitioners will try 
another LMA one size larger or smaller. Th e shaft  
can be secured with tape to the skin of the face. 
2
 Th e LMA partially protects the larynx from 
pharyngeal secretions (but  not gastric regurgi-
tation), and it should remain in place until the 
patient has regained airway refl exes. Th is is usually 
signaled by coughing and mouth opening on 
 command. Th e LMA is available in many sizes 
( Table 19–3 ). 
 Th e LMA provides an alternative to ventila-
tion through a face mask or TT ( Table 19–4 ). 
Relative contraindications for the LMA include 
patients with pharyngeal pathology (eg, abscess), 
pharyngeal obstruction, full stomachs (eg, preg-
nancy, hiatal hernia), or low pulmonary compli-
ance (eg, restrictive airways disease) requiring 
peak inspiratory pressures greater than 30 cm H 2 O. 
Traditionally, the LMA has been avoided in patients 
318 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 1911  A: The laryngeal mask ready for 
insertion. The cuﬀ  should be deﬂ ated tightly with the 
rim facing away from the mask aperture. There should be 
no folds near the tip.  B: Initial insertion of the laryngeal 
mask. Under direct vision, the mask tip is pressed upward 
against the hard palate. The middle ﬁ nger may be used 
to push the lower jaw downward. The mask is pressed 
forward as it is advanced into the pharynx to ensure that 
the tip remains ﬂ attened and avoids the tongue. The 
jaw should not be held open once the mask is inside the 
mouth. The nonintubating hand can be used to stabilize 
the occiput.  C: By withdrawing the other ﬁ ngers and with 
a slight pronation of the forearm, it is usually possible to 
push the mask fully into position in one ﬂ uid movement. 
Note that the neck is kept ﬂ exed and the head extended. 
 D: The laryngeal mask is grasped with the other hand and 
the index ﬁ nger withdrawn. The hand holding the tube 
presses gently downward until resistance is encountered. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from LMA North America.) 
B
C
A
D
with bronchospasm or high airway resistance, but 
new evidence suggests that because it is not placed 
in the trachea, use of an LMA is associated with less 
bronchospasm than a TT. Although it is clearly not 
a substitute for tracheal intubation, the LMA has 
proven particularly helpful as a life-saving temporiz-
ing measure in patients with diffi  cult airways (those 
who cannot be ventilated or intubated) because of 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
319 
 TABLE 194 Advantages and disadvantages of the laryngeal mask airway compared with face 
mask ventilation or tracheal intubation. 1 
Advantages
Disadvantages
Compared with face mask
Hands-free operation
Better seal in bearded patients
Less cumbersome in ENT surgery
Often easier to maintain airway
Protects against airway secretions
Less facial nerve and eye trauma
Less operating room pollution
More invasive
More risk of airway trauma
Requires new skill
Deeper anesthesia required
Requires some TMJ mobility
N 2 O diffusion into cuff
Multiple contraindications
Compared with tracheal 
intubation
Less invasive
Very useful in difficult intubations
Less tooth and laryngeal trauma
Less laryngospasm and bronchospasm
Does not require muscle relaxation
Does not require neck mobility
No risk of esophageal or endobronchial intubation
Increased risk of gastrointestinal aspiration
Less safe in prone or jackknife positions
Limits maximum PPV
Less secure airway
Greater risk of gas leak and pollution
Can cause gastric distention
  1  ENT, ear, nose, and throat; TMJ, temporomandibular joint; PPV, positive-pressure ventilation.
 TABLE 193 A variety of laryngeal masks 
with diﬀ erent cuﬀ  volumes are available for 
diﬀ erent sized patients. 
Mask Size
Patient Size
Weight (kg)
Cuﬀ  
Volume (mL)
1
Infant
<6.5
2–4
2
Child
6.5–20
Up to 10
2½
Child
20–30
Up to 15
3
Small adult
>30
Up to 20
4
Normal adult
<70
Up to 30
5
Larger adult
>70
Up to 30
 TABLE 192 Successful insertion of a 
laryngeal mask airway depends upon 
attention to several details. 
 1.  Choose the appropriate size ( Table 19–3 ) and check for 
leaks before insertion. 
 2.  The leading edge of the deflated cuff should be wrinkle 
free and facing away from the aperture ( Figure 19–11A ). 
 3.  Lubricate only the back side of the cuff. 
 4.  Ensure adequate anesthesia before attempting insertion. 
 5.  Place patient’s head in sniffing position ( Figure 19–11B 
and  Figure 19–23 ). 
 6.  Use your index finger to guide the cuff along the hard 
palate and down into the hypopharynx until an 
increased resistance is felt ( Figure 19–11C ). The 
longitudinal black line should  always be pointing 
directly cephalad (ie, facing the patient’s upper lip). 
 7.  Inflate with the correct amount of air ( Table 19–3 ). 
 8.  Ensure adequate anesthetic depth during patient 
positioning. 
 9.  Obstruction after insertion is usually due to a 
down-folded epiglottis or transient laryngospasm. 
 10.  Avoid pharyngeal suction, cuff deflation, or laryngeal 
mask removal until the patient is awake (eg, opening 
mouth on command). 
performed under topical anesthesia and bilateral 
superior laryngeal nerve blocks, if the airway must 
be secured while the patient is awake. 
 Variations in LMA design include: 
•  Th e ProSeal LMA, which permits passage of a 
gastric tube to decompress the stomach 
•  Th e I-Gel, which uses a gel occluder rather 
than infl atable cuff  
•  Th e Fastrach intubation LMA, which is 
designed to facilitate endotracheal intubation 
through the LMA device 
•  Th e LMA CTrach, which incorporates a camera 
to facilitate passage of an endotracheal tube 
its ease of insertion and relatively high success rate 
(95% to 99%). It has been used as a conduit for 
an intubating stylet (eg, gum-elastic bougie), ven-
tilating jet stylet, fl exible FOB, or small-diameter 
(6.0-mm) TT. Several LMAs are available that have 
been modifi ed to facilitate placement of a larger TT, 
with or without the use of a FOB. Insertion can be 
320 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
decompression. Alternatively, if the Combitube 
enters the trachea, ventilation through the clear tube 
will direct gas into the trachea. 
 King Laryngeal Tube 
 King laryngeal tubes (LTs) consist of tube with a 
small esophageal balloon and a larger balloon for 
placement in the hypopharynx ( Figure 19–13 ). 
Both tubes infl ate through one infl ation line. Th e 
lungs are infl ated from air that exits between the 
two balloons. A suction port distal to the esophageal 
balloon is present, permitting decompression of the 
stomach. Th e LT is inserted and the cuff s infl ated. 
Should ventilation prove diffi  cult, the LT is likely 
inserted too deep. Slightly withdrawing the device 
until compliance improves ameliorates the situation. 
 ENDOTRACHEAL INTUBATION 
 Endotracheal intubation is employed both for the 
conduct of general anesthesia and to facilitate the 
ventilator management of the critically ill. 
 Tracheal Tubes 
 Standards govern TT manufacturing (American 
National Standard for Anesthetic Equipment; ANSI 
Z–79). TTs are most commonly made from polyvi-
nyl chloride. In the past, TTs were marked “I.T.” or 
 Sore throat is a common side eff ect follow-
ing SAD use. Injuries to the lingual, hypoglossal, 
and recurrent laryngeal nerve have been reported. 
Correct device sizing, avoidance of cuff  hyperinfl a-
tion, and gentle movement of the jaw during place-
ment may reduce the likelihood of such injuries. 
 Esophageal–Tracheal Combitube 
 Th e esophageal–tracheal Combitube consists of 
two fused tubes, each with a 15-mm connector on 
its proximal end ( Figure 19–12 ). Th e longer blue 
tube has an occluded distal tip that forces gas to exit 
through a series of side perforations. Th e shorter 
clear tube has an open tip and no side perforations. 
Th e Combitube is usually inserted blindly through 
the mouth and advanced until the two black rings 
on the shaft  lie between the upper and lower teeth. 
Th e Combitube has two infl atable cuff s, a 100-mL 
proximal cuff  and a 15-mL distal cuff , both of which 
should be fully infl ated aft er placement. Th e distal 
lumen of the Combitube usually comes to lie in the 
esophagus approximately 95% of the time so that 
ventilation through the longer blue tube will force 
gas out of the side perforations and into the lar-
ynx. Th e shorter, clear tube can be used for gastric 
 FIGURE 1913  King laryngeal tube. 
 FIGURE 1912  Combitube. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
321 
cuff  ( Figure 19–14 ). Th e valve prevents air loss aft er 
cuff  infl ation. Th e pilot balloon provides a gross 
indication of cuff  infl ation. Th e infl ating tube con-
nects the valve to the cuff  and is incorporated into 
the tube’s wall. By creating a tracheal seal, TT cuff s 
permit positive-pressure ventilation and reduce the 
likelihood of aspiration. Uncuff ed tubes are oft en 
used in infants and young children to minimize the 
risk of pressure injury and postintubation croup; 
however, in recent years, cuff ed pediatric tubes have 
been increasingly favored. 
 Th ere are two major types of cuff s: high pres-
sure (low volume) and low pressure (high volume). 
High-pressure cuff s are associated with more isch-
emic damage to the tracheal mucosa and are less suit-
able for intubations of long duration. Low-pressure 
cuff s may increase the likelihood of sore throat 
(larger mucosal contact area), aspiration, spontane-
ous extubation, and diffi  cult insertion (because of 
the fl oppy cuff ). Nonetheless, because of their lower 
incidence of mucosal damage, low-pressure cuff s are 
generally employed. 
 Cuff  pressure depends on several factors: infl a-
tion volume, the diameter of the cuff  in relation 
to the trachea, tracheal and cuff  compliance, and 
intrathoracic pressure (cuff  pressures increase with 
coughing). Cuff  pressure may increase during gen-
eral anesthesia from diff usion of nitrous oxide from 
the tracheal mucosa into the TT cuff . 
 TTs have been modifi ed for a variety of spe-
cialized applications. Flexible, spiral-wound, wire-
reinforced TTs (armored tubes) resist kinking and 
“Z–79” to indicate that they had been implant tested 
to ensure nontoxicity. Th e shape and rigidity of TTs 
can be altered by inserting a stylet. Th e patient end 
of the tube is beveled to aid visualization and inser-
tion through the vocal cords. Murphy tubes have a 
hole (the Murphy eye) to decrease the risk of occlu-
sion, should the distal tube opening abut the carina 
or trachea ( Figure 19–14 ). 
 Resistance to airfl ow depends primarily on tube 
diameter, but is also aff ected by tube length and 
curvature. TT size is usually designated in millime-
ters of internal diameter, or, less commonly, in the 
French scale (external diameter in millimeters mul-
tiplied by 3). Th e choice of tube diameter is always a 
compromise between maximizing fl ow with a larger 
size and minimizing airway trauma with a smaller 
size ( Table 19–5 ). 
 Most adult TTs have a cuff  infl ation system con-
sisting of a valve, pilot balloon, infl ating tube, and 
Beveled tip
Murphy eye
Inflating tube
Pilot balloon
Valve
Connector
Cuff
 FIGURE 1914  Murphy tracheal tube. 
 TABLE 195 Oral tracheal tube size 
guidelines. 
Age
Internal 
Diameter (mm)
Cut Length (cm)
Full-term infant
3.5
12
Child
 
4
4
+ Age
 
 
14
2
+ Age
 
Adult
 Female
 Male
7.0–7.5
7.5–9.0
24
24
322 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
the United States. Th e choice of blade depends on 
personal preference and patient anatomy. Because 
no blade is perfect for all situations, the clinician 
should become familiar and profi cient with a variety 
of blade designs ( Figure 19–16 ). 
 VIDEO LARYNGOSCOPES 
 In recent years, a myriad of laryngoscopy devices 
that utilize video technology have revolution-
ized management of the airway. Direct laryngos-
copy with a Macintosh or Miller blade mandates 
appropriate alignment of the oral, pharyngeal, and 
laryngeal structures to facilitate a direct view of 
the glottis. Various maneuvers, such as the “sniff -
ing” position and external movement of the larynx 
with cricoid pressure during direct laryngoscopy, 
are used to improve the view. Video- or optically-
based laryngoscopes have either a video chip (DCI 
system, GlideScope, McGrath, Airway) or a lens/
mirror (Airtraq) at the tip of the intubation blade to 
transmit a view of the glottis to the operator. Th ese 
devices diff er in the angulation of the blade, the 
presence of a channel to guide the tube to the glottis, 
and the single use or multiuse nature of the device. 
 Video or indirect laryngoscopy most likely 
off ers minimal advantage in patients with uncompli-
cated airways. However, use in these patients is valu-
able as a training guide for learners, especially when 
the trainee is performing a direct laryngoscopy 
with the device while the instructor views the glot-
tis on the video screen. Additionally, use in uncom-
plicated airway management patients improves 
familiarity with the device for times when direct 
laryngoscopy is not possible. 
 Indirect laryngoscopes generally improve visu-
alization of laryngeal structures in diffi  cult air-
ways; however, visualization does not always lead 
to successful intubation. An endotracheal tube sty-
let is recommended when video laryngoscopy is 
to be performed. Some devices come with stylets 
designed to facilitate intubation with that particu-
lar device. Bending the stylet and endotracheal tube 
in a manner similar to the bend in the curve of the 
blade oft en facilitates passage of the endotracheal 
tube into the trachea. Even when the glottic opening 
is seen clearly, directing the endotracheal tube into 
may prove valuable in some head and neck surgical 
procedures or in the prone patient. If an armored 
tube becomes kinked from extreme pressure (eg, an 
awake patient biting it), however, the lumen will oft en 
remain permanently occluded, and the tube will need 
replacement. Other specialized tubes include micro-
laryngeal tubes, double-lumen endotracheal tubes 
(to facilitate lung isolation and one-lung ventilation), 
endotracheal tubes equipped with bronchial block-
ers (to facilitate lung isolation and one-lung ventila-
tion), metal tubes designed for laser airway surgery to 
reduce fi re hazards, and preformed curved tubes for 
nasal and oral intubation in head and neck surgery. 
 LARYGOSCOPES 
 A laryngoscope is an instrument used to examine 
the larynx and to facilitate intubation of the trachea. 
Th e handle usually contains batteries to light a bulb 
on the blade tip ( Figure 19–15 ), or, alternately, to 
power a fi beroptic bundle that terminates at the tip of 
the blade. Light from a fi beroptic bundle tends to be 
more precisely directed and less diff use. Also, laryn-
goscopes with fi beroptic light bundles in their blades 
can be made magnetic resonance imaging compat-
ible. Th e Macintosh and Miller blades are the most 
popular curved and straight designs, respectively, in 
 FIGURE 1915  A rigid laryngoscope. 
Flange
Bulb
Blade
Electrical
contact
Handle
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
323 
the trachea can be diffi  cult. Should the tube become 
caught on the arytenoids, slightly pulling the blade 
farther out may better permit tube passage. 
 Indirect laryngoscopy may result in less dis-
placement of the cervical spine; however, all pre-
cautions associated with airway manipulation in a 
patient with a possible cervical spine fracture should 
be maintained. 
 Varieties of indirect laryngoscopes include: 
•  Various Macintosh and Miller blades in pediatric 
and adult sizes have video capability in the Storz 
DCI system. Th e system can also incorporate 
an optical intubating stylet ( Figure 19–17 ). Th e 
blades are similar to conventional intubation 
blades, permitting direct laryngoscopy and 
indirect video laryngoscopy. Assistants and 
instructors are able to see the view obtained 
by the operator and adjust their maneuvers 
accordingly to facilitate intubation or to provide 
instruction, respectively. 
•  Th e McGrath laryngoscope is a portable video 
laryngoscope with a blade length that can be 
Macintosh
Miller
Wisconsin
 FIGURE 1916  An assortment of laryngoscope blades. 
adjusted to facilitate a child of age 5 years up 
to an adult ( Figure 19–18 ). Th e blade can be 
disconnected from the handle to facilitate its 
insertion in morbidly obese patients in whom 
the space between the upper chest and head 
is reduced. Th e blade is inserted midline, with 
the laryngeal structures viewed at a distance 
to enhance intubation success. 
 FIGURE 1917  Optical intubating stylet. 
324 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 1920  Airtraq optical laryngoscope. 
•  Th e GlideScope comes with disposable adult- 
and pediatric-sized blades ( Figure 19–19 ). 
Th e blade is inserted midline and advanced 
until glottic structures are identifi ed. Th e 
GlideScope has a 60° angle, preventing direct 
laryngoscopy and necessitating the use of stylet 
that is similar in shape to the blade. 
•  Airtraq is a single-use optical laryngoscope 
available in pediatric and adult sizes 
( Figure 19–20 ). Th e device has a channel to 
guide the endotracheal tube to the glottis. Th is 
device is inserted midline. Success is more 
likely when the device is not positioned too 
close to the glottis. 
•  Video intubating stylets have a video capability 
and light source. Th e stylet is introduced, 
and the glottis identifi ed. Intubation with a 
video stylet may result in less cervical spine 
movement than with other techniques. 
 Flexible Fiberoptic Bronchoscopes 
 In some situations—for example, patients with 
unstable cervical spines, poor range of motion of 
the temporomandibular joint, or certain congenital 
 FIGURE 1918  McGrath laryngoscope. 
 FIGURE 1919  Glidescope. 
or acquired upper airway anomalies—laryngoscopy 
with direct or indirect laryngoscopes may be unde-
sirable or impossible. A fl exible FOB allows indi-
rect visualization of the larynx in such cases or in 
any situation in which awake intubation is planned 
( Figure 19–21 ). Bronchoscopes are constructed of 
coated glass fi bers that transmit light and images by 
internal refl ection (ie, a light beam becomes trapped 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
325 
not a risk-free procedure, and not all patients receiv-
ing general anesthesia require it. A TT is generally 
placed to protect the airway and for airway access. 
Intubation is indicated in patients who are at risk of 
aspiration and in those undergoing surgical proce-
dures involving body cavities or the head and neck. 
Mask ventilation or ventilation with an LMA is usu-
ally satisfactory for short minor procedures such as 
cystoscopy, examination under anesthesia, inguinal 
hernia repairs, extremity surgery, and so forth. 
 Preparation for Direct Laryngoscopy 
 Preparation for intubation includes checking equip-
ment and properly positioning the patient. Th e TT 
should be examined. Th e tube’s cuff  infl ation system 
can be tested by infl ating the cuff  using a 10-mL 
syringe. Maintenance of cuff  pressure  aft er detaching 
the syringe ensures proper cuff  and valve function. 
Some anesthesiologists cut the TT to a preset length 
to decrease the dead space, the risk of bronchial 
intubation, and the risk of occlusion from tube kink-
ing ( Table 19–5 ). Th e connector should be pushed 
fi rmly into the tube to decrease the likelihood of dis-
connection. If a stylet is used, it should be inserted 
within a fi ber and exits unchanged at the opposite 
end). Th e insertion tube contains two bundles of 
fi bers, each consisting of 10,000 to 15,000 fi bers. 
One bundle transmits light from the light source 
(light source or incoherent bundle), which is either 
external to the device or contained within the han-
dle ( Figure 19–21B ), whereas the other provides 
a high-resolution image (image or coherent bundle). 
Directional manipulation of the insertion tube is 
accomplished with angulation wires. Aspiration 
channels allow suctioning of secretions, insuffl  a-
tion of oxygen, or instillation of local anesthetic. 
Aspiration channels can be diffi  cult to clean, and, 
if not properly cleaned and sterilized aft er each use, 
may provide a nidus for infection. 
 TECHNIQUES OF DIRECT AND 
INDIRECT LARYNGOSCOPY & 
INTUBATION 
 Indications for Intubation 
 Inserting a tube into the trachea has become a routine 
part of delivering a general anesthetic. Intubation is 
A
B
Aspiration channel
Light source bundle
Light source
Insertion tube
Eyepiece
Objective lens covering
image bundle
 FIGURE 1921  A: Cross section of a ﬁ beroptic 
bronchoscope.  B: A ﬂ exible ﬁ beroptic bronchoscope 
with a ﬁ xed light source. 
326 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
fading indicates depleted batteries. An extra handle, 
blade, TT (one size smaller than the anticipated 
optimal size), and stylet should be immediately 
available. A functioning suction unit is needed to 
clear the airway in case of unexpected secretions, 
blood, or emesis. 
 Successful intubation oft en depends on correct 
patient positioning. Th e patient’s head should be level 
with the anesthesiologist’s waist or higher to prevent 
unnecessary back strain during laryngoscopy. 
 Direct laryngoscopy displaces pharyngeal soft 
tissues to create a direct line of vision from the 
mouth to the glottic opening. Moderate head eleva-
tion (5–10 cm above the surgical table) and exten-
sion of the atlantooccipital joint place the patient 
in the desired sniffi  ng position ( Figure 19–23 ). Th e 
lower portion of the cervical spine is fl exed by rest-
ing the head on a pillow or other soft  support. 
 Preparation for induction and intubation also 
involves routine preoxygenation. Administration of 
100% oxygen provides an extra margin of safety in 
into the TT, which is then bent to resemble a hockey 
stick ( Figure 19–22 ). Th is shape facilitates intuba-
tion of an anteriorly positioned larynx. Th e desired 
blade is locked onto the laryngoscope handle, and 
bulb function is tested. Th e light intensity should 
remain constant even if the bulb is jiggled. A blink-
ing light signals a poor electrical contact, whereas 
10 cm
 FIGURE 1923  The sniﬃ  ng 
position and intubation with a 
Macintosh blade.  (Modiﬁ ed and 
reproduced, with permission, from Dorsch 
JA, Dorsch SE:  Understanding Anesthesia 
Equipment: Construction, Care, and 
Complications . Williams & Wilkins, 1991.) 
 FIGURE 1922  A tracheal tube with a stylet bent to 
resemble a hockey stick. 
Stylet
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management
327
clears the view for TT placement. Th e tip of a 
curved blade is usually inserted into the vallecula, 
and the straight blade tip covers the epiglottis. 
With either blade, the handle is raised up and away 
from the patient in a plane perpendicular to the 
patient’s mandible to expose the vocal cords 
( Figure 19–24 ). Trapping a lip between the teeth 
and the blade and leverage on the teeth are avoided. 
Th e TT is taken with the right hand, and its tip is 
passed through the abducted vocal cords. Th e 
“backward, upward, rightward, pressure” (BURP) 
maneuver applied externally moves an anteriorly 
positioned glottis posterior to facilitate visualiza-
tion of the glottis. Th e TT cuff  should lie in the 
upper trachea, but beyond the larynx. Th e laryngo-
scope is withdrawn, again with care to avoid tooth 
damage.  Th e cuff  is infl ated with the least 
amount of air necessary to create a seal dur-
ing positive-pressure ventilation to minimize the 
3
case the patient is not easily ventilated aft er induc-
tion. Preoxygenation can be omitted in patients who 
object to the face mask; however, failing to preoxy-
genate increases the risk of rapid desaturation fol-
lowing apnea. 
 Because general anesthesia abolishes the pro-
tective corneal refl ex, care must be taken during this 
period not to injure the patient’s eyes by uninten-
tionally abrading the cornea. Th us, the eyes are rou-
tinely taped shut, oft en aft er applying an ophthalmic 
ointment before manipulation of the airway. 
 Orotracheal Intubation 
 Th e laryngoscope is held in the left  hand. With the 
patient’s mouth opened the blade is introduced 
into the right side of the oropharynx—with care to 
avoid the teeth. Th e tongue is swept to the left  and 
up into the fl oor of the pharynx by the blade’s 
fl ange. Successful sweeping of the tongue left ward 
 FIGURE 1924  Typical view of the glottis during laryngoscopy with a curved blade.  (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with 
permission, from Barash PG:  Clinical Anesthesia , 4th ed. Lippincott, 2001.) 
Epiglottis
Glottis
Aryepiglottic fold
Ventricular fold
Vocal fold
Cuneiform
cartilage
Corniculate cartilage
328 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
pressure transmitted to the tracheal mucosa. 
Overinfl ation beyond 30 mm Hg may inhibit capil-
lary blood fl ow, injuring the trachea. Compressing 
the pilot balloon with the fi ngers is  not a reliable 
method of determining whether cuff  pressure is 
either suffi  cient or excessive. 
 Aft er intubation, the chest and epigastrium are 
immediately auscultated, and a capnographic trac-
ing (the defi nitive test) is monitored to ensure 
intratracheal location ( Figure 19–25 ). If there is 
doubt as to whether the tube is in the esophagus or 
trachea, repeat the laryngoscopy to confi rm place-
ment. End-tidal CO 2 will not be produced if there 
is no cardiac output. FOB through the tube and 
visualization of the tracheal rings and carina will 
likewise confi rm correct placement. Otherwise, 
the tube is taped or tied to secure its position. 
 Although the persistent detection of CO 2 by a 
capnograph is the best confi rmation of tra-
cheal placement of a TT, it cannot exclude bron-
chial intubation. Th e earliest evidence of bronchial 
intubation oft en is an increase in peak inspiratory 
pressure. Proper tube location can be reconfi rmed 
by palpating the cuff  in the sternal notch while 
compressing the pilot balloon with the other hand. 
 Th e cuff  should not be felt above the level of 
the cricoid cartilage, because a prolonged 
intralaryngeal location may result in postoperative 
hoarseness and increases the risk of accidental 
extubation. Tube position can also be documented 
by chest radiography. 
 Th e description presented here assumes an 
unconscious patient. Oral intubation is usually 
poorly tolerated by awake, fi t patients. Intravenous 
sedation, application of a local anesthetic spray in 
the oropharynx, regional nerve block, and con stant 
reassurance will improve patient acceptance. 
 A failed intubation should not be followed 
by identical repeated attempts. Changes must be 
made to increase the likelihood of success, such as 
repositioning the patient, decreasing the tube size, 
adding a stylet, selecting a diff erent blade, using an 
indirect laryngoscope, attempting a nasal route, or 
requesting the assistance of another anesthesiolo-
gist. If the patient is also diffi  cult to ventilate with 
a mask, alternative forms of airway management 
(eg, LMA, Combitube, cricothyrotomy with jet ven-
tilation, tracheostomy) must be immediately pur-
sued. Th e guidelines developed by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists for the management of 
a diffi  cult airway include a treatment plan algorithm 
( Figure 19–26 ). 
 Use of video or indirect laryngoscopes is 
dependent upon the design of the device. Some 
devices are placed midline without the requirement 
to sweep the tongue from view. Other devices con-
tain channels to direct the endotracheal tube to the 
glottic opening. Practitioners should be familiar 
with the features of available devices well in advance 
of using one in a diffi  cult airway situation. Th e com-
bined use of a video laryngoscope and an intubation 
4
5
 FIGURE 1925  Sites for auscultation of breath sounds 
at the apices and over the stomach. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
329 
 FIGURE 1926  Diﬃ  cult Airway Algorithm developed 
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists. *Conﬁ rm 
tracheal intubation or LMA placement with exhaled 
CO 2 .  (Reproduced, with permission, from the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of the Diﬃ  cult Airway. 
Practice guidelines for management of the diﬃ  cult airway: an updated 
report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Management of the Diﬃ  cult Airway. Anesthesiology 2003;98:1269.) 
Difficult Airway Algorithm
1. Assess the likelihood and clinical impact of basic management problems.
A. Difficult ventilation
B. Difficult intubation
C. Difficulty with patient cooperation or consent
D. Difficult tracheostomy
2. Actively pursue opportunities to deliver supplemental oxygen throughout the process of difficult airway management.
3. Consider the relative merits and feasibility of basic management choices:
4. Develop primary and alternative strategies.
Noninvasive technique for initial 
approach to intubation
Invasive technique for initial 
approach to intubation
vs.
B.
Preservation of spontaneous 
ventilation
Ablation of spontaneous 
ventilation
vs.
C.
Awake intubation
Intubation attempts after 
induction of general anesthesia
vs.
A.
Call for help
Emergency noninvasive airway ventilatione
Invasive airway ventilationb*
Awaken patientd
Consider feasibility of other optionsa
Successful intubation*
FAIL after multiple attempts
Successful ventilation*
FAIL
Emergency 
invasive 
airway 
accessb*
Face mask ventilation adequate
Face mask ventilation not adequate
Consider/attempt LMA
LMA not adequate or not feasible
Airway approached by 
noninvasive intubation
Airway secured by 
invasive access*
Cancel 
case
Consider feasibility 
of other optionsa
Invasive airway 
accessa*
Awake Intubation
A.
Initial intubation attempts 
UNSUCCESSFUL
FROM THIS POINT ONWARD 
CONSIDER:
1. Calling for help.
2. Returning to spontaneous ventilation
3. Awakening the patient
Intubation Attempts after Induction
of General Anesthesia
B.
Initial intubation 
attempts 
successful*
Succeed*
FAIL
LMA adequate*
Emergency Pathway
Ventilation inadequate, intubation unsuccessful
Alternative approaches to intubationc
Nonemergency Pathway
Ventilation adequate, intubation unsuccessful
330 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
breath sounds as a guide, it is directed toward the 
glottis. When breath sounds are maximal, the anes-
thetist advances the tube during inspiration in an 
eff ort to blindly pass the tube into the trachea. 
 Flexible Fiberoptic Intubation 
 Fiberoptic intubation (FOI) is routinely performed 
in awake or sedated patients with problematic air-
ways. FOI is ideal for: 
•  A small mouth opening 
•  Minimizing cervical spine movement in 
trauma or rheumatoid arthritis 
•  Upper airway obstruction, such as angioedema 
or tumor mass 
•  Facial deformities, facial trauma 
 FOI can be performed awake or asleep via oral 
or nasal routes. 
•  Awake FOI: predicted inability to ventilate by 
mask, upper airway obstruction 
bougie oft en can facilitate intubation, when the 
endotracheal tube cannot be directed into the glot-
tis despite good visualization of the laryngeal open-
ing ( Figure 19–27 ). 
 Nasotracheal Intubation 
 Nasal intubation is similar to oral intubation except 
that the TT is advanced through the nose and naso-
pharynx into the oropharynx before laryngoscopy. 
Th e nostril through which the patient breathes 
most easily is selected in advance and prepared. 
Phenylephrine nose drops (0.5% or 0.25%) vaso-
constrict vessels and shrink mucous membranes. If 
the patient is awake, local anesthetic ointment (for 
the nostril), spray (for the oropharynx), and nerve 
blocks can also be utilized. 
 A TT lubricated with water-soluble jelly is 
introduced along the fl oor of the nose, below the 
inferior turbinate,  at an angle perpendicular to 
the face . Th e tube’s bevel should be directed later-
ally away from the turbinates. To ensure that the 
tube passes along the fl oor of the nasal cavity, the 
proximal end of the TT should be pulled cephalad. 
Th e tube is gradually advanced, until its tip can be 
visualized in the oropharynx. Laryngoscopy, as dis-
cussed, reveals the abducted vocal cords. Oft en the 
distal end of the TT can be pushed into the trachea 
without diffi  culty. If diffi  culty is encountered, the tip 
of the tube may be directed through the vocal cords 
with Magill forceps, being careful not to damage the 
cuff . Nasal passage of TTs, airways, or nasogastric 
catheters carries greater risk in patients with severe 
mid-facial trauma because of the risk of intracranial 
placement ( Figure 19–28 ). 
 Although less used today, blind nasal intuba-
tion of spontaneously breathing patients can be 
employed. In this technique, aft er applying topi-
cal anesthetic to the nostril and pharynx, a breath-
ing tube is passed through the nasopharynx. Using 
 FIGURE 1928  Radiograph demonstrating a 7.0-mm 
tracheal tube placed through the cribriform plate into the 
cranial vault in a patient with a basilar skull fracture. 
 FIGURE 1927  Bougie. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
331 
•  Asleep FOI: Failed intubation, desire for 
minimal C spine movement in patients who 
refuse awake intubation 
•  Oral FOI: Facial, skull injuries 
•  Nasal FOI: A poor mouth opening 
 When FOI is considered, careful planning is 
necessary, as it will likely add to the anesthesia time 
prior to surgery. Patients should be informed of the 
need for awake intubation as a part of the informed 
consent process. 
 Th e airway is anesthetized with a local anes-
thetic spray, and patient sedation is provided, as 
tolerated. Dexmedetomidine has the advantage 
of preserving respiration while providing seda-
tion. Airway anesthesia is discussed in the Case 
Discussion below. 
 If nasal FOI is planned, both nostrils are pre-
pared with vasoconstrictive drops. Th e nostril 
through which the patient breathes more easily is 
identifi ed. Oxygen can be insuffl  ated through the 
suction port and down the aspiration channel of the 
FOB to improve oxygenation and blow secretions 
away from the tip. 
 Alternatively, a large nasal airway (eg, 36F) can 
be inserted in the contralateral nostril. Th e breath-
ing circuit can be directly connected to the end of 
this nasal airway to administer 100% oxygen during 
laryngoscopy. If the patient is unconscious and not 
breathing spontaneously, the mouth can be closed 
and ventilation attempted through the single nasal 
airway. When this technique is used, adequacy of 
ventilation and oxygenation should be confi rmed 
by capnography and pulse oximetry. Th e lubricated 
shaft  of the FOB is introduced into the TT lumen. 
It is important to keep the shaft  of the broncho-
scope relatively straight ( Figure 19–29 ) so that 
if the head of the bronchoscope is rotated in one 
direction, the distal end will move to a similar 
degree and in the same direction. As the tip of 
the FOB passes through the distal end of the TT, 
the epiglottis or glottis should be visible. Th e tip 
of the bronchoscope is manipulated, as needed, to 
pass the abducted cords. 
 Having an assistant thrust the jaw forward 
or apply cricoid pressure may improve visualiza-
tion in diffi  cult cases. If the patient is breathing 
 FIGURE 1929  Correct technique for manipulating a 
ﬁ beroptic bronchoscope through a tracheal tube is shown 
in the top panel; avoid curvature in the bronchoscope, 
which makes manipulation diﬃ  cult. 
spontaneously, grasping the tongue with gauze and 
pulling it forward may also facilitate intubation. 
 Once in the trachea, the FOB is advanced to 
within sight of the carina. Th e presence of tracheal 
rings and the carina is proof of proper position-
ing. Th e TT is pushed off  the FOB. Th e acute angle 
around the arytenoid cartilage and epiglottis may 
prevent easy advancement of the tube. Use of an 
armored tube usually decreases this problem due 
to its greater lateral fl exibility and more obtusely 
angled distal end. Proper TT position is confi rmed 
by viewing the tip of the tube an appropriate dis-
tance (3 cm in adults) above the carina before the 
FOB is withdrawn. 
 Oral FOI proceeds similarly, with the aid of 
various oral airway devices to direct the FOB toward 
the glottis and to reduce obstruction of the view by 
the tongue. 
332 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 1931  Cricothyrotomy. Incision at wire entry 
site. Remove catheter and make incision at the wire entry 
site.  (Photo contributor: Lawrence B. Stack, MD.) 
 FIGURE 1932  Cricothyrotomy. Insert tracheostomy 
tube/introducer. Insert both devices over the wire and into 
the trachea.  (Photo contributor: Lawrence B. Stack, MD.) 
 FIGURE 1930  Cricothyrotomy. Slide catheter into 
trachea.  (Photo contributor: Lawrence B. Stack, MD.) 
 SURGICAL AIRWAY 
TECHNIQUES 
 “Invasive” airways are required when the “can’t intu-
bate, can’t ventilate” scenario presents and may be 
performed in anticipation of such circumstances 
in selected patients. Th e options include: surgical 
cricothyrotomy, catheter or needle cricothyrotomy, 
transtracheal catheter with jet ventilation, and retro-
grade intubation. 
 Surgical cricothyrotomy refers to surgical 
incision of the CTM and placement of a breath-
ing tube. More recently, several needle/dilator 
cricothyrot omy kits have become available. Unlike 
surgical cricothyrotomy, where a horizontal inci-
sion is made across the CTM, these kits utilize 
the Seldinger  catheter/wire/dilator technique. A 
catheter attached to a syringe is inserted across 
the CTM ( Figure 19–30 ). When air is aspirated, a 
guidewire is passed through the catheter into the 
trachea ( Figure 19–31 ). A dilator is then passed 
over the guidewire, and a breathing tube placed 
( Figure 19–32 ). 
 Catheter-based salvage procedures can also be 
performed. A 16- or 14-gauge intravenous cannula 
is attached to a syringe and passed through the CTM 
toward the carina. Air is aspirated. If a jet ventila-
tion system is available, it can be attached. Th e cath-
eter MUST be secured, otherwise the jet pressure 
will push the catheter out of the airway, leading to 
potentially disastrous subcutaneous emphysema. 
Short (1 s) bursts of oxygen ventilate the patient. 
Suffi  cient outfl ow of expired air must be assured 
to avoid barotrauma. Patients ventilated in this 
manner may develop subcutaneous or mediastinal 
emphysema and may become hypercapneic despite 
adequate oxygenation. Transtracheal jet ventilation 
will usually require conversion to a surgical airway 
or tracheal intubation. 
 Should a jet ventilation system not be available, 
a 3-mL syringe can be attached to the catheter and 
the syringe plunger removed. A 7.0-mm internal 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
333 
administered to treat bronchospasm. Obese patients 
may desaturate secondary to a reduced FRC and 
atelectasis. Application of positive end-expiratory 
pressure may improve oxygenation. 
 Should the end-tidal CO 2 decline suddenly, pul-
monary (thrombus) or venous air embolism should 
be considered. Likewise, other causes of a sudden 
decline in cardiac output or a leak in the circuit 
should be considered. 
 A rising end-tidal CO 2 may be secondary 
to hypoven tilation or increased CO 2 produc-
tion, as occurs with malignant hyperthermia, sep-
sis, a depleted CO 2 absorber, or breathing circuit 
malfunc tion. 
 Increases in airway pressure may indicate an 
obstructed or kinked endotracheal tube or reduced 
pulmonary compliance. Th e endotracheal tube 
should be suctioned to confi rm that it is patent and 
the lungs auscultated to detect signs of broncho-
spasm, pulmonary edema, endobronchial intuba-
tion, or pneumothorax. 
 Decreases in airway pressure can occur second-
ary to leaks in the breathing circuit or inadvertent 
extubation. 
 TECHNIQUES OF EXTUBATION 
 Most oft en, extubation should be performed when 
a patient is either deeply anesthetized or awake. 
In either case, adequate recovery from neuromus-
cular blocking agents should be established prior 
to extubation. If neuromuscular blocking agents are 
used, the patient has at least a period of controlled 
mechanical ventilation and likely must be weaned 
from the ventilator before extubation can occur. 
 Extubation during a light plane of anesthe-
sia (ie, a state between deep and awake) is avoided 
because of an increased risk of laryngospasm. Th e 
distinction between deep and light anesthesia is 
usually apparent during pharyngeal suctioning: any 
reaction to suctioning (eg, breath holding, cough-
ing) signals a light plane of anesthesia, whereas no 
reaction is characteristic of a deep plane. Similarly, 
eye opening or purposeful movements imply that 
the patient is suffi  ciently awake for extubation. 
 Extubating an awake patient is usually asso-
ciated with coughing (bucking) on the TT. Th is 
diameter TT connector can be inserted into the 
syringe and attached to a breathing circuit or an 
ambu bag. As with the jet ventilation system, ade-
quate exhalation must occur to avoid barotraumas. 
 Retrograde intubation is another approach to 
secure an airway. A wire is passed via a catheter placed 
in the CTM. Th e wire is angulated cephalad and 
emerges either through the mouth or nose. Th e distal 
end of the wire is secured with a clamp to prevent it 
from passing through the CTM. Th e wire can then 
be threaded into an FOB with a loaded endotracheal 
tube to facilitate and confi rm placement. Conversely, 
a small endotracheal tube can be guided by the wire 
into the trachea. Once placed, the wire is removed. 
Alternatively, an epidural catheter can be placed via 
an epidural needle in the CTM. Aft er the distal end is 
retrieved from the mouth, an endotracheal tube may 
be passed over the catheter into the trachea. 
 PROBLEMS FOLLOWING 
INTUBATION 
 Following apparently successful intubation, several 
scenarios may develop that require immediate atten-
tion. Anesthesia staff  MUST confi rm that the tube 
is correctly placed with bilateral ventilation imme-
diately following placement. Detection of end-tidal 
CO 2 remains the gold standard in this regard, with 
the caveat that cardiac output must be present for 
end-tidal CO 2 production. 
 Decreases in oxygen saturation can occur fol-
lowing tube placement. Th is is oft en secondary to 
endobronchial intubation, especially in small chil-
dren and babies. Decreased oxygen saturation peri-
operatively may be due to inadequate oxygen delivery 
(oxygen not turned on, patient not ventilated) or to 
ventilation/perfusion mismatch (almost any form of 
lung disease). When saturation declines, the patient’s 
chest is auscultated to confi rm bilateral tube place-
ment and to listen for wheezes, rhonchi, and rales 
consistent with lung pathology. Th e breathing cir-
cuit is checked. An intraoperative chest radiograph 
may be needed to identify the cause of desaturation. 
Intraoperative fi beroptic bronchoscopy can also be 
performed and used to confi rm proper tube place-
ment and to clear mucous plugs. Bronchodilators 
and deeper planes of inhalation anesthetics are 
334 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
to a range of complications from sore throat to tra-
cheal stenosis. Most of these are due to prolonged 
external pressure on sensitive airway structures. 
When these pressures exceed the capillary– arteriolar 
blood pressure (approximately 30 mm Hg), tissue 
ischemia can lead to a sequence of infl ammation, 
ulceration, granulation, and stenosis. Infl ation of 
a TT cuff  to the minimum pressure that creates a 
seal during routine positive-pressure ventilation 
(usually at least 20 mm Hg) reduces tracheal blood 
fl ow by 75% at the cuff  site. Further cuff  infl ation or 
induced hypotension can totally eliminate mucosal 
blood fl ow. 
reaction increases the heart rate, central venous 
pressure, arterial blood pressure, intracranial pres-
sure, intraabdominal pressure, and intraocular 
pressure. It may also cause wound dehiscence and 
increased bleeding. Th e presence of a TT in an 
awake asthmatic patient may trigger bronchospasm. 
Some practitioners attempt to decrease the likeli-
hood of these eff ects by administering 1.5 mg/kg 
of intravenous lidocaine 1–2 min before suctioning 
and extubation; however, extubation during deep 
anesthesia may be preferable in patients who cannot 
tolerate these eff ects (provided such patients are not 
at risk of aspiration and/or do not have airways that 
may be diffi  cult to control aft er removal of the TT). 
 Regardless of whether the tube is removed 
when the patient is deeply anesthetized or awake, 
the patient’s pharynx should be thoroughly suc-
tioned before extubation to decrease the potential 
for aspiration of blood and secretions. In addition, 
patients should be ventilated with 100% oxygen in 
case it becomes diffi  cult to establish an airway aft er 
the TT is removed. Just prior to extubation, the TT 
is untaped or untied and its cuff  is defl ated. Th e tube 
is withdrawn in a single smooth motion, and a face 
mask is applied to deliver oxygen. Oxygen delivery 
by face mask is maintained during the period of 
transportation to the postanesthesia care area. 
 COMPLICATIONS OF 
LARYNGOSCOPY & 
INTUBATION 
 Th e complications of laryngoscopy and intuba-
tion include hypoxia, hypercarbia, dental and air-
way trauma, tube malpositioning, physiological 
responses to airway instrumentation, or tube mal-
function. Th ese complications can occur during 
laryngoscopy and intubation, while the tube is in 
place, or following extubation ( Table 19–6 ). 
 Airway Trauma 
 Instrumentation with a metal laryngoscope blade 
and insertion of a stiff  TT oft en traumatizes delicate 
airway tissues. Tooth damage is a common cause of 
(relatively small) malpractice claims against anes-
thesiologists. Laryngoscopy and intubation can lead 
 TABLE 196 Complications of intubation. 
 During laryngoscopy and intubation
 Malpositioning
 Esophageal intubation 
 Bronchial intubation 
 Laryngeal cuff position 
 Airway trauma
 Dental damage 
 Lip, tongue, or mucosal laceration 
 Sore throat 
 Dislocated mandible 
 Retropharyngeal dissection 
 Physiological reflexes
 Hypoxia, hypercarbia 
 Hypertension, tachycardia 
 Intracranial hypertension 
 Intraocular hypertension 
 Laryngospasm 
 Tube malfunction
 Cuff perforation 
 While the tube is in place 
 Malpositioning 
 Unintentional extubation 
 Bronchial intubation 
 Laryngeal cuff position 
 Airway trauma 
 Mucosal inflammation and ulceration 
 Excoriation of nose 
 Tube malfunction 
 Fire/explosion 
 Obstruction 
 Following extubation 
 Airway trauma 
 Edema and stenosis (glottic, subglottic, or tracheal) 
 Hoarseness (vocal cord granuloma or paralysis) 
 Laryngeal malfunction and aspiration 
 Laryngospasm 
 Negative-pressure pulmonary edema 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management
335
 In contrast, inadequate insertion depth will 
position the cuff  in the larynx, predisposing the 
patient to laryngeal trauma. Inadequate depth of 
insertion can be detected by palpating the cuff  over 
the thyroid cartilage. 
 Because no one technique protects against all 
possibilities for misplacing a TT, minimal testing 
should include chest auscultation, routine capnog-
raphy, and occasionally cuff  palpation. 
 If the patient is repositioned, tube placement 
must be reconfi rmed. Neck extension or lateral rota-
tion most oft en moves a TT away from the carina, 
whereas neck fl exion most oft en moves the tube 
toward the carina. 
 At no time should excessive force be employed 
during intubation. Esophageal intubations can 
result in esophageal rupture and mediastinitis. 
Mediastinitis presents as severe sore throat, fever, 
sepsis, and subcutaneous air oft en manifesting as 
crepitus. Early intervention is necessary to avoid 
mortality. If esophageal perforation is suspected, 
consultation with an otolaryngologist or thoracic 
surgeon is recommended. 
 Physiological Responses 
to Airway Instrumentation 
 Laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation violate the 
patient’s protective airway refl exes and predictably 
lead to hypertension and tachycardia when per-
formed under “light” planes of general anesthesia. 
Th e insertion of an LMA is typically associated 
with  less hemodynamic change. Hemodynamic 
changes can be attenuated by intravenous admin-
istration of lidocaine, opioids, or β-blockers or 
deeper planes of inhalation anesthesia in the min-
utes before laryngoscopy. Hypotensive agents, 
including sodium nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, 
esmolol and nicardipine, have also been shown 
to eff ectively attenuate the transient hypertensive 
response associated with laryngoscopy and intuba-
tion. Cardiac arrhythmias—particularly ventricu-
lar bigeminy—sometimes occur during intubation 
and may indicate light anesthesia. 
Laryngospasm is a forceful involuntary spasm 
of the laryngeal musculature caused by sensory 
stimulation of the superior laryngeal nerve. 
Triggering stimuli include pharyngeal secretions 
 Postintubation croup caused by glottic, laryn-
geal, or tracheal edema is particularly serious 
in children. Th e effi  cacy of corticosteroids (eg, 
 dexamethasone—0.2 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 
12 mg) in preventing postextubation airway edema 
remains controversial; however, corticosteroids have 
been demonstrated to be effi  cacious in children with 
croup from other causes. Vocal cord paralysis from 
cuff  compression or other trauma to the recurrent 
laryngeal nerve results in hoarseness and increases 
the risk of aspiration. Th e incidence of postopera-
tive hoarseness seems to increase with obesity, dif-
fi cult intubations, and anesthetics of long duration. 
Curiously, applying a water-soluble lubricant or a 
local anesthetic-containing gel to the tip or cuff  of the 
TT does not decrease the incidence of postoperative 
sore throat or hoarseness, and, in some studies, actu-
ally increased the incidence of these complications. 
Smaller tubes (size 6.5 in women and size 7.0 in men) 
are associated with fewer complaints of postoperative 
sore throat. Repeated attempts at laryngoscopy during 
a diffi  cult intubation may lead to periglottic edema 
and the inability to ventilate with a face mask, thus 
turning a bad situation into a life-threatening one. 
 Errors of Tracheal Tube Positioning 
 Unrecognized esophageal intubation can pro-
duce catastrophic results. Prevention of this 
complication depends on direct visualization of the 
tip of the TT passing through the vocal cords, care-
ful auscultation for the presence of bilateral breath 
sounds and the absence of gastric gurgling while 
ventilating through the TT, analysis of exhaled gas 
for the presence of CO 2 (the most reliable automated 
method), chest radiography, or the use of an FOB. 
 Even though it is confi rmed that the tube is in 
the trachea, it may not be correctly positioned. 
Overly “deep” insertion usually results in intubation 
of the right (rather than left ) main-stem bronchus 
because of the right bronchus’ less acute angle with 
the trachea.  Clues to the diagnosis of bron chial 
intubation include unilateral breath sounds, 
unexpected hypoxia with pulse oximetry (unreliable 
with high inspired oxygen concentrations), inability 
to palpate the TT cuff  in the sternal notch during 
cuff  infl ation, and decreased  breathing-bag compli-
ance (high peak inspiratory pressures). 
6
7
336 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 What are some important anesthetic 
considerations during the preoperative 
evaluation of a patient with an abnormal airway? 
 Induction of general anesthesia followed by 
direct laryngoscopy and oral intubation is dan-
gerous, if not impossible, in several situations. 
(Table 19–7). To determine the optimal intuba-
tion technique, the anesthesiologist must elicit an 
airway history and carefully examine the patient’s 
head and neck. Any available prior anesthesia 
records should be reviewed for previous prob-
lems in airway management. If a facial deformity 
is severe enough to preclude a good mask seal, 
positive-pressure ventilation may be impossible. 
or passing a TT through the larynx during extuba-
tion. Laryngospasm is usually prevented by extu-
bating patients either deeply asleep or fully awake, 
but it can occur—albeit rarely—in an awake 
patient. Treatment of laryngospasm includes pro-
viding gentle positive-pressure ventilation with an 
anesthesia bag and mask using 100% oxygen or 
administering intravenous lidocaine (1–1.5 mg/kg). 
If laryngospasm persists and hypoxia develops, 
small doses of succinylcholine (0.25–0.5 mg/kg) 
may be required (perhaps in combination with 
small doses of propofol or another anesthetic) to 
relax the laryngeal muscles and to allow controlled 
ventilation.  Th e large negative intrathoracic 
pressures generated by a struggling patient 
during laryngospasm can result in the develop-
ment of negative-pressure pulmonary edema, even 
in healthy patients. 
 Whereas laryngospasm may result from an 
abnormally sensitive refl ex, aspiration can result 
from depression of laryngeal refl exes following pro-
longed intubation and general anesthesia. 
 Bronchospasm is another refl ex response 
to intubation and is most common in asthmatic 
patients. Bronchospasm can sometimes be a clue 
to bronchial intubation. Other pathophysiological 
eff ects of intubation include increased intracranial 
and intraocular pressures. 
 Tracheal Tube Malfunction 
 TTs do not always function as intended. Polyvinyl 
chloride tubes may be ignited by cautery or laser 
in an oxygen/nitrous oxide-enriched environment. 
Valve or cuff  damage is not unusual and should be 
excluded prior to insertion. TT obstruction can 
result from kinking, from foreign body aspira-
tion, or from thick or inspissated secretions in the 
lumen. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Evaluation & Management 
of a Diﬃ  cult Airway 
 A 17-year-old girl presents for emergency drain-
age of a submandibular abscess . 
8
 TABLE 197 Conditions associated with 
diﬃ  cult intubations. 
 Tumors
 Cystic hygroma 
 Hemangioma 
 Hematoma  1  
 Infections
 Submandibular abscess 
 Peritonsillar abscess 
 Epiglottitis 
 Congenital anomalies
 Pierre Robin syndrome 
 Treacher Collins syndrome 
 Laryngeal atresia 
 Goldenhar syndrome 
 Craniofacial dysostosis 
 Foreign body 
 Trauma
 Laryngeal fracture 
 Mandibular or maxillary fracture 
 Inhalation burn 
 Cervical spine injury 
 Obesity 
 Inadequate neck extension
 Rheumatoid arthritis  2  
 Ankylosing spondylitis 
 Halo traction 
 Anatomic variations
 Micrognathia 
 Prognathism 
 Large tongue 
 Arched palate 
 Short neck 
 Prominent upper incisors 
 1  Can occur postoperatively in patients who have had any neck surgery.
 2  Also aﬀ ects arytenoids making them immobile.
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
337 
Furthermore, patients with hypopharyngeal dis-
ease are more dependent on awake muscle tone 
to maintain airway patency. These two groups 
of patients should generally not be allowed to 
become apneic—including induction of anesthe-
sia, sedation, or muscle paralysis—until their air-
way is secured . 
 If there is an abnormal limitation of the tem-
poromandibular joint that may not improve with 
muscle paralysis, a nasal approach with an FOB 
should be considered. Infection conﬁ ned to the 
ﬂ oor of the mouth usually does not preclude 
nasal intubation. If the hypopharynx is involved 
to the level of the hyoid bone, however, any trans-
laryngeal attempt will be diﬃ  cult. Other clues to 
a potentially diﬃ  cult laryngoscopy include lim-
ited neck extension (<35°), a distance between 
the tip of the patient’s mandible and hyoid bone 
of less than 7 cm, a sternomental distance of less 
than 12.5 cm with the head fully extended and 
the mouth closed, and a poorly visualized uvula 
during voluntary tongue protrusion. It must be 
stressed that because no examination technique 
is foolproof and the signs of a diﬃ  cult airway may 
be subtle, the anesthesiologist must always be pre-
pared for unanticipated diﬃ  culties . 
 The anesthesiologist should also evaluate the 
patient for signs of airway obstruction (eg, chest 
retraction, stridor) and hypoxia (agitation, rest-
lessness, anxiety, lethargy). Aspiration pneumonia 
 FIGURE 1933  Technique for airway 
management of a patient with suspected 
spinal cord injury. One individual holds 
the head ﬁ rmly with the patient on a 
backboard, the cervical collar left alone if 
in place, ensuring that neither the head 
nor neck moves with direct laryngoscopy. 
A second person applies cricoid pressure 
and the third performs laryngoscopy and 
intubation. 
is more likely if the patient has recently eaten or if 
pus is draining from an abscess into the mouth. 
In either case, techniques that ablate laryn-
geal reﬂ exes (eg, topical anesthesia) should be 
avoided . 
 Cervical trauma or disease is a factor that 
should be evaluated prior to direct laryngoscopy. 
Cervical arthritis or previous cervical fusion may 
make it diﬃ  cult for the head to be put in the sniﬀ -
ing position; these patients are candidates for 
bronchoscopy to secure the airway, as discussed 
previously. Trauma patients with unstable necks or 
whose neck has not yet been “cleared” are also can-
didates for bronchoscopy for tracheal intubation. 
Alternatively, laryngoscopy with in-line stabiliza-
tion can be performed ( Figure 19–33 ) . 
 In the case under discussion, physical exami-
nation reveals extensive facial edema that limits 
the mandible’s range of motion. Mask ﬁ t does not 
seem to be impaired, however. Lateral radiographs 
of the head and neck suggest that the infection 
has spread over the larynx. Frank pus is observed 
in the mouth . 
 Which intubation technique is indicated? 
 Routine oral and nasal intubations have been 
described for anesthetized patients. Both of these 
can also be performed in awake patients. Whether 
the patient is awake or asleep or whether intuba-
tion is to be oral or nasal, it can be performed with 
338 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
below the epiglottis ( Figure 19–35 ). The hyoid 
bone is located, and 3 mL of 2% lidocaine is inﬁ l-
trated 1 cm below each greater cornu, where the 
internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerves 
penetrates the thyrohyoid membrane . 
 A transtracheal block is performed by identi-
fying and penetrating the CTM while the neck is 
extended. After conﬁ rmation of an intratracheal 
position by aspiration of air, 4 mL of 4% lido-
caine is injected into the trachea at end expira-
tion. A deep inhalation and cough immediately 
following injection distribute the anesthetic 
throughout the trachea. Although these blocks 
may allow the awake patient to tolerate intuba-
tion better, they also obtund protective cough 
reﬂ exes, depress the swallowing reﬂ ex, and may 
lead to aspiration. Topical anesthesia of the phar-
ynx may induce a transient obstruction from the 
loss of reﬂ ex regulation of airway caliber at the 
level of the glottis . 
 Because of this patient’s increased risk for aspi-
ration, local anesthesia might best be limited to 
direct laryngoscopy, ﬁ beroptic visualization, or 
video laryngoscopy techniques . 
 Intubation may be diﬃ  cult in this patient; 
however, there is pus draining into the mouth, 
and positive-pressure ventilation may be impos-
sible. Induction of anesthesia should, therefore, be 
delayed until after the airway has been secured. 
Therefore, the alternatives are awake ﬁ beroptic 
intubation, awake video laryngoscopy, or  awake 
use of optical stylets. The ﬁ nal decision depends on 
the availability of equipment and the experiences 
and preferences of the anesthesia caregivers . 
 Regardless of which alternative is chosen, 
an emergency surgical airway may be necessary. 
Therefore, an experienced team, including a sur-
geon, should be in the operating room, all necessary 
equipment should be available and unwrapped, 
and the neck should be prepped and draped . 
 What premedication would be appropriate for 
this patient? 
 Any loss of consciousness or interference with 
airway reﬂ exes could result in airway obstruction 
or aspiration. Glycopyrrolate would be a good 
choice of premedication because it minimizes 
upper airway secretions without crossing the 
blood–brain barrier. Parenteral sedatives should 
be very carefully titrated. Dexmedetomidine and 
ketamine preserve respiratory eﬀ ort and are fre-
quently used as sedatives. Psychological prepa-
ration of the patient, including explaining each 
step planned in securing the airway, may improve 
patient cooperation . 
 What nerve blocks could be helpful during an 
awake intubation? 
 The lingual and some pharyngeal branches 
of the glossopharyngeal nerve that provide sen-
sation to the posterior third of the tongue and 
oropharynx are easily blocked by bilateral injec-
tion of 2 mL of local anesthetic into the base of 
the palatoglossal arch (also known as the ante-
rior tonsillar pillar) with a 25-gauge spinal needle 
( Figure 19–34 ) . 
 Bilateral  superior laryngeal nerve blocks and 
a transtracheal block would anesthetize the airway 
 FIGURE 1934  Nerve block. While the tongue is 
laterally retracted with a tongue blade, the base of the 
palatoglossal arch is inﬁ ltrated with local anesthetic 
to block the lingual and pharyngeal branches of the 
glossopharyngeal nerve. Note that the lingual branches 
of the glossopharyngeal nerve are not the same as the 
lingual nerve, which is a branch of the trigeminal nerve. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
339 
 FIGURE 1935  Superior laryngeal nerve block and 
transtracheal block. 
the nasal passages. Four percent cocaine has no 
advantages compared with a mixture of 4% lido-
caine and 0.25% phenylephrine and can cause car-
diovascular side eﬀ ects. The maximum safe dose 
of local anesthetic should be calculated—and 
not exceeded. Local anesthetic is applied to the 
nasal mucosa with cotton-tipped applicators until 
a nasal airway that has been lubricated with lido-
caine jelly can be placed into the naris with mini-
mal discomfort. Benzocaine spray is frequently 
used to topicalize the airway, but can produce 
methemoglobinemia . 
 Why is it necessary to be prepared for a 
surgical airway? 
 Laryngospasm is always a possible complica-
tion of intubation in the nonparalyzed patient, 
even if the patient remains awake. Laryngospasm 
may make positive-pressure ventilation with a 
mask impossible. If succinylcholine is administered 
to break the spasm, the consequent relaxation 
of pharyngeal muscles may lead to upper airway 
obstruction and continued inability to ventilate. In 
this situation, an emergency cricothyrotomy may 
be lifesaving . 
 What are some alternative techniques that might 
be successful? 
 Other possible strategies include the retro-
grade passage of a long guidewire or epidural 
catheter through a needle inserted across the 
CTM. The catheter is guided cephalad into the 
pharynx and out through the nose or mouth. A TT 
is passed over the catheter, which is withdrawn 
after the tube has entered the larynx. Variations 
of this technique include passing the retrograde 
wire through the suction port of a ﬂ exible FOB or 
the lumen of a reintubation stylet that has been 
preloaded with a TT. These thicker shafts help the 
TT negotiate the bend into the larynx more eas-
ily. Obviously, a vast array of specialized airway 
equipment exists and must be readily available 
for management of diﬃ  cult airways ( Table 19–8 ). 
Either of these techniques would have been 
diﬃ  cult in the patient described in this case 
 TABLE 198 Suggested contents of the 
portable storage unit for diﬃ  cult airway 
management. 1 , 2 
•  Rigid laryngoscope blades of alternate design and size 
from those routinely used. 
•  Tracheal tubes of assorted size. 
•  Tracheal tube guides. Examples include (but are not 
limited to) semirigid stylets with or without a hollow core 
for jet ventilation, light wands, and forceps designed to 
manipulate the distal portion of the tracheal tube. 
• Laryngeal mask airways of assorted sizes.
•  Fiberoptic intubation equipment and assorted video and 
indirect laryngoscopes. 
•  Retrograde intubation equipment. 
•  At least one device suitable for emergency nonsurgical 
airway ventilation. Examples include (but are not limited 
to) transtracheal jet ventilator, hollow jet ventilation 
stylet, and Combitube. 
•  Equipment suitable for emergency surgical airway access 
(eg, cricothyrotomy). 
•  An exhaled CO 2 detector. 
  1  Modiﬁ ed and used, with permission, from the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists: Practice guidelines for management of the diﬃ  cult 
airway: A report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force 
on Management of the Diﬃ  cult Airway. Anesthesiology 2003; 98:1272.
  2  The items listed in this table are suggestions. The contents of the 
portable storage unit should be customized to meet the speciﬁ c needs, 
preferences, and skills of the practitioner and healthcare facility.
340 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Brain A: Pressure in laryngeal mask airway cuff s. 
Anaesthesia 1996;51:603. 
 Cheney FW, Posner KL, Lee LA, Caplan RA, 
Domino KB: Trends in anesthesia-related death 
and brain damage. A closed claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology 2006;105:1081. 
 Cook TM: A new practical classifi cation of laryngeal 
view. Anaesthesia 2000;55:274. 
 Cooper R: Complications associated with the use of 
the GlideScope video laryngoscope. Can J Anesth 
2007;54:54. 
 El-Orbany M, Woehlck H, Ramez Salem M: Head and 
neck position for direct laryngoscopy. Anesth Analg 
2011;113:103. 
 Galvin E, van Doorn M, Blazques J, et al: A randomized 
prospective study comparing cobra perilaryngeal 
airway and laryngeal mask airway classic during 
controlled ventilation for gynecological laparoscopy. 
Anesth Analg 2007;104:102. 
 Hagberg C, Johnson S, Pillai D: Eff ective use of the 
esophageal tracheal Combitube TN following severe 
burn injury. J Clin Anesth 2003;15:463. 
 Hohlrieder M, Brimacombe J, Von Goedecke A, et al: 
Postoperative nausea, vomiting, airway morbidity, 
and analgesic requirements are lower for the ProSeal 
laryngeal mask airway than the tracheal tube in 
females undergoing breast and gynaecological 
surgery. Br J Anaesth 2007;99:576. 
 Holst B, Hodzovic I, Francis V: Airway trauma 
caused by the Airtraq laryngoscope. Anaesthesia 
2008;63:889. 
 Houston G, Bourke P, Wilson G, et al: Bonfi ls intubating 
fi berscope in normal paediatric airways. Br J Anaesth 
2010;105:546. 
 Hurford WE: Orotracheal intubation outside the 
operating room: anatomic considerations and 
techniques. Respir Care 1999;44:615. 
 Jaeger JM, Durbin CG Jr: Special purpose endotracheal 
tubes. Respir Care 1999;44:661. 
 Jeff erson M, Riff at F, McGuinness J, et al: Th e laryngeal 
mask airway and otorhinolaryngology head and neck 
surgery. Laryngoscope 2011;121:1620. 
 Kaplan M, Ward D, Hagberg C, et al: Seeing is believing: 
the importance of video laryngoscopy in teaching 
and in managing the diffi  cult airway. Surg Endosc 
2006;20:S479. 
 Kim ES, Bishop MJ: Endotracheal intubation, but not 
laryngeal mask airway insertion, produces reversible 
bronchoconstriction. Anesthesiology 1999;90:391. 
 Langeron O, Masso E, Huraux C, et al: Prediction of 
diffi  cult mask ventilation. Anesthesiology 2000;92:1217. 
 FIGURE 1936  Intubating laryngeal mask airway. 
because of the swelling and anatomic distortion 
of the neck that can accompany a submandibular 
abscess .
 What are some approaches when the airway is 
unexpectedly diﬃ  cult? 
 The unexpected diﬃ  cult airway can pres-
ent both in elective surgical patients and also in 
emergency intubations in intensive care units, the 
emergency department, or general hospital wards. 
Should video laryngoscopy fail even after attempts 
with an intubating bougie, an intubating LMA 
should be attempted ( Figure 19–36 ). If ventilation 
is adequate, an FOB can be loaded with a TT and 
passed through the LMA into the trachea. Correct 
tube position is conﬁ rmed by visualization of the 
carina . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Armstrong J, John J Karsli C: A comparison between 
the GlideScope Video Laryngoscope and direct 
laryngoscope in paediatric patients with diffi  cult 
airways—a pilot study. Anaesthesia 2010;65:353. 
 Aziz M, Healy D, Kheterpal S, et al: Routine clinical 
practice eff ectiveness of the GlideScope in diffi  cult 
airway management. Anesthesiology 2011;114:34. 
 Bercker S, Schmidbauer W, Volk T, et al: A comparison 
of seal in seven supraglottic airway devices using 
a cadaver model of elevated esophageal pressure. 
Anesth Analg 2008;106:445. 
 
CHAPTER 19 Airway Management 
341 
 Russi C, Hartley M, Buresh C: A pilot study of the King 
LT supralaryngeal airway use in a rural Iowa EMS 
system. Int J Emerg Med 2008;1:135. 
 Shelly MP, Nightingale P: ABC of intensive care. 
Respiratory support. BMJ 1999;318:1674. 
 Stauff er JL: Complications of endotracheal intubation 
and tracheostomy. Respir Care 1999;44:828. 
 Stix MS, O’Connor CJ Jr: Depth of insertion of the ProSeal 
laryngeal mask airway. Br J Anaesth 2003;90:235. 
 Tanoubi I, Drolet P, Donati F: Optimizing preoxygenation 
in adults. Can J Anesth 2009;56:449. 
 Ting J: Temporomandibular joint dislocation aft er use of 
a laryngeal mask airway. Anaesthesia 2006;61:190. 
 Th ompson AE: Issues in airway management in infants 
and children. Respir Care 1999;44:650. 
 Verghese C, Ramaswamy B: LMA-Supreme—a new 
single-use LMA with gastric access: a report on its 
clinical effi  cacy. Br J Anaesth 2008;101:405. 
 Watson CB: Prediction of a diffi  cult intubation: methods 
for successful intubation. Respir Care 1999;44:777. 
 Maharaj C, Costello J, McDonnell J, et al: Th e Airtraq 
as a rescue airway device following failed direct 
laryngoscopy: a case series. Anaesthesia 2007;67:598. 
 Malik M, Maharaj C, Harte B, et al: Comparison of 
Macintosh, Trueview EVO2, GlideScope, and 
Airwayscope laryngoscope use in patients with cervical 
spine immobilization. Br J Anaesth 2008;101:723. 
 Malik M, Subramanian R, Maharaj C, et al: Randomized 
controlled trial of the Pentax AWS, GlideScope, 
and Macintosh laryngoscopes in predicted diffi  cult 
intubations. Br J Anaesth 2009;103:761. 
 Noppens R, Möbus S, Heid F, Schmidtmann I, 
Werner C, Piepho T: Use of the McGrath Series 5 
videolaryngoscope aft er failed direct laryngoscopy. 
Anaesthesia 2010;65:716. 
 Robitaille A, Williams S, Trembaly M, et al: Cervical 
spine motion during tracheal intubation with 
manual in-line stabilization direct laryngoscopy 
versus GlideScope video laryngoscopy. Anesth Analg 
2008;106:935. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 343
20
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Cardiovascular Physiology 
& Anesthesia 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 In contrast to action potentials in axons, 
the spike in cardiac action potentials is 
followed by a plateau phase that lasts 
0.2–0.3 sec. Whereas the action potential 
for skeletal muscle and nerves is due to 
the abrupt opening of voltage-gated 
sodium channels in the cell membrane, in 
cardiac muscle it is initiated by voltage-
gated sodium channels (the spike) and 
maintained by voltage-gated calcium 
channels (the plateau) . 
 Potent inhalational agents depress 
sinoatrial (SA) node automaticity. These 
agents seem to have only modest 
direct eﬀ ects on the atrioventricular 
(AV) node, prolonging conduction 
time and increasing refractoriness. This 
combination of eﬀ ects likely explains 
the frequent occurrence of junctional 
tachycardia when an anticholinergic agent 
is administered for sinus bradycardia 
during inhalation anesthesia; junctional 
pacemakers are accelerated more than 
those in the SA node . 
 Studies suggest that volatile anesthetics 
depress cardiac contractility by 
decreasing the entry of Ca  2+   into cells 
during depolarization (aﬀ ecting T- and 
L-type calcium channels), altering 
the kinetics of its release and uptake 
into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, 
1
2
3
and decreasing the sensitivity of 
contractile proteins to calcium . 
 Because the normal cardiac index (CI) has 
a wide range, it is a relatively insensitive 
measurement of ventricular performance. 
Abnormalities in CI therefore usually reﬂ ect 
gross ventricular impairment . 
 In the absence of hypoxia or severe 
anemia, measurement of mixed venous 
oxygen tension (or saturation) is an 
excellent estimate of the adequacy of 
cardiac output . 
 Patients with reduced ventricular 
compliance are most aﬀ ected by loss of a 
normally timed atrial systole . 
 Cardiac output in patients with marked 
right or left ventricular impairment 
is very sensitive to acute increases 
in afterload . 
 The ventricular ejection fraction, the 
fraction of the end-diastolic ventricular 
volume ejected, is the most commonly 
used clinical measurement of systolic 
function . 
 Left ventricular diastolic function 
can be assessed clinically by Doppler 
echocardiography in a transthoracic or 
transesophageal examination . 
4
5
6
7
8
9
—Continued next page
344 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Continued—
 Because the endocardium is subjected to 
the greatest intramural pressures during 
systole, it tends to be most vulnerable to 
ischemia during decreases in coronary 
perfusion pressure . 
10
 The failing heart becomes increasingly 
dependent on circulating catecholamines. 
Abrupt withdrawal in sympathetic outﬂ ow 
or decreases in circulating catecholamine 
levels, such as can occur following induction 
of anesthesia, may lead to acute cardiac 
decompensation . 
11
 Anesthesiologists must have a thorough under-
standing of cardiovascular physiology both for its 
scientifi c signifi cance in anesthesia and for its prac-
tical applications to patient management. Anesthetic 
successes and failures are oft en directly related to the 
skill of the practitioner in manipulating cardiovas-
cular physiology. Th is chapter reviews the physiol-
ogy of the heart and the systemic circulation and the 
pathophysiology of heart failure. 
 Th e circulatory system consists of the heart, 
blood vessels, and blood. Its function is to provide 
oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and to carry 
away the products of metabolism. Th e heart pro-
pels blood through two vascular systems arranged 
in series. In the normally low-pressure pulmonary 
circulation, venous blood fl ows past the alveolar– 
capillary membrane, takes up oxygen, and elimi-
nates CO 2 . In the high pressure systemic circulation, 
oxygenated arterial blood is pumped to metabo-
lizing tissues, and the by-products of metabolism 
are taken up for elimination by the lungs, kidneys, 
or liver. 
 The Heart 
 Although anatomically one organ, the heart can 
be functionally divided into right and left  pumps, 
each consisting of an atrium and a ventricle. Th e 
atria serve as both conduits and priming pumps, 
whereas the ventricles act as the major pumping 
chambers. Th e right ventricle receives systemic 
venous (deoxygenated) blood and pumps it into the 
pulmonary circulation, whereas the left  ventricle 
receives pulmonary venous (oxygenated) blood and 
pumps it into the systemic circulation. Four valves 
normally ensure unidirectional fl ow through each 
chamber. Th e normal pumping action of the heart 
is the result of a complex series of electrically driven 
and mechanical events. Electrical events precede 
mechanical ones. 
 Th e heart consists of specialized striated muscle 
in a connective tissue skeleton. Cardiac muscle can 
be divided into atrial, ventricular, and specialized 
pacemaker and conducting cells. Th e self-excitatory 
nature of cardiac muscle cells and their unique 
organization allow the heart to function as a highly 
effi  cient pump. Serial low-resistance connections 
(intercalated disks) between individual myocardial 
cells allow the rapid and orderly spread of depolar-
ization in each pumping chamber. Electrical activity 
readily spreads from one atrium to another and from 
one ventricle to another via specialized conduction 
pathways. Th e normal absence of direct connections 
between the atria and ventricles except through the 
atrioventricular (AV) node delays conduction and 
enables atrial contraction to prime the ventricle. 
 CARDIAC ACTION 
POTENTIALS 
 At rest, the myocardial cell membrane is nominally 
permeable to K + , but is relatively impermeable to 
Na + . A membrane-bound Na + –K + -adenosine tri-
phosphatase (ATPase) concentrates K + intracellu-
larly in exchange for extrusion of Na + out of the cell. 
Intracellular Na + concentration is kept low, whereas 
intracellular K + concentration is kept high relative to 
the extracellular space. Th e relative impermeability 
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia
345
are activated by a change in cell membrane voltage, 
whereas others open only when bound by ligands. 
T-type (transient) voltage-gated calcium channels 
play a role in phase 0 of depolarization. During the 
plateau phase (phase 2), Ca 2+ infl ow occurs through 
slow L-type (long-lasting), voltage-gated calcium 
channels. Th ree major types of potassium channels 
are responsible for repolarization. Th e fi rst results in 
a transient outward K + current ( I To ), the second is 
responsible for a short rectifying current ( I Kr ), and 
the third produces a slowly acting rectifying current 
( I Ks ) that helps to restore the cell membrane poten-
tial to its resting value. 
 INITIATION & CONDUCTION 
OF THE CARDIAC IMPULSE 
 Th e cardiac impulse normally originates in the sino-
atrial (SA) node, a group of specialized pacemaker 
cells in the sulcus terminalis, located posteriorly at 
the junction of the right atrium and the superior 
vena cava. Th ese cells seem to have an outer mem-
brane that leaks Na + (and possibly Ca 2+ ). Th e slow 
infl ux of Na + , which results in a less negative rest-
ing membrane potential (–50 to –60 mV), has three 
important consequences: near constant inactivation 
of voltage-gated sodium channels, an action poten-
tial with a threshold of –40 mV that is primarily due 
to ion movement across the slow calcium channels, 
and regular spontaneous depolarizations. During 
each cycle, intracellular leakage of Na + causes the 
cell membrane to become progressively less nega-
tive; when the threshold potential is reached, cal-
cium channels open, K + permeability decreases, and 
an action potential develops. Restoration of normal 
K + permeability returns the cells in the SA node to 
their normal resting membrane potential. 
 Th e impulse generated at the SA node is nor-
mally rapidly conducted across the atria and to 
the AV node. Specialized atrial fi bers may speed 
up conduction to both the left  atrium and the AV 
node. Th e AV node, which is located in the septal 
wall of the right atrium, just anterior to the opening 
of the coronary sinus and above the insertion of the 
septal leafl et of the tricuspid valve, is actually made 
up of three distinct areas: an upper junctional (AN) 
region, a middle nodal (N) region, and a lower junc-
tional (NH) region. Although the N region does not 
of the membrane to calcium also maintains a high 
extracellular to cytoplasmic calcium gradient. 
Movement of K + out of the cell and down its con-
centration gradient results in a net loss of positive 
charges from inside the cell. An electrical poten-
tial is established across the cell membrane, with 
the inside of the cell negative with respect to the 
extracellular environment, because anions do not 
accompany K + . Th us, the resting membrane poten-
tial represents the balance between two opposing 
forces: the movement of K + down its concentration 
gradient and the electrical attraction of the nega-
tively charged intracellular space for the positively 
charged potassium ions. 
 Th e normal ventricular cell resting membrane 
potential is –80 to –90 mV. As with other excitable 
tissues (nerve and skeletal muscle), when the cell 
membrane potential becomes less negative and 
reaches a threshold value, a characteristic action 
potential (depolarization) develops ( Figure 20–1
and  Table 20–1 ). Th e action potential transiently 
raises the membrane potential of the myocardial cell 
to +20 mV.  In contrast to action potentials in 
axons, the spike in cardiac action potentials is 
followed by a plateau phase that lasts 0.2–0.3 sec. 
Whereas the action potential for skeletal muscle and 
nerves is due to the abrupt opening of voltage-gated 
sodium channels in the cell membrane, in cardiac 
muscle, it is initiated by voltage-gated sodium chan-
nels (the spike) and maintained by voltage-gated cal-
cium channels (the plateau). Depolarization is also 
accompanied by a transient decrease in potassium 
permeability. Subsequent restoration of normal 
potassium permeability and termination of sodium 
and calcium channel permeability eventually restores 
the membrane potential to its resting value. 
 Following depolarization, the cells are typically 
refractory to subsequent normal depolarizing stim-
uli until “phase 4.” Th e eff ective refractory period 
is the minimum interval between two depolarizing 
impulses that will propagate. In fast-conducting 
myocardial cells, this period is generally closely cor-
related with the duration of the action potential. 
In contrast, the eff ective refractory period in more 
slowly conducting myocardial cells can outlast the 
duration of the action potential. 
Table 20–2 lists some of the multiple types of 
ion channels in cardiac muscle membrane. Some 
1
346 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 201  Cardiac action potentials.  A: Note the 
characteristic contours of action potentials recorded 
from diﬀ erent parts of the heart.  B: Pacemaker cells in 
the sinoatrial (SA) node lack the same distinct phases as 
atrial and ventricular muscle cells and display prominent 
spontaneous diastolic depolarization. See  Table 20–1 
for an explanation of the diﬀ erent phases of the action 
potential. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from 
Barrett KE: Ganong’s  Review of Medical Physiology , 24th ed., 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.) 
Superior vena cava
Sinoatrial node
Internodal pathways
Atrioventricular node
Bundle of His
Right bundle branch
Purkinje system
Purkinje fibers
Left posterior fascicle
Aorta
SA node
Atrial muscle
AV node
LAF
Common bundle
Bundle branches
Ventricular muscle
Action potential
VENTRICULAR MUSCLE FIBER
SINOATRIAL NODE FIBER
B
A
0.2
1
2
3
0
4
3
0
+40
+20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
30 ms
0.4
0.6
P
T
U
Q R S
ECG
Membrane potential (mV)
Time (s)
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia
347
interventricular septum before dividing into left  and 
right branches to form the complex network of Pur-
kinje fi bers that depolarizes both ventricles. In sharp 
contrast to AV nodal tissue, His–Purkinje fi bers 
have the fastest conduction velocities in the heart, 
resulting in nearly simultaneous depolarization of 
the entire endocardium of both ventricles (normally 
within 0.03 s). Synchronized depolarization of the 
lateral and septal walls of the left  ventricle promotes 
eff ective ventricular contraction. Th e spread of the 
impulse from the endocardium to the epicardium 
through ventricular muscle requires an additional 
0.03 sec. Th us, an impulse arising from the SA node 
normally requires less than 0.2 sec to depolarize the 
entire heart. 
 Potent inhaled anesthetics depress SA node 
automaticity. Th ese agents seem to have only 
modest direct eff ects on the AV node, prolonging 
conduction time and increasing refractoriness. Th is 
combination of eff ects likely explains the occur-
rence of junctional tachycardia when an anticholin-
ergic is administered for sinus bradycardia during 
inhalation anesthesia; junctional pacemakers are 
accelerated more than those in the SA node. Th e 
electrophysiological eff ects of volatile agents on Pur-
kinje fi bers and ventricular muscle are complex due 
to autonomic interactions. Both antiarrhythmic and 
arrhythmogenic properties are described. Th e for-
mer may be due to direct depression of Ca 2+ infl uxes, 
2
possess intrinsic spontaneous activity (automatic-
ity), both junctional areas do. Th e normally slower 
rate of spontaneous depolarization in AV junctional 
areas (40–60 times/min) allows the faster SA node 
to control heart rate. Any factor that decreases the 
rate of SA node depolarization or increases the auto-
maticity of AV junctional areas allows the junctional 
areas to function as the pacemaker for the heart. 
 Impulses from the SA node normally reach the 
AV node aft er about 0.04 sec, but leave aft er another 
0.11 sec. Th is delay is the result of the slowly con-
ducting small myocardial fi bers within the AV node, 
which depend on slow calcium channels for propa-
gation of the action potential. In contrast, conduc-
tion of the impulse between adjoining cells in the 
atria and in the ventricles is due primarily to activa-
tion of sodium channels. Th e lower fi bers of the AV 
node combine to form the common bundle of His. 
Th is specialized group of fi bers passes into the 
 TABLE 202 Cardiac ion channels.  1  
 Voltage-gated channels 
 Na + 
 T Ca 2+ 
 L Ca 2+ 
 K + 
 Transient outward 
 Inward rectifying 
 Slow (delayed) rectifying 
 Ligand-gated K +  channels 
 Ca 2+ activated 
 Na + activated 
 ATP sensitive  2  
 Acetylcholine activated 
 Arachadonic acid activated 
  1  From Ganong WF:  Review of Medical Physiology , 21st ed. McGraw-Hill, 
2003.
  2  ATP, adenosine triphosphate.
 TABLE 201 Cardiac action potential. 
Phase
Name
Event
Cellular Ion 
Movement
0
Upstroke
Activation 
(opening) of 
voltage-gated 
Na + channels
Na + entry and 
decreased 
permeability 
to K + 
1
Early rapid 
repolarization
Inactivation of 
Na + channel and 
transient increase 
in K + permeability
K + out (I To )
2
Plateau
Activation of slow 
calcium channels
Ca 2+ entry
3
Final 
repolarization
Inactivation of 
calcium channels 
and increased 
permeability to K + 
K + out
4
Resting 
potential
Normal 
permeability 
restored (atrial 
and ventricular 
cells)
Na+–K+-ATPase 
pumps K+ in 
and Na+ out
Diastolic 
repolarization
Intrinsic slow 
leakage of Ca 2+ 
into cells that 
spontaneously 
depolarize
Ca 2+ in
348 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
connects actin to the cell membrane (sarcolemma). 
Cell shortening occurs when the actin and myo-
sin are allowed to fully interact and slide over one 
another. Th is interaction is normally prevented by 
two regulatory proteins, troponin and tropomyosin; 
troponin is composed of three subunits (troponin I, 
troponin C, and troponin T). Troponin is attached 
to actin at regular intervals, whereas tropomyo-
sin lies within the center of the actin structure. An 
increase in intracellular Ca 2+ concentration (from 
about 10 –7 to 10 –5 mol/L) promotes contraction as 
Ca 2+ ions bind troponin C. Th e resulting conforma-
tional change in these regulatory proteins exposes 
the active sites on actin that allow interaction with 
myosin bridges (points of overlapping). Th e active 
site on myosin functions as a magnesium-dependent 
ATPase whose activity is enhanced by the increase in 
intracellular Ca 2+ concentration. A series of attach-
ments and disengagements occur as each myosin 
bridge advances over successive active sites on actin. 
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is consumed dur-
ing each attachment. Relaxation occurs as Ca 2+ is 
actively pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum by a Ca 2+ –Mg 2+ -ATPase; the resulting drop in 
intracellular Ca 2+ concentration allows the tropo-
nin–tropomyosin complex to again prevent the 
interaction between actin and myosin. 
 Excitation–Contraction Coupling 
 Th e quantity of Ca 2+ ions required to initiate con-
traction exceeds that entering the cell through 
slow calcium channels during phase 2. Th e small 
amount that does enter through slow calcium chan-
nels triggers the release of much larger amounts of 
Ca 2+ stored intracellularly (calcium-dependent cal-
cium release) within cisterns in the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. 
 Th e action potential of muscle cells depolarizes 
their T systems, tubular extensions of the cell mem-
brane that transverse the cell in close approximation 
to the muscle fi brils, via dihydropyridine recep-
tors (voltage-gated calcium channels). Th is initial 
increase in intracellular Ca 2+ triggers an even greater 
Ca 2+ infl ow across ryanodine receptors, a nonvoltage-
dependent calcium channel in the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. Th e force of contraction is directly depen-
dent on the magnitude of the initial Ca 2+ infl ux. 
During relaxation, when the slow channels close, a 
whereas the latter generally involves potentiation 
of catecholamines, especially with halothane. Th e 
arrhythmogenic eff ect requires activation of both 
α 1 - and β-adrenergic receptors. Intravenous induc-
tion agents have limited electrophysiological eff ects 
in usual clinical doses. Opioids, particularly fentanyl 
and sufentanil, can depress cardiac conduction, 
increasing AV node conduction and the refractory 
period and prolonging the duration of the Purkinje 
fi ber action potential. 
 Local anesthetics have important electrophysi-
ological eff ects on the heart at blood concentrations 
that are generally associated with systemic toxicity. 
In the case of lidocaine, electrophysiological eff ects at 
low blood concentrations can be therapeutic. At high 
blood concentrations, local anesthetics depress con-
duction by binding to sodium channels; at extremely 
high concentrations, they also depress the SA node. 
Th e most potent local anesthetics—bupivacaine, eti-
docaine, and to a lesser degree, ropivacaine—seem 
to have the most potent eff ects on the heart, particu-
larly on Purkinje fi bers and ventricular muscle. Bupi-
vacaine binds open or inactivated sodium channels 
and dissociates from them slowly. It can cause pro-
found sinus bradycardia and sinus node arrest and 
malignant ventricular arrhythmias; furthermore, 
it can depress left  ventricular contractility. Twenty 
percent lipid emulsions have been used to treat local 
anesthetic cardiac toxicity. Th e mechanisms of action 
of this therapy are unclear, although possibilities 
include serving as a lipid reservoir and decreasing 
lipophilic toxic local anesthetics in the myocardium. 
 Calcium channel blockers are organic com-
pounds that block Ca 2+ infl ux through L-type but not 
T-type channels. Dihydropyridine blockers, such as 
nifedipine, simply plug the channel, whereas other 
agents, such as verapamil, and to a lesser extent, dil-
tiazem, preferentially bind the channel in its depo-
larized inactivated state (use-dependent blockade). 
 MECHANISM OF 
CONTRACTION 
 Myocardial cells contract as a result of the interac-
tion of two overlapping, rigid contractile proteins, 
actin and myosin. Th ese proteins are fi xed in posi-
tion within each cell during both contraction and 
relaxation. Dystrophin, a large intracellular protein, 
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia
349
cardiac depression is potentiated by hypocalcemia, 
β-adrenergic blockade, and calcium channel block-
ers. Nitrous oxide also produces concentration-
dependent decreases in contractility by reducing the 
availability of intracellular Ca 2+ during contraction. 
Th e mechanisms of direct cardiac depression from 
intravenous anesthetics are not well established, but 
presumably involve similar actions. Of all the major 
intravenous induction agents, ketamine seems to 
have the least direct depressant eff ect on contrac-
tility. Local anesthetic agents also depress cardiac 
contractility by reducing Ca 2+ infl ux and release in a 
dose-dependent fashion. Th e more potent (at nerve 
block) agents, such as bupivacaine, tetracaine, and 
ropivacaine, more signifi cantly depress left  ventric-
ular contractility than less potent (at nerve block) 
agents, such as lidocaine or chloroprocaine. 
 INNERVATION OF THE HEART 
 Parasympathetic fi bers primarily innervate the atria 
and conducting tissues. Acetylcholine acts on spe-
cifi c cardiac muscarinic receptors (M 2 ) to produce 
negative chronotropic, dromotropic, and inotro-
pic eff ects. In contrast, sympathetic fi bers are more 
widely distributed throughout the heart. Cardiac 
sympathetic fi bers originate in the thoracic spi-
nal cord (T1–T4) and travel to the heart initially 
through the cervical (stellate) ganglia and from 
the ganglia as the cardiac nerves. Norepinephrine 
release causes positive chronotropic, dromotropic, 
and inotropic eff ects primarily through activation of 
β 1 -adrenergic receptors. β 2 -Adrenergic receptors are 
normally fewer in number and are found primarily 
in the atria; activation increases heart rate and, to a 
lesser extent, contractility. 
 Cardiac autonomic innervation has an apparent 
sidedness , because the right sympathetic and right 
vagus nerves primarily aff ect the SA node, whereas 
the left  sympathetic and vagus nerves principally 
aff ect the AV node. Vagal eff ects frequently have 
a very rapid onset and resolution, whereas sym-
pathetic infl uences generally have a more gradual 
onset and dissipation. Sinus arrhythmia is a cyclic 
variation in heart rate that corresponds to respira-
tion (increasing with inspiration and decreasing 
during expiration); it is due to cyclic changes in 
vagal tone. 
membrane-bound ATPase actively transports Ca 2+
back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca 2+ is also 
extruded extracellularly by an exchange of intracel-
lular Ca 2+ for extracellular sodium by an ATPase in 
the cell membrane. Th us, relaxation of the heart also 
requires ATP. 
 Th e quantity of intracellular Ca 2+ available, its 
rate of delivery, and its rate of removal determine, 
respectively, the maximum tension developed, the 
rate of contraction, and the rate of relaxation. Sym-
pathetic stimulation increases the force of contrac-
tion by raising intracellular Ca 2+ concentration via a 
β 1 -adrenergic receptor-mediated increase in intra-
cellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
through the action of a stimulatory G protein. Th e 
increase in cAMP recruits additional open calcium 
channels. Moreover, adrenergic agonists enhance 
the rate of relaxation by enhancing Ca 2+ reuptake by 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Phosphodiesterase 
inhibitors, such as inamrinone, enoximone, and mil-
rinone, produce similar eff ects by preventing the 
breakdown of intracellular cAMP. Digitalis glyco-
sides increase intracellular Ca 2+ concentration 
through inhibition of the membrane-bound Na + –
K + -ATPase; the resulting small increase in intracel-
lular Na + allows for a greater infl ux of Ca 2+ via the 
Na + –Ca 2+ exchange mechanism. Glucagon enhances 
contractility by increasing intracellular cAMP levels 
via activation of a specifi c nonadrenergic receptor. 
Th e new agent levosimendan is a calcium sensitizer 
that enhances contractility by binding to troponin 
C. In contrast, release of acetylcholine following 
vagal stimulation depresses contractility through 
increased cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) 
levels and inhibition of adenylyl cyclase; these eff ects 
are mediated by an inhibitory G protein. Acidosis 
blocks slow calcium channels and therefore also 
depresses cardiac contractility by unfavorably alter-
ing intracellular Ca 2+ kinetics. 
 Studies suggest that volatile anesthetics 
depress cardiac contractility by decreasing the 
entry of Ca 2+ into cells during depolarization (aff ect-
ing T- and L-type calcium channels), altering the 
kinetics of its release and uptake into the sarcoplas-
mic reticulum, and decreasing the sensitivity of con-
tractile proteins to Ca 2+ . Halothane and enfl urane 
seem to depress contractility more than isofl urane, 
sevofl urane, and desfl urane. Anesthetic-induced 
3
350 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 202  The normal cardiac 
cycle. Note the correspondence between 
electrical and mechanical events. (Modiﬁ ed 
and reproduced, with permission, from Barrett KE: 
Ganong’s  Review of Medical Physiology , 24th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.) 
Ventricular
volume (mL)
Aortic
blood flow
(L/min)
Pressure
(mm Hg)
Electrocardiogram
Time(s)
Heart sounds
(phonocardiogram)
Aortic pressure
(at O, the aortic valve opens;
at C, it closes)
Left ventricular pressure (      )
Left atrial pressure (      )
(right is similar)
Left ventricular volume
(at C′, the mitral valve closes;
at O′, it opens)
Jugular venous pressure,
showing a, c, and v waves
Carotid pressure
(n = dicrotic notch)
Radial pressure
Pulmonary arterial pressure
Right ventricular pressure
Phases of cardiac cycle
Pressure
(mm Hg)
Ventric.
syst.
Atr.
syst.
Diastole
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
P R T
U
Q
O
C
C′
a c
v
n
1 2
3
4
5
O′
S
4
120
80
40
0
130
0
5
3
0
30
0
15
65
1
2
3
Atrial systole
Isometric contraction
Ejection
Isometric relaxation
Filling
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
 THE CARDIAC CYCLE 
 Th e cardiac cycle can be defi ned by both electrical 
and mechanical events ( Figure 20–2 ).  Systole refers 
to contraction and  diastole refers to relaxation. Most 
diastolic ventricular fi lling occurs passively before 
atrial contraction. Contraction of the atria normally 
contributes 20% to 30% of ventricular fi lling.  Th ree 
waves can generally be identifi ed on atrial pres-
sure tracings ( Figure 20–2 ). Th e  a wave is due to 
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia
351
based on height and weight ( Figure 20–3 ). Normal 
CI is 2.5–4.2 L/min/m 2 .  Because the normal 
CI has a wide range, it is a relatively insensi-
tive measurement of ventricular performance. 
Abnormalities in CI therefore usually refl ect gross 
ventricular impairment. A more accurate assess-
ment can be obtained if the response of the cardiac 
output to exercise is evaluated. Under these condi-
tions, failure of the cardiac output to increase and 
keep up with oxygen consumption is refl ected by 
a decreasing mixed venous oxygen saturation. 
A decrease in mixed venous oxygen saturation in 
response to increased demand usually refl ects inad-
equate tissue perfusion.  Th us, in the absence 
of hypoxia or severe anemia, measure-
ment of mixed venous oxygen tension (or satura-
tion) is an excellent estimate of the adequacy of 
cardiac output. 
 1. Heart Rate 
 When stroke volume remains constant, cardiac out-
put is directly proportional to heart rate. Heart rate 
is an intrinsic function of the SA node (spontane-
ous depolarization), but is modifi ed by autonomic, 
humoral, and local factors. Th e normal intrinsic 
rate of the SA node in young adults is about 90–
100 beats/min, but it decreases with age based on the 
following formula: 
 Normal intrinsic heart rate = 118 beats/min 
                        − (0.57 × age)
 Enhanced vagal activity slows the heart rate via 
stimulation of M 2 cholinergic receptors, whereas 
enhanced sympathetic activity increases the heart 
rate mainly through activation of β 1 -adrenergic 
receptors and, to lesser extent, β 2 -adrenergic recep-
tors (see above). 
 2. Stroke Volume 
 Stroke volume is normally determined by three 
major factors: preload, aft erload, and contractility. 
Th is analysis is analogous to laboratory observa-
tions on skeletal muscle preparations. Preload is 
muscle length prior to contraction, whereas aft er-
load is the tension against which the muscle must 
4
5
atrial systole. Th e  c wave coincides with ventricular 
contraction and is said to be caused by bulging of 
the AV valve into the atrium. Th e  v wave is the result 
of pressure buildup from venous return before the 
AV valve opens again. Th e  x descent is the decline in 
pressure between the  c and  v waves and is thought to 
be due to a pulling down of the atrium by ventricular 
contraction. Incompetence of the AV valve on either 
side of the heart abolishes the  x descent on that side, 
resulting in a prominent  cv wave. Th e  y descent fol-
lows the  v wave and represents the decline in atrial 
pressure as the AV valve opens. Th e notch in the aor-
tic pressure tracing is referred to as the  incisura and 
is said to represent the brief pressure change from 
transient backfl ow of blood into the left  ventricle 
just before aortic valve closure. 
 DETERMINANTS OF 
VENTRICULAR PERFORMANCE 
 Discussions of ventricular function usually refer to 
the left  ventricle, but the same concepts apply to the 
right ventricle. Although the ventricles are oft en 
thought of as functioning separately, their interde-
pendence has clearly been demonstrated. Moreover, 
factors aff ecting systolic and diastolic functions can 
be diff erentiated: Systolic function involves ventric-
ular ejection, whereas diastolic function is related to 
ventricular fi lling. 
 Ventricular systolic function is oft en (errone-
ously) equated with cardiac output, which can be 
defi ned as the volume of blood pumped by the heart 
per minute. Because the two ventricles function in 
series, their outputs are normally equal. Cardiac out-
put (CO) is expressed by the following equation: 
 CO = SV × HR 
 where SV is the stroke volume (the volume pumped 
per contraction) and HR is heart rate. To compensate 
for variations in body size, CO is oft en expressed in 
terms of total body surface area: 
 
Cl = CO
BSA 
 where CI is the cardiac index and BSA is body sur-
face area. BSA is usually obtained from nomograms 
352 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 203  Nomograms for calculating body surface area (BSA) in adult  ( A ) and pediatric  ( B ) patients. (Data from the 
formula of Du Bois and Du Bois: Arch Intern Med 1916;17:863. hjhjjh 1916, American Medical Association.) 
contract. Contractility is an intrinsic property of 
the muscle that is related to the force of contrac-
tion but is independent of both preload and aft er-
load. Because the heart is a three-dimensional 
multichambered pump, both ventricular geometric 
form and valvular dysfunction can also aff ect stroke 
volume ( Table 20–3 ). 
 Preload 
 Ventricular preload is end-diastolic volume, which 
is generally dependent on ventricular fi lling. Th e 
relationship between cardiac output and left  ven-
tricular end-diastolic volume is known as Starling’s 
law of the heart ( Figure 20–4 ). Note that when the 
heart rate and contractility remain constant, car-
diac output is directly proportional to preload until 
excessive end-diastolic volumes are reached. At that 
 TABLE 203 Major factors aﬀ ecting cardiac 
stroke volume. 
 Preload 
 Afterload 
 Contractility 
 Wall motion abnormalities 
 Valvular dysfunction 
330 lb
320
310
300
290
280
270
260
250
240
230
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
66 lb
0.85 m2
39 in
cm 100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
cm 200
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79 in
60
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.25
1.30
1.35
1.40
1.45
1.50
1.55
1.60
1.65
1.70
1.75
1.80
1.85
1.90
1.95
2.00
2.10
2.20
2.30
2.40
2.50
2.60
2.70
2.80 m2
kg 30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
kg 150
WEIGHT
ADULT
BODY SURFACE
HEIGHT
A
90 lb
WEIGHT
PEDIATRIC
BODY SURFACE
HEIGHT
B
1.10 m2
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.16
0.15
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.074 m2
47 in
46
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10 in
kg 40.0
cm 120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
cm 25
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
kg 1.0
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2.2 lb
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
353 
factors aff ecting venous return are usually fi xed, 
vascular capacity is normally its major determi-
nant. Increases in metabolic activity reduce vas-
cular capacity, so that venous return to the heart 
increases as the volume of venous capacitance 
vessels decreases. Changes in blood volume and 
venous tone are important causes of intraopera-
tive and postoperative changes in ventricular fi ll-
ing and cardiac output. Any factor that alters the 
normally small venous pressure gradient favoring 
blood return to the heart also aff ects cardiac fi lling. 
Such factors include changes in intrathoracic pres-
sure (positive-pressure ventilation or thoracotomy), 
posture (positioning during surgery), and pericar-
dial pressure (pericardial disease). 
 Th e most important determinant of right ven-
tricular preload is venous return.  In the absence of 
signifi cant pulmonary or right ventricular dys-
function, venous return is also the major deter-
minant of left  ventricular preload . Normally, the 
end-diastolic volumes of both ventricles are similar, 
point, cardiac output does not appreciably change—
or may even decrease. Excessive distention of either 
ventricle can lead to excessive dilatation and incom-
petence of the AV valves. 
 A. Determinants of Ventricular Filling 
 Ventricular fi lling can be infl uenced by a variety 
of factors ( Table 20–4 ), of which the most impor-
tant is venous return. Because most of the other 
 TABLE 204 Factors aﬀ ecting ventricular 
preload. 
 Blood volume 
 Distribution of blood volume
 Posture 
 Intrathoracic pressure 
 Pericardial pressure 
 Venous tone 
 Rhythm (atrial contraction) 
 Heart rate 
 FIGURE 204  Starling’s law of the heart. 
Maximal
activity
Normal during exercise
Normal at rest
Contractile state
Heart failure
Cardiogenic
shock
Walking
Rest
Cardiac output
Pulmonary
edema
Dyspnea
Ventricular end-diastolic volume
354 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Many factors are known to infl uence ventricular 
diastolic function and compliance. Nonetheless, 
measurement of LVEDP or other pressures approx-
imating LVEDP (such as pulmonary artery occlu-
sion pressure) are potential means of estimating 
left  ventricular preload. Changes in central venous 
pressure can be used as a rough index for changes 
in right and left  ventricular preload in most normal 
individuals. 
 Factors aff ecting ventricular compliance can 
be separated into those related to the rate of relax-
ation (early diastolic compliance) and passive 
stiff ness of the ventricles (late diastolic compli-
ance) . Hypertrophy (from hypertension or aortic 
valve stenosis), ischemia, and asynchrony reduce 
early compliance; hypertrophy and fi brosis reduce 
late compliance. Extrinsic factors (such as pericar-
dial disease, excessive distention of the contralat-
eral ventricle, increased airway or pleural pressure, 
tumors, and surgical compression) can also reduce 
ventricular compliance. Because of its normally 
thinner wall, the right ventricle is more compliant 
than the left . 
 Afterload 
 Aft erload for the intact heart is commonly equated 
with either ventricular wall tension during systole or 
arterial impedance to ejection. Wall tension may be 
thought of as the pressure the ventricle must over-
come to reduce its cavity volume. If the ventricle is 
assumed to be spherical, ventricular wall tension can 
be expressed by Laplace’s law: 
 
Circumferential stress = 2 × H
P × R
 
 where  P is intraventricular pressure,  R is the ven-
tricular radius, and  H is wall thickness. Although 
the normal ventricle is usually ellipsoidal, this 
relationship is still useful. Th e larger the ventricu-
lar radius, the greater the wall tension required to 
develop the same ventricular pressure. Conversely, 
an increase in wall thickness reduces ventricular 
wall tension. 
 Systolic intraventricular pressure is dependent 
on the force of ventricular contraction; the visco-
elastic properties of the aorta, its proximal branches, 
and, normally, the venous return is numerically 
equivalent to the cardiac output. 
 Both heart rate and rhythm can also aff ect ven-
tricular preload. Increases in heart rate are associ-
ated with proportionately greater reductions in 
diastole than systole. Ventricular fi lling therefore 
progressively becomes impaired at increased heart 
rates (>120 beats/min in adults). Absent (atrial 
fi brillation), ineff ective (atrial fl utter), or altered 
timing of atrial contraction (low atrial or junctional 
rhythms) can also reduce ventricular fi lling by 20% 
to 30%.  Patients with reduced ventricular 
compliance are more aff ected by the loss of a 
normally timed atrial systole than are those with 
normal ventricular compliance. 
 B. Diastolic Function and 
Ventricular Compliance 
 Left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) 
can be used as a measure of preload only if the 
relationship between ventricular volume and 
pressure (ventricular compliance) is constant . 
However, ventricular compliance is normally non-
linear ( Figure 20–5 ). Impaired diastolic function 
reduces ventricular compliance. Th erefore, the same 
LVEDP that corresponds to a normal preload in a 
normal patient may correspond to a decreased pre-
load in a patient with impaired diastolic function. 
6
 FIGURE 205  Normal and abnormal ventricular 
compliance. 
Less compliant
Normal
More compliant
Ventricular end-diastolic volume
Ventricular end-diastolic pressure
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia
355
 Contractility 
 Cardiac contractility (inotropy) is the intrinsic 
ability of the myocardium to pump in the absence 
of changes in preload or aft erload. Contractility is 
related to the rate of myocardial muscle shortening, 
which is, in turn, dependent on the intracellular Ca 2+
concentration during systole. Increases in heart rate 
can also enhance contractility under some condi-
tions, perhaps because of the increased availability 
of intracellular Ca 2+ . 
 Contractility can be altered by neural, humoral, 
or pharmacological infl uences. Sympathetic nervous 
system activity normally has the most important 
eff ect on contractility. Sympathetic fi bers innervate 
atrial and ventricular muscle, as well as nodal tissues. 
In addition to its positive chronotropic eff ect, norepi-
nephrine release also enhances contractility primar-
ily via β 1 -receptor activation. α-Adrenergic receptors 
are also present in the myocardium, but seem to 
have only minor positive inotropic and chronotropic 
eff ects. Sympathomimetic drugs and secretion of epi-
nephrine from the adrenal glands similarly increase 
contractility via β 1 -receptor activation. 
 Myocardial contractility is depressed by 
hypoxia, acidosis, depletion of catecholamine stores 
within the heart, and loss of functioning muscle 
mass as a result of ischemia or infarction. At large 
enough doses, most anesthetics and antiarrhyth-
mic agents are negative inotropes (ie, they decrease 
contractility). 
 Wall Motion Abnormalities 
 Regional wall motion abnormalities cause a break-
down of the analogy between the intact heart and 
skeletal muscle preparations. Such abnormalities 
may be due to ischemia, scarring, hypertrophy, or 
altered conduction. When the ventricular cavity 
does not collapse symmetrically or fully, emptying 
becomes impaired. Hypokinesis (decreased contrac-
tion), akinesis (failure to contract), and dyskinesis 
(paradoxic bulging) during systole refl ect increasing 
degrees of contraction abnormalities. Although con-
tractility may be normal or even enhanced in some 
areas, abnormalities in other areas of the ventricle 
can impair emptying and reduce stroke volume. Th e 
severity of the impairment depends on the size and 
number of abnormally contracting areas. 
and blood (viscosity and density); and  systemic 
vascular resistance (SVR) . Arteriolar tone is the 
primary determinant of SVR. Because viscoelastic 
properties are generally fi xed in any given patient, 
left  ventricular aft erload is usually equated clini-
cally with SVR, which is calculated by the following 
equation: 
 
SVR = 80 × MAP – CVP
CO
 where MAP is mean arterial pressure in millime-
ters of mercury, CVP is central venous pressure in 
millimeters of mercury, and CO is cardiac output 
in liters per minute. Normal SVR is 900–1500 dyn · 
s cm –5 . Systolic blood pressure may also be used as 
an approximation of left  ventricular aft erload in the 
absence of chronic changes in the size, shape, or 
thickness of the ventricular wall or acute changes in 
systemic vascular resistance. Some clinicians prefer 
to use CI instead of CO in calculating a systemic vas-
cular resistance index (SVRI), so that SVRI = SVR × 
BSA. 
 Right ventricular aft erload is mainly depen-
dent on pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and is 
expressed by the following equation: 
 
PVR = 80 × PAP – LAP
CO
 where PAP is mean pulmonary artery pressure and 
LAP is left  atrial pressure. In practice, pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) is usually substi-
tuted as an approximation for LAP. Normal PVR is 
50–150 dyn · s cm –5 . 
 Cardiac output is inversely related to large 
changes in aft erload on the left  ventricle; however, 
small increases or decreases in aft erload may have 
no eff ect at all on cardiac output. Because of its 
thinner wall, the right ventricle is more sensitive 
to changes in aft erload than is the left  ventricle. 
 Cardiac output in patients with marked 
right  or left  ventricular impairment is very 
sensitive to acute increases in aft erload. Th e latter is 
particularly true in the presence of drug- or ischemia-
induced myocardial depression or chronic heart 
failure. 
7
356 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
as a measure of contractility. Contractility is directly 
proportional to  dP/dt , but accurate measurement 
of this value requires a high-fi delity (“Millar”) ven-
tricular catheter; however, it can be estimated with 
echocardiography. Although arterial pressure trac-
ings are distorted due to properties of the vascular 
tree, the initial rate of rise in pressure (the slope) 
can serve as a rough approximation; the more proxi-
mally the arterial line catheter is located in the arte-
rial tree, the more accurate the extrapolation will be. 
Th e usefulness of  dP/dt is also limited in that it may 
be aff ected by preload, aft erload, and heart rate. 
 Ejection Fraction 
 Th e ventricular ejection fraction (EF), the 
fraction of the end-diastolic ventricular vol-
ume ejected, is the most commonly used clinical 
measurement of systolic function. EF can be calcu-
lated by the following equation: 
 
EF = EDV – ESV 
EDV
 where EDV is left  ventricular diastolic volume 
and ESV is end-systolic volume. Normal EF is 
8
 Valvular Dysfunction 
 Valvular dysfunction can involve any one of the four 
valves in the heart and can include stenosis, regur-
gitation (incompetence), or both. Stenosis of an AV 
valve (tricuspid or mitral) reduces stroke volume 
primarily by decreasing ventricular preload, whereas 
stenosis of a semilunar valve (pulmonary or aortic) 
reduces stroke volume primarily by increasing ven-
tricular aft erload. In contrast, valvular regurgita-
tion can reduce stroke volume without changes in 
preload, aft erload, or contractility and without wall 
motion abnormalities. Th e eff ective stroke volume is 
reduced by the regurgitant volume with every con-
traction. When an AV valve is incompetent, a sig-
nifi cant part of the ventricular end-diastolic volume 
can fl ow backward into the atrium during systole; 
the stroke volume is reduced by the regurgitant vol-
ume. Similarly, when a semilunar valve is incompe-
tent, a fraction of end-diastolic volume arises from 
backward fl ow into the ventricle during diastole. 
 ASSESSMENT OF 
VENTRICULAR FUNCTION 
 1. Ventricular Function Curves 
 Plotting cardiac output or stroke volume against 
preload is useful in evaluating pathological states 
and understanding drug therapy. Normal right 
and left  ventricular function curves are shown in 
 Figure 20–6 . 
 Ventricular pressure–volume diagrams are use-
ful because they dissociate contractility from both 
preload and aft erload. Two points are identifi ed on 
such diagrams: the end-systolic point (ESP) and the 
end-diastolic point (EDP) ( Figure 20–7 ). ESP is 
refl ective of systolic function, whereas EDP is more 
refl ective of diastolic function. For any given con-
tractile state, all ESPs are on the same line (ie, the 
relationship between end-systolic volume and end-
systolic pressure is fi xed). 
 2. Assessment of Systolic Function 
 Th e change in ventricular pressure over time dur-
ing systole ( dP/dt ) is defi ned by the fi rst derivative 
of the ventricular pressure curve and is oft en used 
 FIGURE 206  Function curves for the left and right 
ventricles. 
Right
ventricle
Left
ventricle
Stroke volume
End-diastolic pressure, mm Hg
10
0
20
30
40
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
357 
Pulmonary artery catheters with fast-response 
thermistors allow measurement of the right ventric-
ular EF. Unfortunately, when pulmonary vascular 
resistance increases, decreases in right ventricular 
approximately 0.67 ± 0.08. Measurements can be 
made preoperatively from cardiac catheterization, 
radionucleotide studies, or transthoracic (TTE) 
or 
transesophageal 
echocardiography 
(TEE). 
 FIGURE 207  Ventricular pressure-volume diagrams. 
 A: A single ventricular contraction. Note that stroke 
volume represents change in volume on the x-axis 
(diﬀ erence between end-systolic volume and end-
diastolic volume). Note also that the circumscribed area 
represents external work performed by the ventricle. 
 B: Increasing preload with constant contractility and 
afterload.  C: Increasing afterload with constant preload 
and contractility.  D: Increasing contractility with constant 
preload and afterload. ESP, end-systolic point; EDP, end-
diastolic point. 
A
B
C
D
Pressure
Pressure
Pressure
Pressure
ESP
ESP
External
work
Potential
energy
EDP
EDP
EDP
Stroke volume
Volume
Stroke volume
Stroke volume
Stroke volume
Increasing preload
Volume
Volume
Volume
Increasing afterload
Increasing contractility
Normal
Normal
Increased contractility
Depressed contractility
358 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Systemic Circulation 
 Th e systemic vasculature can be divided function-
ally into arteries, arterioles, capillaries, and veins. 
Arteries are the high-pressure conduits that supply 
the various organs. Arterioles are the small vessels 
that directly feed and control blood fl ow through 
each capillary bed. Capillaries are thin-walled ves-
sels that allow the exchange of nutrients between 
blood and tissues. Veins return blood from capillary 
beds to the heart. 
 Th e distribution of blood between the various 
components of the circulatory system is shown in 
 Table 20–5 . Note that most of the blood volume 
is in the systemic circulation—specifi cally, within 
systemic veins. Changes in systemic venous tone 
allow these vessels to function as a reservoir for 
blood. Following signifi cant blood or fl uid losses, a 
sympathetically mediated increase in venous tone 
reduces the caliber of these vessels and shift s blood 
into other parts of the vascular system. Conversely, 
venodilation allows these vessels to accommodate 
increases in blood volume. Sympathetic control of 
venous tone is an important determinant of venous 
EF may refl ect aft erload rather than contractility. 
Left  ventricular EF is not an accurate measure of 
ventricular contractility in the presence of mitral 
insuffi  ciency. 
 3. Assessment of Diastolic Function 
 Left  ventricular diastolic function can be 
assessed clinically by Doppler echocar-
diography on a transthoracic or transesophageal 
examination. Flow velocities are measured across 
the mitral valve during diastole. Th ree patterns 
of diastolic dysfunction are generally recognized 
based on isovolumetric relaxation time, the ratio 
of peak early diastolic fl ow (E) to peak atrial sys-
tolic fl ow (A), and the deceleration time (DT) of E 
(DT E ) ( Figure 20–8 ). Tissue Doppler is frequently 
used to distinguish “pseudonormal” from normal 
diastolic function. Tissue Doppler is also an excel-
lent way to detect “conventional” diastolic dysfunc-
tion. An e’ wave peak velocity of less than 8 cm/sec 
is associated with impaired diastolic function. An 
E/e’ wave ratio that is greater than 15 is consistent 
with elevated left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
( Figure 20–9 ). 
9
 FIGURE 208  Doppler echocardiography of diastolic 
ﬂ ow across the mitral valve.  A–D (from left to right) 
represents increasing severity of diastolic dysfunction. 
E, early diastolic ﬂ ow; A, peak atrial systolic ﬂ ow; IVRT, 
isovolumic relaxation time; DT E , deceleration time of E. 
IVRT
E/A ratio
DTE
Normal
Impaired relaxation
Pseudonormalization
Restricted
DTE
IVRT
70 – 90 ms
0.8 – 1.2
150 – 300 ms
70 – 90 ms
0.8 – 1.2
150 – 300 ms
>100 ms
<0.8
>250 ms
reduced
E
reduced
A
increased
E
E
A
A
A
A
B
C
D
<90 ms
>1.2
<150 ms
E
Velocity (m/s)
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
359 
 AUTOREGULATION 
 Most tissue beds regulate their own blood fl ow 
(autoregulation). Arterioles generally dilate in 
response to reduced perfusion pressure or increased 
tissue demand. Conversely, arterioles constrict in 
response to increased pressure or reduced tissue 
demand. Th ese phenomena are likely due to both 
an intrinsic response of vascular smooth muscle to 
stretch and the accumulation of vasodilatory met-
abolic by-products. Th e latter may include K + , H + , 
CO 2 , adenosine, and lactate. 
 ENDOTHELIUMDERIVED 
FACTORS 
 Th e vascular endothelium is metabolically active in 
elaborating or modifying substances that directly 
or indirectly play a major role in controlling blood 
return to the heart. Reduced venous tone following 
induction of anesthesia frequently results in venous 
pooling of blood and contributes to hypotension. 
 A multiplicity of factors infl uences blood fl ow 
in the vascular tree. Th ese include mechanisms of 
local and metabolic control, endothelium-derived 
factors, the autonomic nervous system, and circulat-
ing hormones. 
 TABLE 205 Distribution of blood volume. 
Heart
 7%
Pulmonary circulation
 9%
Systemic circulation
Arterial
Capillary
Venous
15%
 5%
64%
 FIGURE 209  Tissue Doppler.  A: Tissue Doppler at the 
lateral mitral annulus. During diastole the annulus moves 
toward the transesophageal examination transducer 
in the esophagus. Thus the e’ and a’ waves of diastolic 
ﬁ lling are positive deﬂ ections above the baseline.  B: 
When transesophageal examination is used to measure 
transmitral diastolic inﬂ ow, the E and A waves of early 
and late ﬁ lling are below the baseline because ﬂ ow is 
moving away from the Doppler probe in the esophagus. 
Tissue Doppler can be used to distinguish normal from 
pseudonormal diastolic inﬂ ow pattern because the e’ wave 
remains depressed as diastolic dysfunction progresses. 
(Reproduced with permission from Wasnick JD, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia 
and Transesophageal Echocardiography , McGraw-Hill, 2011.) 
Normal
e′
a′
e′
e′
e′
a′
a′
a′
E
A
E
A
E
A
E
A
Impaired
relaxation
Pseudonormal
Restrictive
Normal
Impaired
relaxation
Pseudonormal
Restrictive
A
B
360 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Vascular tone and autonomic infl uences on the 
heart are controlled by vasomotor centers in the 
reticular formation of the medulla and lower pons. 
Distinct vasoconstrictor and vasodilator areas have 
been identifi ed. Vasoconstriction is mediated by 
the anterolateral areas of the lower pons and upper 
medulla. Th ey are also responsible for adrenal secre-
tion of catecholamines, as well as the enhancement of 
cardiac automaticity and contractility. Vasodilatory 
areas, which are located in the lower medulla, are 
also adrenergic, but function by projecting inhibitory 
fi bers upward to the vasoconstrictor areas. Vasomo-
tor output is modifi ed by inputs from throughout the 
central nervous system, including the hypothalamus, 
cerebral cortex, and the other areas in the brainstem. 
Areas in the posterolateral medulla receive input 
from both the vagal and the glossopharyngeal nerves 
and play an important role in mediating a variety of 
circulatory refl exes. Th e sympathetic system nor-
mally maintains some tonic vasoconstriction on the 
vascular tree. Loss of this tone following induction of 
anesthesia or sympathectomy frequently contributes 
to perioperative hypotension. 
 ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE 
 Systemic blood fl ow is pulsatile in large arteries 
because of the heart’s cyclic activity; by the time 
blood reaches the systemic capillaries, fl ow is con-
tinuous (laminar). Th e mean pressure falls to less 
than 20 mm Hg in the large systemic veins that 
return blood to the heart. Th e largest pressure drop, 
nearly 50%, is across the arterioles, and the arterioles 
account for the majority of SVR. 
 MAP is proportionate to the product of 
SVR × CO. Th is relationship is based on an analogy 
to Ohm’s law, as applied to the circulation: 
 MAP − CVP ≈ SVR × CO 
 Because CVP is normally very small compared 
with MAP, the former can usually be ignored. From 
this relationship, it is readily apparent that hypo-
tension is the result of a decrease in SVR, CO, or 
both: To maintain arterial blood pressure, a decrease 
in either SVR or CO must be compensated by an 
increase in the other. MAP can be measured as the 
integrated mean of the arterial pressure waveform. 
pressure and fl ow. Th ese include vasodilators (eg, 
nitric oxide, prostacyclin [PGI 2 ]), vasoconstrictors 
(eg, endothelins, thromboxane A 2 ), anticoagulants 
(eg, thrombomodulin, protein C), fi brinolytics (eg, 
tissue plasminogen activator), and factors that inhibit 
platelet aggregation (eg, nitric oxide and PGI 2 ). Nitric 
oxide is synthesized from arginine by nitric oxide 
synthetase. Th is substance has a number of func-
tions In the circulation, it is a potent vasodilator. It 
binds guanylate cyclase, increasing cGMP levels and 
producing vasodilation. Endothelially derived vaso-
constrictors (endothelins) are released in response to 
thrombin and epinephrine. 
 AUTONOMIC CONTROL OF 
THE SYSTEMIC VASCULATURE 
 Although the parasympathetic system can exert 
important infl uences on the circulation, auto-
nomic control of the vasculature is primarily sym-
pathetic. Sympathetic outfl ow to the circulation 
passes out  of the spinal cord at all thoracic seg-
ments and  the fi rst two lumbar segments. Th ese 
fi bers reach blood vessels via specifi c autonomic 
nerves or by traveling along spinal nerves. Sympa-
thetic fi bers innervate all parts of the vasculature 
except for capillaries. Th eir principal function is to 
regulate vascular tone. Variations of arterial vas-
cular tone serve to regulate blood pressure and the 
distribution of blood fl ow to the various organs, 
whereas variations in venous tone alter vascular 
capacity, venous pooling, and venous return to the 
heart. 
 Th e vasculature has sympathetic vasocon-
strictor and vasodilator fi bers, but the former are 
more important physiologically in most tissue 
beds. Sympathetic-induced vasoconstriction (via 
α 1 -adrenergic receptors) can be potent in skeletal 
muscle, kidneys, gut, and skin; it is least active in the 
brain and heart. Th e most important vasodilatory 
fi bers are those feeding skeletal muscle, mediating 
increased blood fl ow (via β 2 -adrenergic receptors) in 
response to exercise. Vasodepressor (vasovagal) syn-
cope, which can occur following intense emotional 
strain associated with high sympathetic tone, results 
from refl ex activation of both vagal and sympathetic 
vasodilator fi bers. 
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
361 
baroreceptor discharge, inhibiting systemic vaso-
constriction and enhancing vagal tone  (barorecep-
tor refl ex) . Reductions in blood pressure decrease 
baroreceptor discharge, allowing vasoconstriction 
and reduction of vagal tone. Carotid baroreceptors 
send aff erent signals to circulatory brainstem centers 
via Hering’s nerve (a branch of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve), whereas aortic baroreceptor aff erent signals 
travel along the vagus nerve. Of the two peripheral 
sensors, the carotid baroreceptor is physiologi-
cally more important and is primarily responsible 
for minimizing changes in blood pressure that are 
caused by acute events, such as a change in posture. 
Carotid baroreceptors sense MAP most eff ectively 
between pressures of 80 and 160 mm Hg. Adapta-
tion to acute changes in blood pressure occurs over 
the course of 1–2 days, rendering this refl ex inef-
fective for longer term blood pressure control. All 
volatile anesthetics depress the normal barorecep-
tor response, but isofl urane and desfl urane seem to 
have less eff ect. Cardiopulmonary stretch receptors 
located in the atria, left  ventricle, and pulmonary 
circulation can cause a similar eff ect. 
 B. Intermediate Control 
 In the course of a few minutes, sustained decreases 
in arterial pressure, together with enhanced sym-
pathetic outfl ow, activate the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system, increase secretion of arginine 
vasopressin (AVP), and alter normal capillary 
fl uid exchange. Both angiotensin II and AVP are 
potent arteriolar vasoconstrictors. Th eir immedi-
ate action is to increase SVR. In contrast to forma-
tion of angiotensin II, which responds to relatively 
smaller changes, suffi  cient AVP secretion to pro-
duce vasoconstriction will only occur in response to 
more marked degrees of hypotension. Angiotensin 
constricts arterioles via AT 1 receptors. AVP medi-
ates vasoconstriction via V 1 receptors and exerts its 
antidiuretic eff ect via V 2 receptors. 
 Sustained changes in arterial blood pressure 
can also alter fl uid exchange in tissues by their sec-
ondary eff ects on capillary pressures. Hypertension 
increases interstitial movement of intravascular 
fl uid, whereas hypotension increases reabsorption 
of interstitial fl uid. Such compensatory changes in 
intravascular volume can reduce fl uctuations in 
Alternatively, MAP may be estimated by the follow-
ing formula: 
 
MAP = Diastolic pressure + Pulse pressure
3
 where pulse pressure is the diff erence between sys-
tolic and diastolic blood pressure. Arterial pulse 
pressure is directly related to stroke volume, but is 
inversely proportional to the compliance of the arte-
rial tree. Th us, decreases in pulse pressure may be 
due to a decrease in stroke volume, an increase in 
SVR, or both. Increased pulse pressure increases 
shear stress on vessel walls, potentially leading to 
atherosclerotic plaque rupture and thrombosis or 
rupture of aneurysms. Increased pulse pressure in 
patients undergoing cardiac surgery has been associ-
ated with adverse renal and neurological outcomes. 
 Transmission of the arterial pressure wave from 
large arteries to smaller vessels in the periphery is 
faster than the actual movement of blood; the pres-
sure wave velocity is 15 times the velocity of blood in 
the aorta. Moreover, refl ections of the propagating 
waves off  arterial walls widen pulse pressure before 
the pulse wave is completely dampened in very small 
arteries. 
 Control of Arterial Blood Pressure 
 Arterial blood pressure is regulated by a series of 
immediate, intermediate, and long-term adjust-
ments that involve complex neural, humoral, and 
renal mechanisms. 
 A. Immediate Control 
 Minute-to-minute control of blood pressure is pri-
marily the function of autonomic nervous system 
refl exes. Changes in blood pressure are sensed both 
centrally (in hypothalamic and brainstem areas) 
and peripherally by specialized sensors (barorecep-
tors). Decreases in arterial blood pressure result in 
increased sympathetic tone, increased adrenal secre-
tion of epinephrine, and reduced vagal activity.  Th e 
resulting systemic vasoconstriction, increased 
heart rate, and enhanced cardiac contractility 
serve to increase blood pressure . 
 Peripheral baroreceptors are located at the 
bifurcation of the common carotid arteries and the 
aortic arch. Elevations in blood pressure increase 
362 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
or the LAD (the remaining 40%). Th e AV node is 
usually supplied by the RCA (85% to 90%) or, less 
frequently, by the CX (10% to 15%); the bundle of 
His has a dual blood supply derived from the PDA 
and LAD. Th e anterior papillary muscle of the mitral 
valve also has a dual blood supply that is fed by diag-
onal branches of the LAD and marginal branches 
of the CX. In contrast, the posterior papillary of the 
mitral valve is usually supplied only by the PDA 
and is therefore much more vulnerable to ischemic 
dysfunction. 
 2. Determinants of Coronary Perfusion 
 Coronary perfusion is unique in that it is inter-
mittent rather than continuous, as it is in other 
organs. During contraction, intramyocardial pres-
sures in the left  ventricle approach systemic arterial 
pressure. Th e force of left  ventricular contraction 
almost completely occludes the intramyocardial 
part of the coronary arteries; in fact, blood fl ow 
may transiently reverse in epicardial vessels. Even 
during the latter part of diastole, left  ventricular 
pressure eventually exceeds venous (right atrial) 
pressure.  Th us, coronary perfusion pressure is 
usually determined by the diff erence between 
aortic pressure and ventricular pressure , and the 
left  ventricle is perfused almost entirely during 
diastole. In contrast, the right ventricle is perfused 
during both systole and diastole ( Figure 20–11 ). 
Moreover, as a determinant of myocardial blood 
fl ow, arterial diastolic pressure is more important 
than MAP: 
 
Coronary perfusion 
pressure
Arterial 
diastolic 
pressure 
=
– LVEDP
 
 Decreases in aortic pressure or increases in ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure can reduce coronary 
perfusion pressure. Increases in heart rate also 
decrease coronary perfusion because of the dispro-
portionately greater reduction in diastolic time as 
heart rate increases ( Figure 20–12 ).  Because it 
is subjected to the greatest intramural pres-
sures during systole, the endocardium tends to be 
most vulnerable to ischemia during decreases in 
coronary perfusion pressure. 
10
blood pressure, particularly in the absence of ade-
quate renal function (see below). 
 C. Long-Term Control 
 Th e eff ects of slower renal mechanisms become 
apparent within hours of sustained changes in arte-
rial pressure. As a result, the kidneys alter total body 
sodium and water balance to restore blood pres-
sure to normal. Hypotension results in sodium (and 
water) retention, whereas hypertension generally 
increases sodium excretion in normal individuals. 
 ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY OF 
THE CORONARY CIRCULATION 
 1. Anatomy 
 Myocardial blood supply is derived entirely from 
the right and left  coronary arteries ( Figure 20–10 ). 
Blood fl ows from epicardial to endocardial vessels. 
Aft er perfusing the myocardium, blood returns to 
the right atrium via the coronary sinus and the ante-
rior cardiac veins. A small amount of blood returns 
directly into the chambers of the heart by way of the 
thebesian veins. 
 Th e right coronary artery (RCA) normally sup-
plies the right atrium, most of the right ventricle, 
and a variable portion of the left  ventricle (inferior 
wall). In 85% of persons, the RCA gives rise to the 
posterior descending artery (PDA), which supplies 
the superior–posterior interventricular septum and 
inferior wall—a right dominant circulation; in the 
remaining 15% of persons, the PDA is a branch of 
the left  coronary artery—a left  dominant circulation. 
 Th e left  coronary artery normally supplies the 
left  atrium and most of the interventricular septum 
and left  ventricle (septal, anterior, and lateral walls). 
Aft er a short course, the left  main coronary artery 
bifurcates into the left  anterior descending artery 
(LAD) and the circumfl ex artery (CX); the LAD 
supplies the septum and anterior wall and the CX 
supplies the lateral wall. In a left  dominant circula-
tion, the CX wraps around the AV groove and con-
tinues down as the PDA to also supply most of the 
posterior septum and inferior wall. 
 Th e arterial supply to the SA node may be 
derived from either the RCA (60% of individuals) 
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
363 
 FIGURE 2010  Anatomy of the coronary arteries in a patient with a right dominant circulation.  A: Right anterior 
oblique view.  B: Left anterior oblique view. 
A. RIGHT ANTERIOR OBLIQUE VIEW
B. LEFT ANTERIOR OBLIQUE VIEW
RCA
CB
SN
LMCA
CX
LAD
OM
PL
LV
PD
AM
1° D
2° D
AVN
RV
Right coronary (RCA)
Sinus node (SN)
Conus branch (CB)
Atrial (A)
Right ventricular (RV)
Acute marginal (AM)
Atrioventricular node (AVN)
Left ventricular (LV)
Posterior descending (PDA)
Septal branch (S)
Left main coronary (LMCA)
Left circumflex (CX)
Left anterior descending (LAD)
First diagonal (1° D)
Obtuse marginal (OM)
First septal branch (1° S)
Second diagonal (2° D)
Posterolateral (PL)
364 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
are primarily located on larger epicardial vessels, 
whereas the β 2 -receptors are mainly found on the 
smaller intramuscular and subendocardial vessels. 
Sympathetic stimulation generally increases myo-
cardial blood fl ow because of an increase in meta-
bolic demand and a predominance of β 2 -receptor 
activation. Parasympathetic eff ects on the coro-
nary vasculature are generally minor and weakly 
vasodilatory. 
 3. Myocardial Oxygen Balance 
 Myocardial oxygen demand is usually the most 
important determinant of myocardial blood fl ow. 
Relative contributions to oxygen requirements 
include basal requirements (20%), electrical activ-
ity (1%), volume work (15%), and pressure work 
(64%). Th e myocardium usually extracts 65% of 
the oxygen in arterial blood, compared with 25% 
in most other tissues. Coronary sinus oxygen satu-
ration is usually 30%. Th erefore, the myocardium 
(unlike other tissues) cannot compensate for reduc-
tions in blood fl ow by extracting more oxygen from 
hemoglobin. Any increases in myocardial metabolic 
demand must be met by an increase in coronary 
blood fl ow.  Table 20–6 lists the most important fac-
tors in myocardial oxygen demand and supply. Note 
that the heart rate and, to a lesser extent, ventricular 
 Control of Coronary Blood Flow 
 Coronary blood fl ow normally parallels myocar-
dial metabolic demand. In the average adult man, 
coronary blood fl ow is approximately 250 mL/min 
at rest. Th e myocardium regulates its own blood 
fl ow closely between perfusion pressures of 50 and 
120 mm Hg. Beyond this range, blood fl ow becomes 
increasingly pressure dependent. 
 Under normal conditions, changes in blood 
fl ow are entirely due to variations in coronary 
arterial tone (resistance) in response to metabolic 
demand. Hypoxia—either directly, or indirectly 
through the release of adenosine—causes coronary 
vasodilation. Autonomic infl uences are generally 
weak. Both α 1 - and β 2 -adrenergic receptors are 
present in the coronary arteries. Th e α 1 -receptors 
 FIGURE 2011  Coronary blood ﬂ ow during the 
cardiac cycle. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from 
Pappano A, Wier W:  Cardiovascular Physiology , 10th ed. Mosby, 2013.) 
Left
coronary
Right
coronary
Coronary blood flow (mL/min)
Time (s)
.2
0
5
10
15
0
20
40
60
80
100
80
100
120
.4
.6
.8
1.0
Aortic pressure (mm Hg)
 FIGURE 2012  The relationship between diastolic 
time and heart rate. 
Heart rate
Diastolic time as % of cardiac cycle
30
30
40
50
60
70
80
50
70
90
110
130
150
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
365 
(hypocontractile, but recoverable, myocardium aft er 
ischemia). Moreover, although volatile anesthetics 
decrease myocardial contractility, they can be poten-
tially benefi cial in patients with heart failure because 
most of them decrease preload and aft erload. 
 The Pathophysiology 
of Heart Failure 
 Systolic heart failure occurs when the heart is unable 
to pump a suffi  cient amount of blood to meet the 
body’s metabolic requirements. Clinical manifesta-
tions usually refl ect the eff ects of the low cardiac 
output on tissues (eg, fatigue, dyspnea, oxygen 
debt, acidosis), the damming-up of blood behind 
the failing ventricle (dependent edema or pulmo-
nary venous congestion), or both. Th e left  ventricle 
is most commonly the primary cause, oft en with 
secondary involvement of the right ventricle. Iso-
lated right ventricular failure can occur in the set-
ting of advanced disease of the lung parenchyma or 
pulmonary vasculature. Left  ventricular failure is 
most commonly the result of myocardial dysfunc-
tion, usually from coronary artery disease, but may 
also be the result of viral disease, toxins, untreated 
hypertension, valvular dysfunction, arrhythmias, or 
pericardial disease. 
 Diastolic dysfunction can be present in the 
absence of signs or symptoms of heart failure. Symp-
toms arising from diastolic dysfunction are the result 
of atrial hypertension ( Figure 20–13 ). Failure of the 
heart to relax during diastole leads to elevated left  
ventricular end-diastolic pressure, which is trans-
mitted to the left  atrium and pulmonary vasculature. 
Common causes of diastolic dysfunction include 
hypertension, coronary artery disease, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease, and peri-
cardial disease. Although diastolic dysfunction can 
occasionally cause symptoms of heart failure, even 
in the presence of normal systolic function (normal 
left  ventricular ejection fraction), it nearly always 
occurs in association with systolic dysfunction in 
patients with heart failure. 
 Diastolic dysfunction is diagnosed echocar-
diographically. Placing the pulse wave Doppler 
sample gate at the tips of the mitral valve during 
end-diastolic pressure are important determinants 
of both supply and demand. 
 EFFECTS OF ANESTHETIC 
AGENTS 
 Most volatile anesthetic agents are coronary vasodi-
lators. Th eir eff ect on coronary blood fl ow is vari-
able because of their direct vasodilating properties, 
reduction of myocardial metabolic requirements 
(and secondary decrease due to autoregulation), 
and eff ects on arterial blood pressure. Th e mecha-
nism is not clear, and these eff ects are unlikely to 
have any clinical importance. Halothane and iso-
fl urane seem to have the greatest eff ect; the former 
primarily aff ects large coronary vessels, whereas the 
latter aff ects mostly smaller vessels. Vasodilation 
due to desfl urane seems to be primarily autonomi-
cally mediated, whereas sevofl urane seems to lack 
coronary vasodilating properties. Dose-dependent 
abolition of autoregulation may be greatest with 
isofl urane. 
 Volatile agents exert benefi cial eff ects in experi-
mental myocardial ischemia and infarction. Th ey 
reduce myocardial oxygen requirements and protect 
against reperfusion injury; these eff ects are mediated 
by activation of ATP-sensitive K + (K ATP ) channels. 
Some evidence also suggests that volatile anesthet-
ics enhance recovery of the “stunned” myocardium 
 TABLE 206 Factors aﬀ ecting myocardial 
oxygen supply–demand balance. 
 Supply 
 Heart rate (diastolic ﬁ lling time) 
 Coronary perfusion pressure
 Aortic diastolic blood pressure 
 Ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
 Arterial oxygen content
 Arterial oxygen tension 
 Hemoglobin concentration 
 Coronary vessel diameter 
 Demand 
 Basal metabolic requirements 
 Heart rate 
 Wall tension
 Preload (ventricular radius) 
 Afterload 
 Contractility 
366 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
pseudonormalized and normal E/A ratio. Currently, 
most echocardiographers use tissue Doppler to 
examine the movement of the lateral annulus of the 
mitral valve during ventricular fi lling ( Figure 20–9 ). 
Tissue Doppler allows the echocardiographer to 
determine both the velocity and the direction of 
the movement of the heart. During systole, the 
heart contracts toward the apex, away from a TEE 
transducer in the esophagus. Th is motion produces 
the s’ wave of systole. During early and late diastolic 
fi lling, the heart moves toward the transducer pro-
ducing the e’ and a’ waves. Like the infl ow patterns 
achieved with pulse wave Doppler, characteristic 
patterns of diastolic dysfunction are refl ected in the 
tissue Doppler trace. An e’ wave less than 8 cm/sec 
is consistent with diastolic dysfunction. Of note, the 
tissue Doppler trace does not produce a pseudonor-
malized pattern permitting the echocardiographer 
to readily distinguish between normal and abnor-
mal diastolic function. 
 Cardiac output  may be reduced at rest with 
heart failure, but the key point is that the heart is 
incapable of appropriately  increasing cardiac output 
and oxygen delivery in response to demand. Inad-
equate oxygen delivery to tissues is refl ected by a low 
mixed venous oxygen tension and an increase in the 
arteriovenous oxygen content diff erence. In com-
pensated heart failure, the arteriovenous diff erence 
may be normal at rest, but it rapidly widens during 
stress or exercise. 
left  ventricular fi lling will produce the characteris-
tic diastolic fl ow pattern ( Figure 20–9 ). In patients 
with normal diastolic function, the ratio between 
the peak velocities of the early (E) and the atrial (A) 
waves is from 0.8 to 2. In the early stages of diastolic 
dysfunction, the primary abnormality is impaired 
relaxation. When left  ventricular relaxation is 
delayed, the initial pressure gradient between the 
left  atrium and the left  ventricle is reduced, result-
ing in a decline in early fi lling, and, consequently, 
a reduced peak E wave velocity. Th e A wave veloc-
ity is increased relative to the E wave, and the E/A 
ratio is reduced. As diastolic dysfunction advances, 
the left  atrial pressure increases, restoring the gradi-
ent between the left  atrium and left  ventricle with 
an apparent restoration of the normal E/A ratio. 
Th is pattern is characterized as “pseudonormal-
ized.” Using the E/A ratio alone cannot distinguish 
between a normal and pseudonormalized pattern 
of diastolic infl ow. As diastolic dysfunction worsens 
further, a restrictive pattern is obtained. In this sce-
nario, the left  ventricle is so stiff  that pressure builds 
in the left  atrium, resulting in a dramatic peak of 
early fi lling and a prominent, tall, narrow E wave. 
Because the ventricle is so poorly compliant, the 
atrial contraction contributes little to fi lling, result-
ing in a diminished A wave and an E/A ratio greater 
than 2:1. 
 Doppler 
patterns 
of 
pulmonary 
venous 
fl ow have been used to distinguish between a 
 FIGURE 2013  Ventricular pressure–volume relationships in isolated systolic and diastolic dysfunction. 
Diastolic dysfunction
Normal
Normal
Systolic
dysfunction
LV pressure (mm Hg)
LV pressure (mm Hg)
LV volume (mL/m2 BSA)
LV volume (mL/m2 BSA)
50
100
150
50
100
150
20
40
80
120
20
40
80
120
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia
367
adrenal secretion of epinephrine into the circula-
tion. Plasma catecholamine levels are generally 
directly proportional to the degree of left  ventricu-
lar dysfunction. Although enhanced sympathetic 
outfl ow can initially maintain cardiac output by 
increasing heart rate and contractility, worsening 
ventricular function elicits increasing degrees of 
vasoconstriction in an eff ort to maintain arterial 
blood pressure. Th e associated increase in aft erload, 
however, reduces cardiac output and exacerbates the 
ventricular failure. 
 Chronic sympathetic activation in patients 
with heart failure eventually decreases the response 
of adrenergic receptors to catecholamines (receptor 
uncoupling), the number of receptors (down-
regulation), and cardiac catecholamine stores. 
 Nonetheless, the failing heart becomes 
increasingly dependent on circulating cate-
cholamines. Abrupt withdrawal in sympathetic out-
fl ow or decreases in circulating catecholamine 
levels, such as can occur following induction of 
anesthesia, may lead to acute cardiac decompensa-
tion. A reduced density of M 2 receptors also 
decreases parasympathetic infl uences on the heart. 
 Sympathetic activation tends to redistribute 
systemic blood fl ow output away from the skin, 
gut, kidneys, and skeletal muscle to the heart and 
brain. Decreased renal perfusion, together with 
β 1 -adrenergic activity at the juxtaglomerular appa-
ratus, activates the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
axis, which leads to sodium retention and intersti-
tial edema. Moreover, vasoconstriction secondary 
to elevated angiotensin II levels increases left  ven-
tricular aft erload and causes further deterioration 
of systolic function. Th e latter partially accounts 
for the effi  cacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers in heart failure. Symptoms may also improve in 
some patients with careful, low-dose β-adrenergic 
blockade. Outcomes in heart failure are improved 
by administration of ACE inhibitors (and/or 
angiotensin receptor blockers), certain long-acting 
β-blockers (carvedilol or extended release meto-
prolol), and aldosterone inhibitors (spironolactone 
or eplerenone). 
 Circulating 
AVP 
levels, 
oft en 
markedly 
increased in patients with severe heart failure, will 
11
 Heart failure is less commonly associated with 
an elevated cardiac output. Th is form of heart fail-
ure is most oft en seen with sepsis, thyrotoxicosis, 
and other hypermetabolic states, which are typically 
associated with a low SVR. 
 COMPENSATORY 
MECHANISMS 
 Compensatory mechanisms generally present in 
patients with heart failure include increased pre-
load, activation of the sympathetic nervous system 
and the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, 
and increased release of AVP. Although these 
mechanisms can initially compensate for mild to 
moderate cardiac dysfunction, with increasing 
severity of dysfunction, they may actually contrib-
ute to the cardiac impairment. Many of the drug 
treatments of chronic heart failure serve to coun-
teract these mechanisms. 
 Increased Preload 
 An increase in ventricular size not only refl ects an 
inability to keep up with an increased circulating 
blood volume, but also serves to increase stroke vol-
ume by moving the heart up the Starling curve (see 
 Figure 20–4 ). Even when EF is reduced, an increase 
in ventricular end-diastolic volume can maintain a 
normal stroke volume. Worsening venous conges-
tion caused by the pooling of blood behind the fail-
ing ventricle and excessive ventricular dilatation can 
rapidly lead to clinical deterioration. Left  ventricu-
lar failure results in pulmonary vascular congestion 
and progressive transudation of fl uid, fi rst into the 
pulmonary interstitium and then into alveoli (pul-
monary edema). Right ventricular failure leads to 
systemic venous hypertension, which results in 
peripheral edema, hepatic congestion and dysfunc-
tion, and ascites. Dilatation of the annulus of either 
AV valve leads to valvular regurgitation, further 
impairing ventricular output. 
 Increased Sympathetic Tone 
 Sympathetic activation increases release of norepi-
nephrine from nerve endings in the heart and the 
368 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 CASE DISCUSSION
A Patient With a Short P–R Interval 
 A 38-year-old man is scheduled for endoscopic 
sinus surgery following a recent onset of head-
aches. He gives a history of having passed out 
at least once during one of these headaches. A 
preoperative electrocardiogram (ECG) is normal, 
except for a P–R interval of 0.116 sec with normal 
P-wave morphology . 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of the short P–R interval? 
 The P–R interval, which is measured from the 
beginning of atrial depolarization (P wave) to 
the beginning of ventricular depolarization (QRS 
complex), usually represents the time required for 
depolarization of both atria, the AV node, and the 
His–Purkinje system. Although the P–R interval can 
vary with heart rate, it is normally 0.12–0.2 sec in 
duration. Abnormally short P–R intervals can be 
seen with either low atrial (or upper AV junctional) 
rhythms or preexcitation phenomena. The two can 
usually be diﬀ erentiated by P-wave morphology: 
With a low atrial rhythm, atrial depolarization is 
retrograde, resulting in an inverted P wave in leads 
II, III, and aVF; with preexcitation, the P wave is nor-
mal during sinus rhythm. If the pacemaker rhythm 
originates from a lower AV junctional focus, the 
P wave may be lost in the QRS complex or may fol-
low the QRS . 
 What is preexcitation? 
 Preexcitation usually refers to early depolar-
ization of the ventricles by an abnormal conduc-
tion pathway from the atria. Rarely, more than 
one such pathway is present. The most common 
form of preexcitation is due to the presence of 
an accessory pathway (bundle of Kent) that con-
nects one of the atria with one of the ventricles. 
This abnormal connection between the atria and 
ventricles allows electrical impulses to bypass the 
AV node (hence the term bypass tract). The ability 
to conduct impulses along the bypass tract can 
be quite variable and may be only intermittent or 
rate dependent. Bypass tracts can conduct in both 
directions, retrograde only (ventricle to atrium), or, 
increase ventricular aft erload and are responsible 
for a defect in free water clearance that is commonly 
associated with hyponatremia. 
 Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is produced 
in the heart in response to myocyte distention. 
Elevated BNP concentration (>500 pg/mL) usually 
indicates heart failure, and measurement of BNP 
concentration can be used to distinguish between 
heart failure and lung disease as a cause of dyspnea. 
Recombinant BNP was developed as a vasodilator 
and inhibitor of the renin–angiotensin–aldoste-
rone system for use in patients with severe decom-
pensated heart failure, but outcomes were not 
improved with its use. 
 Ventricular Hypertrophy 
 Ventricular hypertrophy can occur with or without 
dilatation, depending on the type of stress imposed 
on the ventricle. When the heart is subjected to either 
pressure or volume overload, the initial response is 
to increase sarcomere length and optimally overlap 
actin and myosin. With time, ventricular muscle 
mass begins to increase in response to the abnormal 
stress. 
 In the volume-overloaded ventricle, the prob-
lem is an increase in diastolic wall stress. Th e 
increase in ventricular muscle mass is suffi  cient 
only to compensate for the increase in diameter: 
Th e ratio of the ventricular radius to wall thickness 
is unchanged. Sarcomeres replicate mainly in series, 
resulting in eccentric hypertrophy. Although ven-
tricular EF remains depressed, the increase in end-
diastolic volume can maintain normal at-rest stroke 
volume (and cardiac output). 
 Th e problem in a pressure-overloaded ven-
tricle is an increase in systolic wall stress. In this 
case, sarcomeres mainly replicate in parallel, result-
ing in concentric hypertrophy: Th e hypertrophy is 
such that the ratio of myocardial wall thickness to 
ventricular radius increases. As can be seen from 
Laplace’s law, systolic wall stress can then be nor-
malized. Ventricular hypertrophy, particularly that 
caused by pressure overload, usually results in pro-
gressive diastolic dysfunction. Th e most common 
reasons for isolated left  ventricular hypertrophy are 
hypertension and aortic stenosis. 
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
369 
slightly shortened with a left lateral bypass tract 
(the most common location). Preexcitation may 
be more apparent at fast heart rates because 
conduction slows through the AV node with 
increasing heart rates. Secondary ST-segment and 
T-wave changes are also common because of 
abnormal ventricular repolarization . 
 What is the clinical signiﬁ cance of preexcitation? 
 Preexcitation occurs in approximately 0.3% of 
the general population. An estimated 20% to 50% 
of aﬀ ected persons develop paroxysmal tachyar-
rhythmias, typically paroxysmal supraventricular 
tachycardia (PSVT). Although most patients are 
otherwise normal, preexcitation can be associated 
with other cardiac anomalies, including Ebstein’s 
anomaly, mitral valve prolapse, and cardiomyopa-
thies. Depending on its conductive properties, 
the bypass tract in some patients may predis-
pose them to tachyarrhythmias and even sudden 
death. Tachyarrhythmias include PSVT, atrial ﬁ bril-
lation, and, less commonly, atrial ﬂ utter. Ventricu-
lar ﬁ brillation can be precipitated by a critically 
timed premature atrial beat that travels down the 
bypass tract and catches the ventricle at a vulner-
able period. Alternatively, very rapid conduction 
of impulses into the ventricles by the bypass tract 
during atrial ﬁ brillation can rapidly lead to myo-
cardial ischemia, hypoperfusion, and hypoxia and 
culminate in ventricular ﬁ brillation . 
 Recognition of the preexcitation phenomenon 
is also important because its QRS morphology on 
the surface ECG can mimic bundle branch block, 
right ventricular hypertrophy, ischemia, myocar-
dial infarction, and ventricular tachycardia (during 
atrial ﬁ brillation) . 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of the 
history of syncope in this patient? 
 This patient should be evaluated preopera-
tively by a cardiologist for possible electrophysi-
ological studies, curative radiofrequency ablation 
of the bypass tract, and the need for perioperative 
drug therapy. Such studies can identify the location 
of the bypass tracts, reasonably predict the poten-
tial for malignant arrhythmias by programmed 
rarely, anterograde only (atrium to ventricle). The 
name  Wolﬀ –Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome is 
often applied to ventricular preexcitation associ-
ated with tachyarrhythmias . 
 How does preexcitation shorten 
the P–R interval? 
 In patients with preexcitation, the normal car-
diac impulse originating from the SA node is con-
ducted simultaneously through the normal (AV 
nodal) and anomalous (bypass tract) pathways. 
Because conduction is more rapid in the anoma-
lous pathway than in the AV nodal pathway, the 
cardiac impulse rapidly reaches and depolarizes 
the area of the ventricles where the bypass tract 
ends. This early depolarization of the ventricle is 
reﬂ ected by a short P–R interval and a slurred initial 
deﬂ ection (δ wave) in the QRS complex. The spread 
of the anomalous impulse to the rest of the ven-
tricle is delayed because it must be conducted by 
ordinary ventricular muscle, not by the much faster 
Purkinje system. The remainder of the ventricle is 
then depolarized by the normal impulse from the 
AV node as it catches up with the preexcitation 
front. Although the P–R interval is shortened, the 
resulting QRS is slightly prolonged and represents 
a fusion complex of normal and abnormal ventric-
ular depolarizations . 
 The P–R interval in patients with preexci-
tation depends on relative conduction times 
between the AV nodal pathway and the bypass 
pathway. If conduction through the former is fast, 
preexcitation (and the δ wave) is less prominent, 
and QRS will be relatively normal. If conduction 
is delayed in the AV nodal pathway, preexcita-
tion is more prominent, and more of the ventricle 
will be depolarized by the abnormally conducted 
impulse. When the AV nodal pathway is com-
pletely blocked, the entire ventricle is depolarized 
by the bypass pathway, resulting in a very short 
P–R interval, a very prominent δ wave, and a wide, 
bizarre QRS complex. Other factors that can aﬀ ect 
the degree of preexcitation include interatrial 
conduction time, the distance of the atrial end of 
the bypass tract from the SA node, and autonomic 
tone. The P–R interval is often normal or only 
370 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
conductivity or refractoriness and that can form 
a closed electrical loop; (2) unidirectional block 
in one pathway ( Figure 20–14A and  B ); (3) slow 
conduction or suﬃ  cient length in the circuit to 
allow recovery of the conduction block in the ﬁ rst 
pathway ( Figure 20–14C ); and (4) excitation of the 
initially blocked pathway to complete the loop 
( Figure 20–14D ). Reentry is usually precipitated by 
a premature cardiac impulse . 
 What is the mechanism of PSVT 
in patients with WPW syndrome? 
 If the bypass tract is refractory during antero-
grade conduction of a cardiac impulse, as during a 
critically timed atrial premature contraction (APC), 
and the impulse is conducted by the AV node, the 
same impulse can be conducted retrograde from 
the ventricle back into the atria via the bypass 
tract. The retrograde impulse can then depolarize 
the atrium and travel down the AV nodal pathway 
again, establishing a continuous repetitive cir-
cuit (circus movement). The impulse reciprocates 
between the atria and ventricles and conduction 
pacing, and assess the eﬃ  cacy of antiarrhythmic 
therapy if curative ablation is not possible. Ablation 
is reported to be curative in over 90% of patients. 
A history of syncope may be ominous because it 
may indicate the ability to conduct impulses very 
rapidly through the bypass tract, leading to sys-
temic hypoperfusion and perhaps predisposing 
the patient to sudden death . 
 Patients with only occasional asymptomatic 
tachyarrhythmias generally do not require inves-
tigation or prophylactic drug therapy. Those with 
frequent episodes of tachyarrhythmias or arrhyth-
mias associated with signiﬁ cant symptoms require 
drug therapy and close evaluation . 
 How do tachyarrhythmias generally develop? 
 Tachyarrhythmias develop as a result of either 
abnormal impulse formation or abnormal impulse 
propagation (reentry). Abnormal impulses result 
from enhanced automaticity, abnormal automatic-
ity, or triggered activity. Usually, only cells of the SA 
node, specialized atrial conduction pathways, AV 
nodal junctional areas, and the His–Purkinje system 
depolarize spontaneously. Because diastolic repo-
larization (phase 4) is fastest in the SA node, other 
areas of automaticity are suppressed. Enhanced or 
abnormal automaticity in other areas, however, can 
usurp pacemaker function from the SA node and 
lead to tachyarrhythmias. Triggered activity is the 
result of either early after-depolarizations (phase 2 
or 3) or delayed after-depolarizations (after phase 3). 
It consists of small-amplitude depolarizations that 
can follow action potentials under some condi-
tions in atrial, ventricular, and His–Purkinje tissue. If 
these after-depolarizations reach threshold poten-
tial, they can result in an extrasystole or repetitive 
sustained tachyarrhythmias. Factors that can pro-
mote the formation of abnormal impulses include 
increased catecholamine levels, electrolyte disor-
ders (hyperkalemia, hypokalemia, and hypercal-
cemia), ischemia, hypoxia, mechanical stretch, and 
drug toxicity (particularly digoxin) . 
 The most common mechanism for tachyar-
rhythmias is reentry. Four conditions are neces-
sary to initiate and sustain reentry ( Figure 20–14 ): 
(1) two areas in the myocardium that diﬀ er in 
 FIGURE 2014 A–D:  The mechanism of reentry. 
See text for description. 
A
B
C
D
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
371 
the atria and arrives to ﬁ nd diﬀ erent parts of the 
atria out of phase in recovery from the impulse. 
Once atrial ﬁ brillation is established, conduc-
tion into the ventricles most commonly occurs 
through the bypass tract only; because of the 
accessory pathway’s ability to conduct very rap-
idly (unlike the AV nodal pathway), the ventricu-
lar rate is typically very rapid (180–300 beats/
min). The majority of QRS complexes are bizarre, 
but periodic conduction of an impulse through 
the AV nodal pathway results in occasional nor-
mal-looking QRS complexes. Less commonly, 
impulses during atrial ﬁ brillation are conducted 
mainly through the AV nodal pathway (result-
ing in mostly normal QRS complexes) or through 
both the bypass tract and the AV nodal pathway 
(resulting in a mixture of normal, fusion, and 
bizarre QRS complexes). As stated previously, 
atrial ﬁ brillation in patients with WPW syndrome 
is a very dangerous arrhythmia . 
 What anesthetic agents can safely be used in 
patients with preexcitation? 
 Few data are available comparing the use 
of diﬀ erent anesthetic agents or techniques in 
patients with preexcitation. Almost all the volatile 
and intravenous agents have been used with equal 
success. Volatile anesthetics increase antegrade 
refractoriness in both normal and accessory path-
ways and increase the coupling interval (a measure 
of the ability of an extrasystole to induce tachycar-
dia). Propofol, opioids, and benzodiazepines seem 
to have little direct electrophysiological eﬀ ects, 
but can alter autonomic tone, generally reducing 
sympathetic outﬂ ow. Factors that tend to cause 
sympathetic stimulation and increased cardiac 
automaticity are undesirable. Premedication with 
a benzodiazepine helps reduce high sympathetic 
tone preoperatively. Agents that can increase 
sympathetic tone, such as ketamine and perhaps 
pancuronium in large bolus doses, should gener-
ally be avoided. Anticholinergics should be used 
cautiously; glycopyrrolate may be preferable to 
atropine. Endotracheal intubation should be car-
ried out only after the patient is deeply anesthe-
tized; pretreatment with a β-adrenergic blocker, 
alternates between the AV nodal pathway and the 
bypass tract. The term “concealed conduction” is 
often applied because the absence of preexcita-
tion during this arrhythmia results in a normal QRS 
that lacks a δ wave . 
 The circus movement less commonly involves 
anterograde conduction through the bypass tract 
and retrograde conduction through the AV nodal 
pathway. In such instances, the QRS has a δ wave 
and is completely abnormal; the arrhythmia can be 
mistaken for ventricular tachycardia . 
 What other mechanisms may be 
responsible for PSVT? 
 In addition to the WPW syndrome, PSVT can 
be caused by AV reentrant tachycardia, AV nodal 
reentrant tachycardia, and SA node and atrial 
reentrant tachycardias. Patients with AV reentrant 
tachycardia have an extranodal bypass tract simi-
lar to patients with WPW syndrome, but the bypass 
tract conducts only retrograde; preexcitation and 
a δ wave are absent. The PSVT may be initiated 
either by an APC or a ventricular premature con-
traction (VPC). A retrograde P wave is usually vis-
ible because atrial depolarization always follows 
ventricular depolarization . 
 Functional diﬀ erences in conduction and refrac-
toriness may occur within the AV node, SA node, 
or atria; a large bypass tract is not necessary. Thus, 
the circus movement may occur on a smaller scale 
within the AV node, SA node, or atria, respectively. 
PSVT is always induced during AV nodal reentry by 
an APC with a prolonged P–R interval; a retrograde 
P wave is either absent or buried in the QRS com-
plex. Another APC may terminate the arrhythmia . 
 PSVT associated with SA node or atrial reentry 
is always triggered by an APC. The P wave is usu-
ally visible and has a prolonged P–R interval. Its 
morphology is normal with SA nodal reentry and 
abnormal with atrial reentry . 
 How does atrial ﬁ brillation in patients 
with WPW syndrome diﬀ er from the 
arrhythmia in other patients? 
 Atrial ﬁ brillation can occur when a cardiac 
impulse is conducted rapidly retrograde up into 
372 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 How are antiarrhythmic agents selected for 
tachyarrhythmias? 
 Most antiarrhythmic agents act by altering 
myocardial cell conduction (phase 0), repolariza-
tion (phase 3), or automaticity (phase 4). Prolonga-
tion of repolarization increases the refractoriness of 
cells. Many antiarrhythmic drugs also exert direct 
or indirect autonomic eﬀ ects. Although antiar-
rhythmic agents are generally classiﬁ ed according 
to broad mechanisms of action or electrophysi-
ological eﬀ ects ( Table 20–7 ), the most commonly 
such as esmolol, may be useful. Light anesthesia, 
hypercapnia, acidosis, and even transient hypoxia 
will activate the sympathetic system and are to 
be avoided. A deep extubation and good post-
operative analgesia (without respiratory acidosis) 
may also help prevent the onset of arrhythmias. 
When patients with preexcitation are anesthe-
tized for electrophysiological study and surgical 
ablation, opioids, propofol, and benzodiazepines 
may be the agents least likely to alter conduction 
characteristics . 
 TABLE 207 Classiﬁ cation of antiarrhythmic agents.  1  
Class
Mechanism of Action
Agents
Intravenous Loading Dose
I
Blocks voltage-gated sodium channels; 
decreases slope of phase 0 ( V max )
Ia
Moderate depression of  V max , prolongs APD
Quinidine  2 – 4  
Procainamide (Pronestyl)  1 , 4  
Disopyramide (Norpace)  1 , 4  
NR
5–10 mg/kg
NA
Ib
Minimal eﬀ ect on  V max , shorten APD
Lidocaine
Phenytoin
Tocainide (Tonocard)
Mexiletine (Mexitil)
Moricizine (Ethmozine)
1–2 mg/kg
5–15 mg/kg
NA
NA
NA
Ic
Marked depression of  V max , 
minimal eﬀ ect of APD
Flecainide (Tambacor)
Propafenone (Rythmol)
NA
NA
II
Blocks β-adrenergic receptors
Esmolol (Brevibloc)
Metoprolol (Lopressor)
0.5 mg/kg
5–10 mg
III
Prolongs repolarization
Amiodarone (Cordarone)  5 – 7  
Sotalol (Betapace)  8  
Ibutilide (Corvert)
Dofetilide (Tikosyn)
150 mg
NA
1 mg
NA
IV
Blocks slow calcium channels
Verapamil (Calan)
Diltiazem (Cardizem)
2.5–10 mg
0.25–0.35 mg/kg
V
Various (miscellaneous agents)
Digoxin
Adenosine (Adenocard)
0.5–0.75 mg
6–12 mg
  1  V max , maximum velocity; APD, action potential duration; NR, not recommended; NA, not available for intravenous use.
  2  Also has antimuscarinic (vagolytic activity).
  3  Also blocks α-adrenergic receptors.
  4  Also prolongs repolarization.
  5  Also binds inactivated sodium channels.
  6  Also causes noncompetitive α- and β-adrenergic blockade.
  7  Also blocks slow calcium channels.
  8  Also has nonselective β-adrenergic blocking activity.
 
CHAPTER 20 Cardiovascular Physiology & Anesthesia 
373 
or supraventricular and whether acute control or 
chronic therapy is required. Intravenous agents 
are usually employed in the acute management of 
arrhythmias, whereas oral agents are reserved for 
chronic therapy ( Table 20–8 ) . 
used classiﬁ cation system is not perfect because 
some agents have more than one mechanism of 
action . 
 Selection of an antiarrhythmic agent generally 
depends on whether the arrhythmia is ventricular 
 TABLE 208 Clinical pharmacological properties of antiarrhythmic drugs.  1  
Drug
Eﬀ ect on 
SA Nodal 
Rate
Eﬀ ect on 
AV Nodal 
Refractory 
Period
PR 
Interval
QRS 
Duration
QT Interval
Usefulness in Arrhythmias
Half-Life
Supraventricular
Ventricular
Adenosine
Little
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
0
0
++++
?
<10 s
Amiodarone
↓↓  2  
↑↑
↑↑
↑
↑↑↑↑
+++
+++
(Weeks)
Bretylium
↑↓  3  
↑↓  3  
0
0
0
0
+
4h
Diltiazem
↑↓
↑↑
↑
0
0
+++
–
4–8 h
Disopyramide
↑↓  2 , 4  
↑↓  4  
↑↓  4  
↑↑
↑↑
+
+++
6–8 h
Dofetilide
↓?
0
0
0
↑↑
++
None
7 h
Esmolol
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
0
+
+
10 min
Flecainide
None
↑
↑
↑↑↑
0
+  5  
++++
20 h
Ibutilide
↓(?)
0
0
0
↑↑
++
?
6 h
Lidocaine
None  2  
None
0
0
0
None  6  
+++
1–2 h
Metopolol
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
0
+
+
8 h
Mexiletine
None  2  
None
0
0
0
None  7  
+++
12 h
Moricizine
None
None
↑
↑↑
0
None
+++
2–6 h7
Procainamide
↓  2  
↑↓  4  
↑↓  4  
↑↑
↑↑
+
+++
3–4 h
Propafenone
0
↑
↑
↑↑↑
0
+
+++
5–7 h
Quinidine
↑↓  2 , 4  
↑↓  4  
↑↓  4  
↑↑
↑↑
+
+++
6 h
Sotalol
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
↑↑↑
+++
+++
7 h
Tocainide
None  2  
None
0
0
0
None  6  
+++
12 h
Verapamil
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
0
+++
–
7 h
  1  Data from Katzung BG:  Basic and Clinical Pharmacology , 12th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
  2  May suppress diseased sinus nodes.
  3  Initial stimulation by release of endogenous norepinephrine followed by depression.
  4  Anticholingergic eﬀ ect and direct depressant action.
  5  Particularly in Wolﬀ –Parkinson–White syndrome.
  6  May be eﬀ ective in atrial arrhythmias caused by digitalis.
  7  Half-life of active metabolites is much longer.
374 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
be readily distinguishable from ventricular tachy-
cardia in these patients if wide-QRS tachycardia 
develops . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Balser JR: Th e rational use of intravenous amiodarone in 
the perioperative period. Anesthesiology 1997;86:974. 
 Colson P, Ryckwaert F, Coriat P: Renin angiotensin 
system antagonists and anesthesia. Anesth Analg 
1999;89:1143. 
 Eriksson H, Jalonen J, Heikkinen L: Levosimendan 
facilitates weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass in 
high risk coronary patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 
1997;11:1097. 
 Fontes M, Aronson S, Mathew J, et al: Pulse pressure and 
risk of adverse outcome in coronary bypass surgery. 
Anesth Analg 2008;107:1122. 
 Ganong WF:  Review of Medical Physiology , 23rd ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2009. 
 Gomez MN: Magnesium and cardiovascular disease. 
Anesthesiology 1998;89:222. 
 Groban L, Butterworth J: Perioperative management of 
chronic heart failure. Anesth Analg 2006;103:557. 
 Jacobsohn E, Chorn R, O’Connor M: Th e role of the 
vasculature in regulating venous return and cardiac 
output: Historical and graphical approach. Can J 
Anaesth 1997;44:849. 
 Ross S, Foex P: Protective eff ects of anaesthetics in 
reversible and irreversible ischemia-reperfusion 
injury. Br J Anaesth 1999;82:622. 
 Van Gelder IC, Tuinenburg AE, Schoonderwoerd BS, 
et al: Pharmacologic versus direct-current electrical 
cardioversion of atrial fl utter and fi brillation. Am J 
Cardiol 1999;84:147R. 
 Woods J, Monteiro P, Rhodes A: Right ventricular 
dysfunction. Curr Opin Crit Care 2007;13:535. 
 Yost CS: Potassium channels. Basic aspects, functional 
roles and medical signifi cance. Anesthesiology 
1999;90:1186. 
 Which agents are most useful for 
tachyarrhythmias in patients with WPW 
syndrome? 
 Cardioversion is the treatment of choice in 
hemodynamically compromised patients. Adenos-
ine is the drug of choice for PSVT because of its 
short duration of action. Small doses of phenyl-
ephrine (100 mcg), together with vagal maneuvers 
(carotid massage if not contraindicated by carotid 
occulsive disease), help support arterial blood 
pressure and may terminate the arrhythmia. The 
most useful pharmacological agents are class Ia 
drugs (eg, procainamide). These agents increase 
the refractory period and decrease conduction in 
the accessory pathway. Moreover, class Ia drugs 
frequently terminate and can suppress the recur-
rence of PSVT and atrial ﬁ brillation. Class Ic drugs 
and amiodarone are also useful because they slow 
conduction and prolong refractoriness in both the 
AV node and the accessory pathway. β-Adrenergic 
blocking agents may also be useful, particularly in 
controlling ventricular rate once these rhythms are 
established. Verapamil and digoxin are contrain-
dicated during atrial ﬁ brillation or ﬂ utter in these 
patients because they can dangerously acceler-
ate the ventricular response. Both types of agents 
decrease conduction through the AV node, favor-
ing conduction of impulses down the accessory 
pathway. The bypass tract is capable of conducting 
impulses into the ventricles much faster than the 
AV nodal pathway. Digoxin may also increase the 
ventricular response by shortening the refractory 
period and increasing conduction in accessory 
pathways. Although verapamil can terminate PSVT, 
its use in this setting may be hazardous because 
patients can subsequently develop atrial ﬁ brilla-
tion or ﬂ utter. Moreover, atrial ﬁ brillation may not 
 375
375
 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Cardiovascular Disease 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
Cardiovascular complications account for 
25% to 50% of deaths following noncardiac 
surgery. Perioperative myocardial infarction 
(MI), pulmonary edema, congestive heart 
failure, arrhythmias, and thromboembolism 
are most commonly seen in patients with 
preexisting cardiovascular disease. 
Regardless of the level of preoperative 
blood pressure control, many patients 
with hypertension display an accentuated 
hypotensive response to induction of 
anesthesia, followed by an exaggerated 
hypertensive response to intubation. 
Hypertensive patients may display an 
exaggerated response to both endogenous 
catecholamines (from intubation or surgical 
stimulation) and exogenously administered 
sympathetic agonists. 
Patients with extensive (three-vessel or left 
main) coronary artery disease, a history of 
MI, or ventricular dysfunction are at greatest 
risk of cardiac complications. 
Holter monitoring, exercise 
electrocardiography, myocardial perfusion 
scans, and echocardiography are important 
in determining perioperative risk and the 
need for coronary angiography; however, 
these tests are indicated only if their 
outcome would alter patient care. 
Sudden withdrawal of antianginal 
medication perioperatively—particularly 
β-blockers—can precipitate a sudden, 
rebound increase in ischemic episodes. 
1
2
3
4
5
The overwhelming priority in managing 
patients with ischemic heart disease is 
maintaining a favorable myocardial supply–
demand relationship. Autonomic-mediated 
increases in heart rate and blood pressure 
should be controlled by deep anesthesia 
or adrenergic blockade, and excessive 
reductions in coronary perfusion pressure or 
arterial oxygen content are to be avoided. 
Intraoperative detection of ischemia depends 
on recognition of electrocardiographic 
changes, hemodynamic manifestations, 
or regional wall motion abnormalities on 
transesophageal echocardiography. New 
ST-segment elevations are rare during 
noncardiac surgery and are indicative of 
severe ischemia, vasospasm, or infarction. 
The principal hemodynamic goals in 
managing mitral stenosis are to maintain 
a sinus rhythm (if present preoperatively) 
and to avoid tachycardia, large increases in 
cardiac output, and both hypovolemia and 
ﬂ uid overload by judicious administration of 
intravenous ﬂ uids. 
Anesthetic management of mitral 
regurgitation should be tailored to the severity 
of regurgitation and to the underlying left 
ventricular function. Factors that exacerbate 
the regurgitation, such as slow heart rates and 
acute increases in afterload, should be avoided. 
Excessive volume expansion can also worsen 
the regurgitation by dilating the left ventricle. 
6
7
8
9
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
21
—Continued next page
376 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
The presence of shunt ﬂ ow between the right 
and left hearts, regardless of the direction 
of blood ﬂ ow, mandates the meticulous 
exclusion of air bubbles or particulate 
material from intravenous ﬂ uids to prevent 
paradoxical embolism into the cerebral or 
coronary circulations. 
The goals of anesthetic management in patients 
with tetralogy of Fallot should be to maintain 
intravascular volume and SVR. Increases in PVR, 
such as might occur from acidosis or excessive 
airway pressures, should be avoided. The 
right-to-left shunting tends to slow the uptake 
of inhalation anesthetics; in contrast, it may 
accelerate the onset of intravenous agents. 
The transplanted heart is totally denervated, 
so direct autonomic inﬂ uences are absent. 
Moreover, the absence of reﬂ ex increases 
in heart rate can make patients particularly 
sensitive to rapid vasodilatation. Indirect 
vasopressors, such as ephedrine, are less 
eﬀ ective than direct-acting agents because 
of the absence of catecholamine stores in 
myocardial neurons. 
13
14
15
 Maintenance of normal sinus rhythm, heart 
rate, vascular resistance and intravascular 
volume is critical in patients with aortic 
stenosis. Loss of a normally timed atrial 
systole often leads to rapid deterioration, 
particularly when associated with 
tachycardia. Spinal and epidural anesthesia 
are relatively contraindicated in patients 
with severe aortic stenosis. 
 Bradycardia and increase in systemic 
vascular resistance (SVR) increase the 
regurgitant volume in patients with aortic 
regurgitation, whereas tachycardia can 
contribute to myocardial ischemia. Excessive 
myocardial depression should also be 
avoided. The compensatory increase in 
cardiac preload should be maintained, but 
excessive ﬂ uid replacement can readily 
result in pulmonary edema. 
 In patients with congenital heart disease, 
an increase in SVR relative to pulmonary 
vascular resistance (PVR) favors left-to-
right shunting, whereas an increase in PVR 
relative to SVR favors right-to-left shunting. 
10
11
12
 Cardiovascular diseases—particularly hypertensive, 
ischemic, congenital, and valvular heart disease—
are among the medical illnesses most frequently 
encountered in anesthetic practice and are a major 
cause of perioperative morbidity and mortality. 
Management of patients with these diseases contin-
ues to challenge the ingenuity and resources of the 
anesthesiologist. Th e adrenergic response to surgical 
stimulation and the circulatory eff ects of anesthetic 
agents, endotracheal intubation, positive-pressure 
ventilation, blood loss, fl uid shift s, and alterations 
in body temperature impose additional burdens on 
an oft en already compromised cardiovascular sys-
tem. Most anesthetic agents cause cardiac depres-
sion, vasodilatation, or both. Even anesthetics that 
have no direct circulatory eff ects may cause appar-
ent circulatory depression in severely compromised 
patients who are dependent on the enhanced sym-
pathetic activity characteristic of heart failure or 
acute blood loss. Decreased sympathetic activity 
as a consequence of the anesthetized state can lead 
to acute circulatory collapse. 
 Good anesthetic management of patients with 
cardiovascular disease requires a thorough knowl-
edge of normal cardiac physiology, the circulatory 
eff ects of the various anesthetic agents, and the 
pathophysiology and treatment of these diseases. 
Th e same principles used in treating cardiovascular 
diseases in patients not undergoing surgery should 
be used perioperatively. In most instances, the 
choice of anesthetic agent is not terribly important; 
on the other hand, knowing how the agent is used, 
understanding the underlying pathophysiology, and 
understanding how the two interact are critical. 
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
377
 Patients with severe cardiovascular illnesses 
commonly undergo both cardiac and noncardiac sur-
gery. Th e American College of Cardiology (ACC), in 
collaboration with the American Heart Association 
(AHA), have issued numerous guidelines related 
to the management of patients with heart disease, 
and many of their recommendations are relevant to 
patients undergoing anesthesia and invasive proce-
dures. Because guidelines change as new evidence 
becomes available, anesthesiologists are advised to 
review the AHA website for current evidence-based 
indications for the management of heart disease. 
 Perioperative Cardiovascular 
Evaluation and Preparation 
for Noncardiac Surgery 
 Th e prevalence of cardiovascular disease increases 
progressively with advancing age. Moreover, the 
number of patients over 65 years of age is expected to 
increase by 25% to 35% over the next two decades. 
 Cardiovascular complications account for 25% to 
50% of deaths following noncardiac surgery. 
Perioperative myocardial infarction (MI), pul-
monary edema, systolic and diastolic heart fail-
ure, arrhythmias, and thromboembolism are the most 
common diagnoses in patients with preexisting car-
diovascular disease. Th e incidence of postoperative 
cardiogenic pulmonary edema is approximately 2% in 
all patients over 40 years of age, but it is 6% in patients 
with a history of heart failure and 16% in patients with 
poorly compensated heart failure. Th e relatively high 
prevalence of cardiovascular disorders in surgical 
patients has given rise to attempts to defi ne  cardiac 
risk or the likelihood of intraoperative or postopera-
tive fatal or life-threatening cardiac complications. 
 In 2007, the ACC/AHA Task Force Report pro-
duced revised guidelines for perioperative evaluation. 
Th e revised guidelines stated that the patient’s medi-
cal history is critical in determining the requirements 
for preoperative cardiac evaluation and that certain 
conditions (eg, unstable coronary syndromes and 
decompensated heart failure) warrant cardiology 
intervention prior to all but emergency procedures 
( Table 21–1 ). Th e history should also review any 
past procedures, such as cardioverter defi brillator 
implants, coronary stents, and other interventions. 
1
 TABLE 211 Active cardiac conditions for 
which the patient should undergo evaluation 
and treatment before noncardiac surgery 
(class I, level of evidence: B). 
Condition
Examples
Unstable coronary 
syndromes
Unstable or severe angina 1 
(CCS class III or IV)  2  
Recent MI  3  
Decompensated HF 
(NYHA functional 
class IV; worsening 
or new-onset HF)
Significant arrhythmias
High-grade atrioventricular 
block
Mobitz II atrioventricular 
block
Third-degree atrioventricular 
heart block
Symptomatic ventricular 
arrhythmias
Supraventricular arrhythmias 
(including atrial 
fibrillation) with 
uncontrolled ventricular 
rate (HR greater than 
100 bpm at rest)
Symptomatic bradycardia
Newly recognized ventricular 
tachycardia
Severe valvular disease
Severe aortic stenosis 
(mean pressure 
gradient greater than 
40 mm Hg, aortic valve 
area less than 1.0 cm 2 , 
or symptomatic)
Symptomatic mitral 
stenosis (progressive 
dyspnea on exertion, 
exertional presyncope, 
or HF)
CCS indicates Canadian Cardiovascular Society; HF, heart failure; 
HR, heart rate; MI, myocardial infarction; NYHA, New York Heart 
Association.
1 According to Campeau L. Letter: Grading of angina pectoris. 
Circulation. 1976;54:522-523.
 2  May include “stable” angina in patients who are unusually 
sedentary.
 3  The American College of Cardiology National Database Library 
deﬁ nes recent MI as more than 7 days but less than or equal to 
1 month (within 30 days).
Reproduced, with permission from Fleisher L, Beckman J, Brown 
K, et al: ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular 
evaluation and care for noncardiac surgery. Circulation 2007;116:
1971-1996.
378 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 • Cerebral vascular disease (stroke) 
 • High-risk surgery (vascular, thoracic, 
abdominal, orthopedic) 
 • Diabetes mellitus 
 • Preoperative creatinine >2 mg/dL 
 Recent ACC/AHA guidelines identify con-
ditions that are a major cardiac risk and warrant 
intensive management prior to all but emergent 
surgery. Th ese conditions include: unstable coro-
nary syndromes (recent MI, unstable angina), 
decompensated heart failure, signifi cant arrhyth-
mias, and severe valvular heart disease. Th e ACC/
AHA guidelines identify an MI within 7 days, or 
one within 1 month with myocardium at risk for 
ischemia, as “active” cardiac conditions. On the 
other hand, evidence of past MI with no myocar-
dium thought at ischemic risk is considered a low 
risk for perioperative infarction aft er noncardiac 
surgery. 
 Th e ACC/AHA guidelines suggest a stepwise 
approach to preoperative cardiac evaluation. Th eir 
recommendations are classifi ed as follows: 
 • Class I: Benefi ts >> risk 
 • Class IIa: Benefi ts >> risk, but scientifi c 
evidence incomplete 
Additionally, the patient’s ability to perform the tasks 
of daily living should be assessed as a guide to deter-
mine functional capacity. A patient with a history of 
cardiac disease and advanced age, but good exercise 
tolerance, will likely have a lower perioperative risk 
than a similar individual with dyspnea aft er minimal 
physical activity ( Table 21–2 ). 
 Th e patient’s history should also seek signs 
of other disease processes that frequently accom-
pany heart disease. Cardiac patients oft en present 
with obstructive pulmonary disease, reduced renal 
function, and diabetes mellitus. 
 A physical examination should be performed on 
all patients, and the heart and lungs should be aus-
cultated. Th e physical examination is especially use-
ful in patients with certain conditions. For example, 
if a murmur suggestive of aortic stenosis is detected, 
additional ultrasound evaluation will likely be war-
ranted, as aortic stenosis substantially increases the 
risks in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. 
 Th e following conditions are associated with 
increased risk: 
 • Ischemic heart disease (history of MI, evidence 
on electrocardiogram [ECG], chest pain) 
 • Congestive heart failure (dyspnea, pulmonary 
edema) 
 TABLE 212 Estimated energy requirements for various activities. 
Can you ...
Can you ...
1 MET
Take care of yourself?
4 METs
Climb a flight of stairs or walk up a hill?
Eat, dress, or use the toilet?
Walk on level ground at 4 mph (6.4 kph)?
Walk indoors around the house?
Run a short distance?
Walk a block or 2 on level ground at 2 
to 3 mph (3.2 to 4.8 kph)?
Do heavy work around the house like scrubbing 
floors or lifting or moving heavy furniture?
4 METs
Do light work around the house like 
dusting or washing dishes?
Participate in moderate recreational activities like 
golf, bowling, dancing, doubles tennis, or 
throwing a baseball or football?
Greater 
than 10 
METs
Participate in strenuous sports like swimming, 
singles tennis, football, basketball, or skiing?
kph indicates kilometers per hour; MET, metabolic equivalent; and mph, miles per hour.
Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from Hlatky MA, Boineau RE, Higginbotham MB, et al. A brief self-administered 
questionnaire to determine functional capacity (the Duke Activity Status Index). Am J Cardiol. 1989;64:651-654.
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
379 
with three clinical risk factors. Likewise, such test-
ing might be indicated in patients with one or two 
clinical risk factors scheduled for vascular or inter-
mediate-risk surgery.  Table 21–3 classifi es surgical 
procedures according to risk. 
 Th e ACC/AHA guidelines also provide specifi c 
recommendations regarding various conditions likely 
to be encountered perioperatively. 
 CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE 
 Th e ACC/AHA guidelines note that only the subset 
of patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) who 
would benefi t from revascularization, irrespective 
of their need for a nonemergent surgical procedure, 
would likely benefi t from preoperative coronary 
interventions. Consequently, the indications for the 
testing of such patients as candidates for a coronary 
intervention are unrelated to their presenting for 
surgery and depend only on whether such evalua-
tion would be indicated as part of general medical 
management. 
 • Class IIb: Benefi ts ≥ risk, and scientifi c 
evidence incomplete 
 • Class III: Risks >>benefi ts 
 Class I recommendations are as follows: 
 • Patients who have a need for emergency 
noncardiac surgery should proceed to the 
operating room with perioperative surveillance 
and postoperative risk factor management 
 • Patients with active cardiac conditions should 
be evaluated by a cardiologist and treated 
according to ACC/AHA guidelines 
 • Patients undergoing low-risk procedures 
should proceed to surgery 
 • Patients with poor exercise tolerance (<4 
metabolic equivalents [METs]) and no known 
risk factors should proceed to surgery 
 Class IIa recommendations are as follows: 
 • Patients with a functional capacity >4 METs 
and without symptoms should proceed to 
surgery 
 • Patients with a functional capacity <4 METs 
or those with an unknown functional capacity 
with three or more clinical risk factors 
scheduled for vascular surgery should be tested, 
if management is likely to change based on 
the results 
 • Patients with a functional capacity <4 METs 
or those with an unknown functional capacity 
with three or more clinical risk factors 
scheduled for intermediate-risk surgery 
should proceed to surgery with heart rate 
control 
 • Patients with a functional capacity <4 METs 
or those with an unknown functional capacity 
with one or two clinical risk factors who are 
scheduled for vascular or intermediate-risk 
surgery should proceed to surgery with heart 
rate control 
 Th e ACC/AHA guidelines also note, as class IIb 
recommendations, that noninvasive testing might 
be considered  if patient management changes in 
patients with poor or unknown functional capacity 
or in patients undergoing intermediate-risk surgery 
 TABLE 213 Cardiac risk 1 stratiﬁ cation for 
noncardiac surgical procedures. 
Risk Stratiﬁ cation
Procedure Examples
Vascular (reported cardiac 
risk often more than 5%)
 Aortic and other major 
vascular surgery 
 Peripheral vascular surgery 
Intermediate (reported 
cardiac risk generally 
1% to 5%)
 Intraperitoneal and 
intrathoracic surgery 
 Carotid endarterectomy 
 Head and neck surgery 
 Orthopedic surgery 
 Prostate surgery 
Low 2 (reported cardiac risk 
generally less than 1%)
 Endoscopic procedures 
 Superficial procedure 
 Cataract surgery 
 Breast surgery 
 Ambulatory surgery 
 1 Combined incidence of cardiac death and nonfatal myocardial 
infarction.
 2 These procedures do not generally require further preoperative 
cardiac testing.
Fleisher L, Beckman J, Brown K, et al: ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac 
surgery. Circulation 2007;116:1971-1996.
380 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Epidemiological studies demonstrate a direct 
and continuous correlation between both diastolic 
and systolic blood pressures and mortality rates. Th e 
defi nition of systemic hypertension is arbitrary: a 
consistently elevated diastolic blood pressure greater 
than 90 mm Hg or a systolic pressure greater than 
140 mm Hg. A common classifi cation scheme is 
listed in  Table 21–4 . Borderline hypertension is said 
to exist when the diastolic pressure is 85–89 mm Hg 
or the systolic pressure is 130–139 mm Hg. Whether 
patients with borderline hypertension are at some 
increased risk for cardiovascular complications 
remains unclear. Accelerated, or severe hypertension 
(stage 3), is defi ned as a recent, sustained, and pro-
gressive increase in blood pressure, usually with dia-
stolic blood pressures in excess of 110–119 mm Hg. 
Renal dysfunction is oft en present in such patients. 
Malignant hypertension is a true medical emer-
gency characterized by severe hypertension (>210/
120 mm Hg) oft en associated with papilledema and 
encephalopathy. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Hypertension can be either idiopathic (essential), 
or, less commonly, secondary to other medical con-
ditions such as renal disease, renal artery stenosis, 
primary hyperaldosteronism, Cushing’s disease, 
acromegaly, pheochromocytoma, pregnancy, or 
estrogen therapy. Essential hypertension accounts 
 HYPERTENSION 
 Patients with hypertension frequently present for 
elective surgical procedures. Some will have been 
eff ectively managed, but unfortunately, many others 
will not have been. Hypertension is a leading cause 
of death and disability in most Western societies and 
the most prevalent preoperative medical abnormal-
ity in surgical patients, with an overall prevalence 
of 20% to 25%. Long-standing uncontrolled hyper-
tension accelerates atherosclerosis and hypertensive 
organ damage. Hypertension is a major risk factor 
for cardiac, cerebral, renal, and vascular disease. 
 Complications of hypertension include MI, con-
gestive heart failure, stroke, renal failure, periph-
eral occlusive disease, and aortic dissection . Th e 
presence of left  ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in 
hypertensive patients may be an important predic-
tor of cardiac mortality. However, systolic blood 
pressures below 180 mm Hg, and diastolic pressures 
below 110 mm Hg, have not been associated with 
increased perioperative risks. When patients present 
with systolic blood pressures greater than 180 mm 
Hg and diastolic pressures greater than 110 mm Hg, 
anesthesiologists face the dilemma of delaying sur-
gery to allow optimization of oral antihypertensive 
therapy, but adding the risk of a surgical delay versus 
proceeding with surgery and achieving blood pres-
sure control with rapidly acting intravenous agents. 
Intravenous β-blockers can be useful to treat preop-
erative hypertension. Of note, patients with preop-
erative hypertension are more likely than others to 
develop intraoperative hypotension. Th is is particu-
larly frequent in patients treated with angiotensin 
receptor blockers and/or angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. 
 Blood pressure measurements are aff ected by 
many variables, including posture, time of day or 
night, emotional state, recent activity, and drug 
intake, as well as the equipment and technique used. 
A diagnosis of hypertension cannot be made by one 
preoperative reading, but requires confi rmation by 
a history of consistently elevated measurements. 
Although preoperative anxiety or pain may produce 
some degree of hypertension in normal patients, 
patients with a history of hypertension generally 
exhibit greater preoperative elevations in blood 
pressure. 
 TABLE 214 Classiﬁ cation of blood 
pressure (adults). 
Category of 
Blood Pressure
Systolic 
Pressure (mm Hg)
Diastolic 
Pressure (mm Hg)
Normal
<130
<85
High normal
130–139
85–89
Hypertension
Stage 1/mild
140–159
90–99
Stage 2/moderate
160–179
100–109
Stage 3/severe
180–209
110–119
Stage 4/very severe
>210
>120
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
381 
outcomes, irrespective of the presence of hyperten-
sion. In many patients, the “guideline specifi ed” 
agents will also be more than suffi  cient to control 
hypertension. 
 Patients with moderate to severe hyperten-
sion oft en require two or three drugs for control. 
Th e combination of a diuretic with a β-adrenergic 
blocker and an ACE inhibitor is oft en eff ective when 
single-drug therapy is not. As previously noted, ACE 
inhibitors (or ARBs) prolong survival in patients 
with congestive heart failure, left  ventricular dys-
function, or a prior MI. Familiarity with the names, 
mechanisms of action, and side eff ects of commonly 
used antihypertensive agents is important for anes-
thesiologists ( Table 21–5 ). 
 PREOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT 
 A recurring question in anesthetic practice is the 
degree of preoperative hypertension that is accept-
able for patients scheduled for elective surgery. 
Except for optimally controlled patients, most hyper-
tensive patients present to the operating room with 
some degree of hypertension. Although data suggest 
that even moderate preoperative hypertension (dia-
stolic pressure <90–110 mm Hg) is not clearly statis-
tically associated with  postoperative complications, 
other data indicate that the untreated or poorly con-
trolled hypertensive patient is more apt to experi-
ence  intraoperative episodes of myocardial ischemia, 
arrhythmias, or both hypertension and hypotension. 
Intraoperative adjustments in anesthetic depth and 
use of vasoactive drugs should reduce the incidence 
of postoperative complications referable to poor 
preoperative control of hypertension. 
 Although patients should ideally undergo 
elective surgery only when rendered normoten-
sive, this is not always feasible or necessarily desir-
able because of altered cerebral autoregulation. 
Excessive reductions in blood pressure can com-
promise cerebral perfusion. Moreover, the deci-
sion to delay or to proceed with surgery should be 
individualized, based on the severity of the preop-
erative blood pressure elevation; the likelihood of 
coexisting myocardial ischemia, ventricular dys-
function, or cerebrovascular or renal complica-
tions; and the surgical procedure (whether major 
for 80% to 95% of cases and may be associated with 
an abnormal baseline elevation of cardiac output, 
systemic vascular resistance (SVR), or both. An 
evolving pattern is commonly seen over the course 
of the disease, where cardiac output returns to (or 
remains) normal, but SVR becomes abnormally 
high. Th e chronic increase in cardiac aft erload results 
in concentric LVH and altered diastolic function. 
Hypertension also alters cerebral autoregulation, 
such that normal cerebral blood fl ow is maintained 
in the face of high blood pressures; autoregulation 
limits may be in the range of mean blood pressures 
of 110–180 mm Hg. 
 Th e mechanisms responsible for the changes 
observed in hypertensive patients seem to involve 
vascular hypertrophy, hyperinsulinemia, abnormal 
increases in intracellular calcium, and increased 
intracellular sodium concentrations in vascu-
lar smooth muscle and renal tubular cells. Th e 
increased intracellular calcium presumably results 
in increased arteriolar tone, whereas the increased 
sodium concentration impairs renal excretion of 
sodium. Sympathetic nervous system overactivity 
and enhanced responses to sympathetic agonists 
are present in some patients. Hypertensive patients 
sometimes display an exaggerated response to 
vasopressors and vasodilators. Overactivity of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system seems to 
play an important role in patients with accelerated 
hypertension. 
 Long-Term Treatment 
 Eff ective drug therapy reduces the progression of 
hypertension and the incidence of stroke, conges-
tive heart failure, CAD, and renal damage. Eff ective 
treatment can also delay and sometimes reverse con-
comitant pathophysiological changes, such as LVH 
and altered cerebral autoregulation. 
 Some patients with mild hypertension require 
only single-drug therapy, which may consist of a thi-
azide diuretic, ACE inhibitor, angiotensin-receptor 
blocker (ARB), β-adrenergic blocker, or calcium 
channel blocker, although guidelines and outcome 
studies favor the fi rst three options. Concomitant 
illnesses should guide drug selection. All patients 
with a prior MI should receive a β-adrenergic 
blocker and an ACE inhibitor (or ARB) to improve 
382 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 TABLE 215 Oral antihypertensive agents. 
Category
Class
Subclass
Agent
Diuretics
Thiazide
Chlorothiazide (Diuril)
Chlorthalidone (Thalitone)
Hydrochlorothiazide (Microzide)
Indapamide (Lozol)
Metolazone (Zaroxolyn)
Potassium sparing
Spironolactone (Aldactone)
Triamterene (Dyrenium)
Amiloride (Midamor)
Loop
Bumetanide (Bumex)
Ethacrynic acid (Edecrin)
Furosemide (Lasix)
Torasemide (Demadex)
Sympatholytics
Adrenergic-receptor 
blockers
B
Acebutolol (Sectral)
Atenolol (Tenormin)
Betaxolol (Kerlone)
Bisoprolol (Zebeta)
Carteolol (Cartrol)
Metoprolol (Lopressor)
Nadolol (Corgard)
Penbutolol (Levatol)
Pindolol (Visken)
Propranolol (Inderal)
Timolol (Blocadren)
A
α 1 
Doxazosin (Cardura)
Prazosin (Minipress)
Terazosin (Hytrin)
α 1 +α 2 
Phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline)
α and β
Labetalol (Trandate)
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Central α 2 -agonists
Clonidine (Catapres)
Guanabenz (Wytensin)
Guanfacine (Tenex)
Methyldopa (Aldomet)
surgically induced changes in cardiac preload or 
aft erload are anticipated). With rare exceptions, 
antihypertensive drug therapy should be con-
tinued up to the time of surgery. Some clinicians 
withhold ACE inhibitors and ARBs on the morn-
ing of surgery because of their association with 
an increased incidence of intraoperative hypoten-
sion; however, withholding these agents increases 
the risk of marked perioperative hypertension and 
the need for parenteral antihypertensive agents. 
It also requires the surgical team to remember to 
(continued)
restart the medication aft er surgery. Th e decision to 
delay elective surgical procedures in patients with 
sustained preoperative diastolic blood pressures 
higher than 110 mm  Hg should be made when 
the perceived benefi ts of delayed surgery exceed 
the risks. Unfortunately, there are few appropriate 
studies to guide the decision-making. 
 History 
 Th e preoperative history should inquire into the 
severity and duration of the hypertension, the 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
383 
TABLE 215 Oral antihypertensive agents. (continued)
Category
Class
Subclass
Agent
Vasodilators
Calcium channel blockers
Benzothiazepine
Diltiazem  1  (Tiazac)
Phenylalkylamines
Verapamil  1  (Calan SR)
Dihydropyridines
Amlodipine (Norvasc)
Felodipine (Plendil)
Isradipine  1  (Dynacirc)
Nicardipine  1  (Cardene)
Nifedipine  1  (Procardia XL)
Nisoldipine (Sular)
ACE inhibitors  2  
Benazepril (Lotensin)
Captopril (Capoten)
Enalapril (Vasotec)
Fosinopril (Monopril)
Lisinopril (Zestril)
Moexipril (Univasc)
Perindopril (Aceon)
Quinapril (Accupril)
Ramipril (Altace)
Trandopril (Mavik)
Angiotensin-receptor 
antagonists
Candesartan (Atacand)
Eprosartan (Tevetan)
Irbesartan (Avapro)
Losartan (Cozaar)
Olmesartan (Benicar)
Telmisartan (Micardis)
Valsartan (Diovan)
Direct vasodilators
Hydralazine (Apresoline)
Minoxidil
  1  Extended release.
  2  ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme.
drug therapy currently prescribed, and the pres-
ence or absence of hypertensive complications. 
Symptoms of myocardial ischemia, ventricular 
failure, impaired cerebral perfusion, or peripheral 
vascular disease should be elicited, as well as the 
patient’s record of compliance with the drug regi-
men. Th e patient should be questioned regarding 
chest pain, exercise tolerance, shortness of breath 
(particularly at night), dependent edema, postural 
lightheadedness, syncope, episodic visual dis-
turbances or episodic neurologic symptoms, and 
claudication. Adverse eff ects of current antihyper-
tensive drug therapy ( Table 21–6 ) should also be 
identifi ed. 
 Physical Examination & 
Laboratory Evaluation 
 Ophthalmoscopy is useful in hypertensive patients. 
Visible changes in the retinal vasculature usually 
parallel the severity and progression of arterioscle-
rosis and hypertensive damage in other organs. An 
S 4 cardiac gallop is common in patients with LVH. 
Other physical fi ndings, such as pulmonary rales 
and an S 3 cardiac gallop, are late fi ndings and indi-
cate congestive heart failure. Blood pressure can be 
measured in both the supine and standing positions. 
Orthostatic changes can be due to volume deple-
tion, excessive vasodilatation, or sympatholytic drug 
384 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
on a chest radiograph does not exclude ventricular 
hypertrophy. Echocardiography is a sensitive test of 
LVH and can be used to evaluate ventricular systolic 
and diastolic functions in patients with symptoms 
of heart failure. Chest radiographs are rarely useful 
in an asymptomatic patient, but may show a boot-
shaped heart (suggestive of LVH), frank cardiomeg-
aly, or pulmonary vascular congestion. 
 Renal function is best evaluated by measure-
ment of serum creatinine and blood urea nitro-
gen levels. Serum electrolyte levels (K) should be 
determined in patients taking diuretics or digoxin 
or those with renal impairment. Mild to moder-
ate hypokalemia (3–3.5 mEq/L) is oft en seen in 
patients taking diuretics, but does not have adverse 
outcome eff ects. Potassium replacement should be 
undertaken only in patients who are symptomatic 
therapy; preoperative fl uid administration can pre-
vent severe hypotension aft er induction of anesthe-
sia in these patients. Although asymptomatic carotid 
bruits are usually hemodynamically insignifi cant, 
they may be refl ective of atherosclerotic vascular 
disease that may aff ect the coronary circulation. 
When a bruit is detected, further workup should be 
guided by the urgency of the scheduled surgery and 
the likelihood that further investigations, if diag-
nostic, would result in a change in therapy. Doppler 
studies of the carotid arteries can be used to defi ne 
the extent of carotid disease. 
 Th e ECG is oft en normal, but in patients with 
a long history of hypertension, it may show evi-
dence of ischemia, conduction abnormalities, an old 
infarction, or LVH or strain. A normal ECG does not 
exclude CAD or LVH. Similarly, a normal heart size 
 TABLE 216 Adverse eﬀ ects of long-term antihypertensive therapy. 
Class
Adverse Eﬀ ects
 Diuretics 
Thiazide
Hypokalemia, hyponatremia, hyperglycemia, hyperuricemia, hypomagnesemia, 
hyperlipidemia, hypercalcemia
Loop
Hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, metabolic alkalosis
Potassium sparing
Hyperkalemia
 Sympatholytics 
β-Adrenergic blockers
Bradycardia, conduction blockade, myocardial depression, enhanced bronchial tone, 
sedation, fatigue, depression
α-Adrenergic blockers
Postural hypertension, tachycardia, fluid retention
Central α 2 -agonists
Postural hypotension, sedation, dry mouth, depression, decreased anesthetic requirements, 
bradycardia, rebound hypertension, positive Coombs test and hemolytic anemia 
(methyldopa), hepatitis (methyldopa)
Ganglionic blockers
Postural hypotension, diarrhea, fluid retention, depression (reserpine)
 Vasodilators 
Calcium channels blockers
Cardiac depression, bradycardia, conduction blockade (verapamil, diltiazem), peripheral 
edema (nifedipine), tachycardia (nifedipine), enhanced neuromuscular nondepolarizing 
blockade
ACE inhibitors  1  
Cardiac depression, bradycardia, conduction blockade (verapamil, diltiazem), peripheral 
edema (nifedipine), tachycardia (nifedipine), enhanced neuromuscular nondepolarizing 
blockade
Angiotensin-receptor 
antagonists
Hypotension, renal failure in bilateral renal artery stenosis, hyperkalemia 
Direct vasodilators
Reflex tachycardia, fluid retention, headache, systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome 
(hydralazine), pleural or pericardial effusion (minoxidil)
  1  ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme.
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
385
Electrocardiographic monitoring should focus on 
detecting signs of ischemia. Urinary output should 
generally be monitored with an indwelling urinary 
catheter in patients with a preexisting renal impair-
ment who are undergoing procedures expected to 
last more than 2 hr. When invasive hemodynamic 
monitoring is used, reduced ventricular compli-
ance (see  Chapter 20 ) is oft en apparent in patients 
with ventricular hypertrophy; these patients may 
require more intravenous fl uid to produce a higher 
fi lling pressure to maintain adequate left  ventricular 
end-diastolic volume and cardiac output. Volume 
administration in patients with decreased ventricu-
lar compliance can also result in elevated pulmonary 
arterial pressures and pulmonary congestion. 
 Induction 
 Induction of anesthesia and endotracheal intubation 
are oft en associated with hemodynamic instability in 
hypertensive patients.  Regardless of the level of 
preoperative blood pressure control, many 
patients with hypertension display an accentuated 
hypotensive response to induction of anesthesia, fol-
lowed by an exaggerated hypertensive response to 
intubation. Many, if not most, antihypertensive agents 
and general anesthetics are vasodilators, cardiac 
depressants, or both. In addition, many hypertensive 
patients present for surgery in a volume-depleted 
state. Sympatholytic agents attenuate the normal pro-
tective circulatory refl exes, reducing sympathetic 
tone and enhancing vagal activity. 
 Up to 25% of hypertensive patients may exhibit 
severe hypertension following endotracheal intuba-
tion. Prolonged laryngoscopy should be avoided. 
Moreover, intubation should generally be performed 
under deep anesthesia (provided hypotension can 
be avoided). One of several techniques may be used 
before intubation to attenuate the hypertensive 
response: 
 • Deepening anesthesia with a potent volatile 
agent 
 • Administering a bolus of an opioid (fentanyl, 
2.5–5 mcg/kg; alfentanil, 15–25 mcg/kg; 
sufentanil, 0.5–1.0 mcg/kg; or remifentanil, 
0.5–1 mcg/kg). 
2
or who are also taking digoxin. Hypomagnesemia 
is oft en present and may be a cause of perioperative 
arrhythmias. Hyperkalemia may be encountered in 
patients who are taking potassium-sparing diuretics 
or ACE inhibitors, particularly those with impaired 
renal function. 
 Premedication 
 Premedication reduces preoperative anxiety and is 
desirable in hypertensive patients. Mild to moderate 
preoperative hypertension oft en resolves following 
administration of an agent such as midazolam. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Objectives 
 Th e overall anesthetic plan for a hypertensive patient 
is to maintain an appropriate stable blood pressure 
range. Patients with borderline hypertension may be 
treated as normotensive patients. Th ose with long-
standing or poorly controlled hypertension, how-
ever, have altered autoregulation of cerebral blood 
fl ow; higher than normal mean blood pressures may 
be required to maintain adequate cerebral blood 
fl ow. Because most patients with long- standing 
hypertension are assumed to have some element 
of CAD and cardiac hypertrophy, excessive blood 
pressure elevations are undesirable. Hypertension, 
particularly in association with tachycardia, can 
precipitate or exacerbate myocardial ischemia, 
ventricular dysfunction, or both. Arterial blood 
pressure should generally be kept within 20% of 
preoperative levels. If marked hypertension (>180/
120 mm Hg) is present preoperatively, arterial blood 
pressure should be maintained in the high-normal 
range (150–140/90–80 mm Hg). 
 Monitoring 
 Most hypertensive patients do not require special 
intraoperative monitors. Direct intraarterial pres-
sure monitoring should be reserved for patients with 
wide swings in blood pressure and those undergo-
ing major surgical procedures associated with rapid 
or marked changes in cardiac preload or aft erload. 
386 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 D. Vasopressors 
 Hypertensive patients may display an exagger-
ated response to both endogenous catecholamines 
(from intubation or surgical stimulation) and 
exogenously administered sympathetic agonists. 
If a vasopressor is necessary to treat excessive 
hypotension, a small dose of a direct-acting agent, 
such as phenylephrine (25–50 mcg), may be use-
ful. Patients taking sympatholytics preoperatively 
may exhibit a decreased response to ephedrine. 
Vasopressin as a bolus or infusion can also be 
employed to restore vascular tone in the hypoten-
sive patient. 
 Intraoperative Hypertension 
 Intraoperative hypertension not responding to an 
increase in anesthetic depth (particularly with a vol-
atile agent) can be treated with a variety of parenteral 
agents ( Table 21–7 ). Readily reversible causes—
such as inadequate anesthetic depth, hypoxemia, 
or hypercapnia—should always be excluded before 
initiating antihypertensive therapy. Selection of a 
hypotensive agent depends on the severity, acute-
ness, and cause of hypertension; the baseline ven-
tricular function; the heart rate; the presence of 
bronchospastic pulmonary disease; and the anes-
thetist’s familiarity with each of the drug options. 
β-Adrenergic blockade alone or as a supplement is 
a good choice for a patient with good ventricular 
function and an elevated heart rate, but is relatively 
contraindicated in a patient with bronchospastic 
disease. Metoprolol, esmolol, or labetolol are read-
ily used intraoperatively. Nicardipine or clevidipine 
may be preferable to β-blockers for patients with 
bronchospastic disease. Nitroprusside remains the 
most rapid and eff ective agent for the intraopera-
tive treatment of moderate to severe hypertension. 
Nitroglycerin may be less eff ective, but is also use-
ful in treating or preventing myocardial ischemia. 
Fenoldopam, a dopamine agonist, is also a useful 
hypotensive agent; furthermore, it increases renal 
blood fl ow. Hydralazine provides sustained blood 
pressure control, but also has a delayed onset and can 
cause refl ex tachycardia. Th e latter is not seen with 
labetalol because of a combined α- and β-adrenergic 
blockade. 
 • Administering lidocaine, 1.5 mg/kg 
intravenously, intratracheally, or topically 
in the airway 
 • Achieving β-adrenergic blockade with esmolol, 
0.3–1.5 mg/kg; metoprolol 1–5 mg; 
or labetalol, 5–20 mg. 
 Choice of Anesthetic Agents 
 A. Induction Agents 
 Th e superiority of any one agent or technique over 
another has not been established. Propofol, barbi-
turates, benzodiazepines, and etomidate are equally 
safe for inducing general anesthesia in most hyper-
tensive patients. Ketamine by itself can precipitate 
marked hypertension; however, it is almost never 
used as a single agent. When administered with a 
small dose of another agent, such as a benzodiaz-
epine or propofol, ketamine’s sympathetic stimulat-
ing properties can be blunted or eliminated. 
 B. Maintenance Agents 
 Anesthesia may be safely continued with volatile 
agents (alone or with nitrous oxide), a balanced 
technique (opioid + nitrous oxide + muscle relax-
ant), or a total intravenous technique. Regardless 
of the primary maintenance technique, addition of 
a volatile agent or intravenous vasodilator gener-
ally allows convenient intraoperative blood pressure 
control. 
 C. Muscle Relaxants 
 With the possible exception of large bolus doses 
of pancuronium, any muscle relaxant can be used. 
Pancuronium-induced vagal blockade and neu-
ral release of catecholamines could exacerbate 
hypertension in poorly controlled patients, but, if 
given slowly, in small increments, pancuronium 
is unlikely to cause medically important increases 
in heart rate or blood pressure. Moreover, pan-
curonium can be useful in off setting excessive vagal 
tone induced by opioids or surgical manipulations. 
Hypotension following large (intubating) doses of 
atracurium may be accentuated in hypertensive 
patients. 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
387 
 ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Myocardial ischemia is characterized by a meta-
bolic oxygen demand that exceeds the oxygen sup-
ply. Ischemia can therefore result from a marked 
increase in myocardial metabolic demand, a reduc-
tion in myocardial oxygen delivery, or a combina-
tion of both. Common causes include coronary 
arterial vasospasm or thrombosis; severe hyperten-
sion or tachycardia (particularly in the presence 
of ventricular hypertrophy); severe hypotension, 
hypoxemia, or anemia; and severe aortic stenosis or 
regurgitation. 
 By far, the most common cause of myocardial 
ischemia is atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries. 
CAD is responsible for about 25% of all deaths in 
Western societies and is a major cause of periop-
erative morbidity and mortality. Th e overall inci-
dence of CAD in surgical patients is estimated to be 
between 5% and 10%. Major risk factors for CAD 
include hyperlipidemia, hypertension, diabetes, 
cigarette smoking, increasing age, male sex, and a 
positive family history. Other risk factors include 
 POSTOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Postoperative hypertension is common and should 
be anticipated in patients who have poorly con-
trolled hypertension. Close blood pressure moni-
toring should be continued in both the recovery 
room and the early postoperative period. In addi-
tion to myocardial ischemia and congestive heart 
failure, marked sustained elevations in blood 
pressure can contribute to the formation of wound 
hematomas and the disruption of vascular suture 
lines. 
 Hypertension in the recovery period is oft en mul-
tifactorial and enhanced by respiratory abnormali-
ties, anxiety and pain, volume overload, or bladder 
distention. Contributing causes should be corrected 
and parenteral antihypertensive agents given if nec-
essary. Intravenous labetalol is particularly useful in 
controlling hypertension and tachycardia, whereas 
vasodilators are useful in controlling blood pressure 
in the setting of a slow heart rate. When the patient 
resumes oral intake, preoperative medications should 
be restarted. 
 TABLE 217 Parenteral agents for the acute treatment of hypertension. 
Agent
Dosage Range
Onset
Duration
Nitroprusside
0.5–10 mcg/kg/min
30–60
1–5 min
Nitroglycerin
0.5–10 mcg/kg/min
1 min
3–5 min
Esmolol
0.5 mg/kg over 1 min; 
50–300 mcg/kg/min
1 min
12–20 min
Labetalol
5–20 mg
1–2 min
4–8 hr
Metoprolol
2.5–5 mg
1–5 min
5–8 hr
Hydralazine
5–20 mg
5–20 min
4–8 hr
Clevidipine
1–32 mg/hr
1–3 min
5–15 min
Nicardipine
0.25–0.5 mg
5–15 mg/hr
1–5 min
3–4 hr
Enalaprilat
0.625–1.25 mg
6–15 min
4–6 hr
Fenoldopam
0.1–1.6 mg/kg/min
5 min
5 min
388 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
the coronary circulation. When a stenotic segment 
reaches 70% occlusion, maximum compensatory 
dilatation is usually present distally: blood fl ow is 
generally adequate at rest, but becomes inadequate 
with increased metabolic demand. An extensive col-
lateral blood supply allows some patients to remain 
relatively asymptomatic in spite of severe disease. 
Coronary vasospasm is also a cause of transient 
transmural ischemia in some patients; 90% of vaso-
spastic episodes occur at preexisting stenotic lesions 
in epicardial vessels and are oft en precipitated by 
a variety of factors, including emotional upset and 
hyperventilation (Prinzmetal’s angina). Coronary 
spasm is most oft en observed in patients who have 
angina with varying levels of activity or emotional 
stress (variable-threshold); it is least common with 
classic exertional (fi xed-threshold) angina. 
 Th e overall prognosis of patients with CAD is 
related to both the number and severity of coronary 
obstructions, as well as to the extent of ventricular 
dysfunction. 
 Treatment of Ischemic Heart Disease 
 Th e general approach in treating patients with isch-
emic heart disease is fi ve-fold: 
 • Correction of risk factors, with the hope of 
slowing disease progression. 
 • Modifi cation of the patient’s lifestyle to reduce 
stress and improve exercise tolerance. 
 • Correction of complicating medical conditions 
that can exacerbate ischemia (ie, hypertension, 
anemia, hypoxemia, hyperthyroidism, fever, 
infection, or adverse drug eff ects). 
 • Pharmacological manipulation of the 
myocardial oxygen supply–demand 
relationship. 
 • Correction of coronary lesions by percutaneous 
coronary intervention (angioplasty [with or 
without stenting] or atherectomy) or coronary 
artery bypass surgery. 
 Th e last three approaches are of direct relevance 
to anesthesiologists. Th e same principles should be 
applied in the care of these patients in both the oper-
ating room and the intensive care unit. 
obesity, a history of cerebrovascular or peripheral 
vascular disease, menopause, use of high-estrogen 
oral contraceptives (in women who smoke), and a 
sedentary lifestyle. 
 CAD may be clinically manifested by symp-
toms of myocardial necrosis (infarction), ischemia 
(usually angina), arrhythmias (including sudden 
death), or ventricular dysfunction (congestive heart 
failure). When symptoms of congestive heart failure 
predominate, the term “ischemic cardiomyopathy” 
is oft en used. 
 Unstable Angina 
 Unstable angina is defi ned as (1) an abrupt increase 
in severity, frequency (more than three episodes 
per day), or duration of anginal attacks (crescendo 
angina): (2) angina at rest; or (3) new onset of angina 
(within the past 2 months) with severe or frequent 
episodes (more than three per day). Unstable angina 
may occur following MI or be precipitated by non-
cardiac medical conditions (including severe ane-
mia, fever, infections, thyrotoxicosis, hypoxemia, 
and emotional distress) in previously stable patients. 
 Unstable angina, particularly when it is asso-
ciated with signifi cant ST-segment changes at rest, 
usually refl ects severe underlying coronary disease 
and frequently precedes MI. Plaque disruption with 
platelet aggregates or thrombi and vasospasm are fre-
quent pathological correlates. Critical stenosis in one 
or more major coronary arteries is present in more 
than 80% of patients with these symptoms. Patients 
with unstable angina require evaluation and treat-
ment, which may include admission to a coronary 
care unit and some form of coronary intervention. 
 Chronic Stable Angina 
 Anginal chest pains are most oft en substernal, exer-
tional, radiating to the neck or arm, and relieved 
by rest or nitroglycerin. Variations are common, 
including epigastric, back, or neck pain, or transient 
shortness of breath from ventricular dysfunction 
(anginal equivalent). Nonexertional ischemia and 
silent (asymptomatic) ischemia are recognized as 
fairly common occurrences. Patients with diabetes 
have an increased incidence of silent ischemia. 
 Symptoms are generally absent until the ath-
erosclerotic lesions cause 50% to 75% occlusion of 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
389 
be dependent on the presence of collaterals in the 
coronary circulation. 
 Nitrates can be used for both the treatment of 
acute ischemia and prophylaxis against frequent 
anginal episodes. Unlike β-blockers and calcium 
channel blockers, nitrates do not have a negative 
inotropic eff ect—a desirable feature in the presence 
of ventricular dysfunction. Intravenous nitroglyc-
erin can also be used for controlled hypotensive 
anesthesia. 
 B. Calcium Channel Blockers 
 Th e eff ects and uses of the most commonly used 
calcium channel blockers are shown in  Table 21–9 . 
Calcium channel blockers reduce myocardial oxy-
gen demand by decreasing cardiac aft erload and 
augment oxygen supply by increasing blood fl ow 
(coronary vasodilatation). Verapamil and diltiazem 
also reduce demand by slowing the heart rate. 
 Nifedipine’s potent eff ects on the systemic 
blood pressure may precipitate hypotension, refl ex 
tachycardia, or both; its fast-onset preparations 
(eg, sublingual) have been associated with MI in 
some patients. Its tendency to decrease aft erload 
generally off sets any negative inotropic eff ect. Th e 
slow-release form of nifedipine is associated with 
much less refl ex tachycardia and is more suitable 
than other agents for patients with ventricular 
 Th e most commonly used pharmacological 
agents are nitrates, β-blockers, and calcium channel 
blockers. Th ese drugs also have potent circulatory 
eff ects, which are compared in  Table 21–8 . Any of 
these agents can be used for mild angina. Calcium 
channel blockers are the drugs of choice for patients 
with predominantly vasospastic angina. β-Blockers 
improve the long-term outcome of patients with 
CAD. Nitrates are good agents for both types of 
angina. 
 A. Nitrates 
 Nitrates relax all vascular smooth muscle, but have a 
much greater eff ect on venous than on arterial vessels. 
Decreasing venous and arteriolar tone and reducing 
the eff ective circulating blood volume (cardiac pre-
load) reduce wall tension aft erload. Th ese eff ects tend 
to reduce myocardial oxygen demand. Th e prominent 
venodilatation makes nitrates excellent agents when 
congestive heart failure is also present. 
 Perhaps equally important, nitrates dilate the 
coronary arteries. Even minor degrees of dilatation 
at stenotic sites may be suffi  cient to increase blood 
fl ow, because fl ow is directly related to the fourth 
power of the radius. Nitrate-induced coronary vaso-
dilatation preferentially increases subendocardial 
blood fl ow in ischemic areas. Th is favorable redistri-
bution of coronary blood fl ow to ischemic areas may 
 TABLE 218 Comparison of antianginal agents.  1  
Calcium Channel Blockers
Cardiac Parameter
Nitrates
 Verapamil 
 Nifedipine 
Nicardipine 
Nimodipine 
 Diltiazem 
β-Blockers
Preload
↓↓
—
—
—
—/↑
Afterload
↓
↓
↓↓
↓
—/↓
Contractility 
—
↓↓
—
↓
↓↓↓
SA node automaticity
↑/—
↓↓
↑/—
↓↓
↓↓↓
AV conduction
—
↓↓↓
—
↓↓
↓↓↓
Vasodilatation
 Coronary
 Systemic
↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑
↑↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑
—/↓
—/↓
  1  SA, sinoatrial; AV, atrioventricular; ↑, increases; —, no change; ↓, decreases.
390 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
verapamil and diltiazem can potentiate depression 
of cardiac contractility and conduction in the AV 
node by volatile anesthetics. Nifedipine and simi-
lar agents can potentiate systemic vasodilatation by 
volatile and intravenous agents. 
 C. β-Adrenergic Blocking Agents 
 Th ese drugs decrease myocardial oxygen demand 
by reducing heart rate and contractility, and, in 
some cases, aft erload (via their antihypertensive 
eff ect). Optimal blockade results in a resting heart 
rate between 50 and 60 beats/min and prevents 
appreciable increases with exercise (<20 beats/min 
increase during exercise). Available agents diff er 
in receptor selectivity, intrinsic sympathomimetic 
(partial agonist) activity, and membrane-stabiliz-
ing properties ( Table 21–10 ). Membrane stabili-
zation, oft en described as a quinidine-like eff ect, 
results in antiarrhythmic activity. Agents with 
dysfunction. In contrast, verapamil and diltiazem 
have greater eff ects on cardiac contractility and 
atrioventricular (AV) conduction and therefore 
should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients with 
ventricular dysfunction, conduction abnormalities, 
or bradyarrhythmias. Diltiazem seems to be better 
tolerated than verapamil in patients with impaired 
ventricular function. Nicardipine, nimodipine, and 
clevidipine generally have the same eff ects as nife-
dipine; nimodipine is primarily used in preventing 
cerebral vasospasm following subarachnoid hemor-
rhage, whereas nicardipine is used as an intravenous 
arterial vasodilator. Clevidipine is an ultrashort–act-
ing arterial vasodilator. 
 Calcium channel blockers can have signifi cant 
interactions with anesthetic agents. All calcium 
channel blockers potentiate both depolarizing and 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents 
and the circulatory eff ects of volatile agents. Both 
 TABLE 219 Comparison of calcium channel blockers. 
Clinical Use
Agent
Route
Dosage  1  
Half-life
 Angina 
 Hypertension 
 Cerebral 
Vasospasm 
 Supraventricular 
Tachycardia 
Verapamil
PO
40–240 mg
5 hr
+
+
+
IV
5–15 mg
5 hr
+
+
Nifedipine
PO
30–180 mg
2 hr
+
+
SL
10 mg
2 hr
+
+
Diltiazem
PO
30–60 mg
4 hr
+
+
+
IV
0.25–0.35 mg/kg
4 hr
+
+
Nicardipine
PO
60–120 mg
2–4 hr
+
+
IV
0.25–0.5 mg/kg
2–4 hr
+
+
Nimodipine
PO
240 mg
2 hr
+
Bepridil  2  
PO
200–400 mg
24 hr
+
+
Isradipine
PO
2.5–5.0 mg
8 hr
+
Felodipine
PO
5–20 mg
9 hr
+
Amlodipine
PO
2.5–10 mg
30–50 hr
+
+
  1  Total oral dose per day divided into three doses unless otherwise stated.
  2  Also possesses antiarrhythmic properties.
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
391 
long-standing β-blocker therapy should have these 
agents continued perioperatively. Acute β-blocker 
withdrawal in the perioperative period places 
patients at a markedly increased risk of cardiac mor-
bidity and mortality. 
 Documentation of avoidance of β-blocker 
withdrawal is a frequent tool by which “quality” of 
anesthesia services can be assessed by regulatory 
agencies. 
 D. Other Agents 
 ACE inhibitors prolong survival in patients with 
congestive heart failure or left  ventricular dysfunc-
tion. Chronic aspirin therapy reduces coronary 
events in patients with CAD and prevents coronary 
intrinsic sympathomimetic properties are better tol-
erated by patients with mild to moderate ventricu-
lar dysfunction. Certain β-blockers (carvedilol and 
extended-duration metoprolol) improve survival 
in patients with chronic heart failure. Th is has not 
been shown to be a drug class eff ect. Blockade of 
β 2 -adrenergic receptors also can mask hypoglyce-
mic symptoms in patients with diabetes, delay meta-
bolic recovery from hypoglycemia, and impair the 
handling of large potassium loads. Cardioselective 
(β 1 -receptor-specifi c) agents, although generally 
better tolerated than nonselective agents in patients 
with reactive airways, must still be used cautiously 
in such patients. Th e selectivity of cardioselective 
agents tends to be dose dependent. Patients on 
 TABLE 2110 Comparison of β-adrenergic blocking agents. 
Agent
β 1 -Receptor 
Selectivity
Half-life
Sympathomimetic
α-Receptor 
Blockade
Membrane 
Stabilizing
Acebutolol
+
2–4 hr
+
+
Atenolol
++
5–9 hr
Betaxlol 
++
14–22 hr
Esmolol
++
9 min
Metoprolol
++
3–4 hr
±
Bisoprolol
+
9–12 hr
Oxprenolol
1–2 hr
+
+
Alprenolol
2–3 hr
+
+
Pindolol
3–4 hr
++
±
Penbutolol
5 hr
+
+
Carteolol
6 hr
+
Labetalol
4–8 hr
+
±
Propranolol
3–6 hr
++
Timolol
3–5 hr
Sotalol  1  
5–13 hr
Nadolol
10–24 hr
Carvedilol
6–8 hr
+
±
  1  Also possesses unique antiarrhythmic properties.
392 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
surgery or coronary angioplasty alone does not seem 
to substantially increase perioperative risk. In some 
studies, maintenance of chronic β-receptor block-
ers in the perioperative period has been shown to 
reduce perioperative mortality and the incidence of 
postoperative cardiovascular complications; how-
ever, other studies have shown an increase in stroke 
and death following preoperative introduction of 
β-blockers to “at risk” patients. Consequently, as with 
all drugs, the risks and benefi ts of initiating therapy 
with β-blockers in at risk patients must be consid-
ered. Like β-blockers, statins should be continued 
perioperatively in patients so routinely treated, as 
acute perioperative withdrawal of statins is associ-
ated with adverse outcomes. ACC/AHA guidelines 
suggest that β-blockers are useful in patients under-
going vascular surgery with evidence of ischemia on 
their evaluative workup (class I). 
 History 
 Th e history is of prime importance in patients with 
ischemic heart disease. Questions should encom-
pass symptoms, current and past treatment, com-
plications, and the results of previous evaluations. 
Th is information alone is usually enough to provide 
some estimate of disease severity and ventricular 
function. 
 Th e most important symptoms to elicit include 
chest pains, dyspnea, poor exercise tolerance, syn-
cope, or near syncope. Th e relationship between 
symptoms and activity level should be established. 
Activity should be described in terms of everyday 
tasks, such as walking or climbing stairs. Patients 
may be relatively asymptomatic despite severe CAD 
if they have a sedentary lifestyle. Patients with dia-
betes are particularly prone to silent ischemia. Th e 
patient’s description of chest pains may suggest 
a major role for vasospasm (variable-threshold 
angina). Easy fatigability or shortness of breath 
suggests impaired ventricular function. 
 A history of unstable angina or MI should 
include the time of its occurrence and whether it 
was complicated by arrhythmias, conduction dis-
turbances, or heart failure. Localization of the areas 
of ischemia is invaluable in deciding which elec-
trocardiographic leads to monitor intraoperatively. 
Arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities are 
and ischemic cerebral events in at-risk patients. 
Antiarrhythmic therapy in patients with complex 
ventricular ectopy who have signifi cant CAD and 
left  ventricular dysfunction should be guided by an 
electrophysiological study. Patients with inducible 
sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricu-
lar fi brillation are candidates for an automatic inter-
nal cardioverter-defi brillator (ICD). Treatment of 
ventricular ectopy (with the exception of sustained 
VT) in patients with good ventricular function does 
not improve survival and may increase mortality. In 
contrast, ICDs have been shown to improve survival 
in patients with advanced cardiomyopathy (ejection 
fraction <30%), even in the absence of demonstrable 
arrhythmias. 
 E. Combination Therapy 
 Moderate to severe angina frequently requires com-
bination therapy with two or all three classes of 
agents. Patients with ventricular dysfunction may 
not tolerate the combined negative inotropic eff ect of 
a β-blocker and a calcium channel blocker together; 
an ACE inhibitor is better tolerated and seems to 
improve survival. Similarly, the additive eff ect of 
a β-blocker and a calcium channel blocker on the 
AV node may precipitate heart block in susceptible 
patients. 
 PREOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Th e importance of ischemic heart disease—particu-
larly a history of MI—as a risk factor for periopera-
tive morbidity and mortality was discussed earlier in 
the chapter. Most studies confi rm that perioperative 
outcome is related to disease severity, ventricular 
function, and the type of surgery to be undertaken. 
 Patients with extensive (three-vessel or left 
main) CAD, a recent history of MI, or ventric-
ular dysfunction are at greatest risk of cardiac com-
plications. As mentioned above, current guidelines 
recommend revascularization when such treatment 
would be indicated irrespective of the patient’s need 
for surgery. 
 Chronic stable (mild to moderate) angina does 
not seem to increase perioperative risk substantially. 
Similarly, a history of prior coronary artery bypass 
3
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
393
 Th e chest fi lm can be used to exclude cardio-
megaly or pulmonary vascular congestion secondary 
to ventricular dysfunction. Rarely, calcifi cation of 
the coronaries, aorta, or the aortic valve may be seen 
on the chest radiograph; such is a more common 
fi nding on CT. 
 Specialized Studies 
 When used as screening tests for the general popula-
tion, noninvasive stress tests have a low predictabil-
ity in asymptomatic patients, but are suffi  ciently 
reliable in symptomatic patients with suspect lesions. 
 Holter monitoring, exercise electrocardiogra-
phy, myocardial perfusion scans, and echocar-
diography are important in determining perioperative 
risk and the need for coronary angiography; how-
ever, these tests are indicated only if their outcome 
would alter patient care. 
 Current ACC/AHA guidelines recommend 
noninvasive stress testing in patients scheduled 
for noncardiac surgery with active cardiac condi-
tions (class I). Th e current guidelines also suggest 
that there may be benefi t of such testing in patients 
with  three or more clinical risk factors and poor 
functional capacity (class IIa). Likewise, they sug-
gest that noninvasive testing can be of some possible 
benefi t in patients with one or two clinical risk fac-
tors undergoing intermediate risk or vascular sur-
gery (class IIb). What they do not recommend is the 
indiscriminate use of noninvasive cardiac testing 
in patients with no risk factors undergoing inter-
mediate-risk surgery. Consequently, indications 
for preoperative cardiac screening tests continue to 
narrow. 
 A. Holter Monitoring 
 Continuous 
ambulatory 
electrocardiographic 
(Holter) monitoring is useful in evaluating 
arrhythmias, antiarrhythmic drug therapy, and 
severity and frequency of ischemic episodes. Silent 
(asymptomatic) ischemic episodes are frequently 
found in patients with CAD. Frequent ischemic 
episodes on preoperative Holter monitoring cor-
relate well with intraoperative and postopera-
tive ischemia. Holter monitoring has an excellent 
negative predictive value for postoperative cardiac 
complications. 
4
more common in patients with previous infarction 
and in those with poor ventricular function. Th is 
latter group of patients will oft en have ICDs. 
 Physical Examination & Routine 
Laboratory Evaluation 
 Evaluation of patients with CAD is similar to that 
of patients with hypertension. Laboratory evalua-
tion in patients who have a history compatible with 
recent unstable angina and are undergoing emer-
gency procedures should include cardiac enzymes. 
Serum levels of cardiac-specifi c troponins, creatine 
kinase (MB isoenzyme), and lactate dehydrogenase 
(type 1 isoenzyme) are useful in excluding MI. 
 Th e baseline ECG is normal in 25% to 
50% of patients with CAD but no prior MI. 
Electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia oft en 
becomes apparent only during chest pain. Th e most 
common baseline abnormalities are nonspecifi c 
ST-segment and T-wave changes. Prior infarction is 
oft en manifested by Q waves or loss of R waves in 
the leads closest to the infarct. First-degree AV block, 
bundle-branch block, or hemiblock may be present. 
Persistent ST-segment elevation following MI may 
be indicative of a left  ventricular aneurysm. A long 
rate-corrected QT interval (QT c > 0.44 s) may refl ect 
the underlying ischemia, drug toxicity (usually class 
Ia antiarrhythmic agents, antidepressants, or phe-
nothiazines), electrolyte abnormalities (hypokale-
mia or hypomagnesemia), autonomic dysfunction, 
mitral valve prolapse, or, less commonly, a congeni-
tal abnormality. Patients with a long QT interval 
are at risk of developing ventricular arrhythmias—
particularly polymorphic VT (torsade de pointes), 
which can lead to ventricular fi brillation. Th e long 
QT interval refl ects nonuniform prolongation of 
ventricular repolarization and predisposes patients 
to reentry phenomena. In contrast to polymorphic 
ventricular arrhythmias with a normal QT interval, 
which respond to conventional antiarrhythmics, 
polymorphic tachyarrhythmias with a long QT inter-
val generally respond best to pacing or magnesium 
salts. Patients with congenital prolongation generally 
respond to β-adrenergic blocking agents. Left  stellate 
ganglion blockade is also eff ective and suggests that 
autonomic imbalance plays an important role in this 
group of patients. 
394 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
detecting two- or three-vessel disease. Th ese scans 
can locate and quantitate areas of ischemia or scar-
ring and diff erentiate between the two. Perfusion 
defects that fi ll in on the redistribution phase rep-
resent ischemia, not previous infarction. Th e nega-
tive predictive value of a normal perfusion scan is 
approximately 99%. 
 MRI, PET, and CT scans are increasingly being 
used to defi ne coronary artery anatomy and deter-
mine myocardial viability. 
 D. Echocardiography 
 Th is technique provides information about both 
regional and global ventricular function and may 
be carried out at rest, following exercise, or with 
administration of dobutamine. Detectable regional 
wall motion abnormalities and the derived left  ven-
tricular ejection fraction correlate well with angio-
graphic fi ndings. Moreover, dobutamine stress 
echocardiography seems to be a reliable predictor 
of adverse cardiac complications in patients who 
cannot exercise. New or worsening wall motion 
abnormalities following dobutamine infusion are 
indicative of signifi cant ischemia. Patients with an 
ejection fraction of less than 50% tend to have more 
severe disease and increased perioperative morbid-
ity. Dobutamine stress echocardiography, however, 
may not be reliable in patients with left  bundle-
branch block because septal motion may be abnor-
mal, even in the absence of left  anterior descending 
CAD in some patients. 
 E. Coronary Angiography 
 Coronary angiography remains the defi nitive way 
to evaluate CAD and is associated with a low com-
plication rate (<1%). Nonetheless, coronary angi-
ography should be performed only to determine if 
the patient may benefi t from percutaneous coro-
nary angioplasty or coronary artery bypass graft -
ing prior to noncardiac surgery. Th e location and 
severity of occlusions can be defi ned, and coronary 
vasospasm may also be observed on angiography. 
In evaluating fi xed stenotic lesions, occlusions 
greater than 50% to 75% are generally consid-
ered signifi cant. Th e severity of disease is oft en 
expressed according to the number of major cor-
onary vessels aff ected (one-, two-, or three-vessel 
 B. Exercise Electrocardiography 
 Th e usefulness of this test is limited in patients with 
baseline ST-segment abnormalities and those who 
are unable to increase their heart rate (>85% of max-
imal predicted) because of fatigue, dyspnea, or drug 
therapy. Overall sensitivity is 65%, and specifi city is 
90%. Th e test is most sensitive (85%) in patients with 
three-vessel or left  main CAD. Disease that is lim-
ited to the left  circumfl ex artery may also be missed 
because ischemia in its distribution may not be evi-
dent on the standard surface ECG. A normal test 
does not necessarily exclude CAD, but suggests that 
severe disease is not likely. Th e degree of ST-segment 
depression, its severity and confi guration, the time 
of onset in the test, and the time required for resolu-
tion are important fi ndings. A myocardial ischemic 
response at low levels of exercise is associated with a 
signifi cantly increased risk of perioperative compli-
cations and long-term cardiac events. Other signifi -
cant fi ndings include changes in blood pressure and 
the occurrence of arrhythmias. Exercise-induced 
ventricular ectopy frequently indicates severe CAD 
associated with ventricular dysfunction. Th e isch-
emia presumably leads to electrical instability in 
myocardial cells. Given that risk seems to be asso-
ciated with the degree of myocardium potentially 
ischemic, testing oft en includes perfusion scans 
or echocardiographic assessments; however, in 
ambulatory patients, exercise ECG testing is useful 
because it estimates functional capacity and detects 
myocardial ischemia. 
 C. Myocardial Perfusions Scans and 
Other Imaging Techniques 
 Myocardial perfusion imaging using thallium-201 
or technetium-99m is used in evaluating patients 
who cannot exercise (eg, peripheral vascular dis-
ease) or who have underlying ECG abnormalities 
that preclude interpretation during exercise (eg, left  
bundle-branch block). If the patient cannot exer-
cise, images are obtained before and aft er injection 
of an intravenous coronary dilator (eg, dipyridam-
ole or adenosine) to produce a hyperemic response 
similar to exercise. Myocardial perfusion stud-
ies following exercise or injection of dipyridam-
ole or adenosine have a high sensitivity, but only 
fairly good specifi city for CAD. Th ey are best for 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
395
 Th e sudden withdrawal of antianginal medica-
tion perioperatively—particularly β-blockers—
can precipitate a sudden, rebound increase in 
ischemic episodes. In the past, some clinicians pro-
phylactically administered nitrates intravenously or 
transdermally to patients with CAD in the periopera-
tive period. Although this practice may be theoreti-
cally advantageous, there is no evidence of its effi  cacy 
in patients not previously on long-term nitrate 
therapy and without evidence of ongoing ischemia. 
Transdermal absorption of nitroglycerin may be 
erratic in the perioperative period. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Th e intraoperative period is regularly associated 
with factors and events that can adversely aff ect 
the myocardial oxygen demand–supply relation-
ship. Activation of the sympathetic system plays a 
major role. Hypertension and enhanced contractil-
ity increase myocardial oxygen demand, whereas 
tachycardia increases demand and reduces supply. 
Although myocardial ischemia is commonly associ-
ated with tachycardia, it can occur in the absence of 
any apparent hemodynamic derangement. 
 Objectives 
 Th e overwhelming priority in managing 
patients with ischemic heart disease is main-
taining a favorable myocardial supply–demand rela-
tionship. Autonomic-mediated increases in heart 
rate and blood pressure should be controlled by 
deep anesthesia or adrenergic blockade. Excessive 
reductions in coronary perfusion pressure or arte-
rial oxygen content are to be avoided. Although 
exact limits are not defi ned or predictable, diastolic 
arterial pressure should generally be maintained 
at 50 mm Hg or above. Higher diastolic pressures 
may be preferable in patients with high-grade coro-
nary occlusions. Excessive increases—such as those 
caused by fl uid overload—in left  ventricular end-
diastolic pressure should be avoided because they 
increase ventricular wall tension (aft erload) and can 
reduce subendocardial perfusion (see  Chapter 20 ). 
Transfusion carries its own risks and consequently 
there is no set transfusion trigger in patients with 
5
6
disease). Signifi cant stenosis of the left  main coro-
nary artery is of great concern because disruption 
of fl ow in this vessel will have adverse eff ects on 
almost the entire left  ventricle. 
 Ventriculography, measurement of the ejec-
tion fraction, and measurement of intracardiac 
pressures, also provide important information. 
Indicators of signifi cant ventricular dysfunction 
include an ejection fraction <50%, a left  ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure >18 mm Hg, a cardiac index 
<2.2 L/min/m 2 , and marked or multiple wall motion 
abnormalities. 
 Guidelines suggest that patients with stable 
angina and signifi cant left  main disease, stable 
angina and three-vessel disease, stable angina and 
two-vessel disease with an ejection fraction <50%, 
unstable angina, non-ST segment elevation MI, and 
acute ST segment elevation MI benefi t from revas-
cularization. Th is recommendation also applies 
to patients who are scheduled for noncardiac sur-
gery (class I). Conversely, revascularization is not 
indicated in patients with stable angina (class III). 
Moreover, elective noncardiac surgery is not rec-
ommended within 4–6 weeks following bare metal 
stent placement or within 12 months of placement 
of a drug-eluting stent, if the surgery requires that 
antiplatelet therapy be discontinued. 
 Premedication 
 Allaying fear, anxiety, and pain preoperatively are 
desirable goals in patients with CAD. Satisfactory 
premedication 
prevents 
sympathetic 
activa-
tion, which adversely aff ects the myocardial oxy-
gen  supply–demand balance. Overmedication is 
equally detrimental and should be avoided because 
it may result in hypoxemia, respiratory acido-
sis, and hypotension. A benzodiazepine, alone 
or in combination with an opioid, is commonly 
used. (Th e concomitant administration of oxygen 
via nasal cannula helps avoid hypoxemia follow-
ing premedication.) Patients with poor ventricu-
lar function and coexistent lung disease should 
receive reduced doses. Preoperative medications 
should generally be continued until the time of 
surgery. Th ey may be given orally (with a small sip 
of water), intramuscularly, intravenously, sublin-
gually, or transdermally. 
396 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
surgery). Such patients are at very increased risk of 
thrombosis and perioperative MI. Anesthesia staff 
should never for nonsurgical reasons (eg, desire to 
perform a spinal anesthetic) discontinue antiplatelet 
or anti thrombotic agents perioperatively without 
fi rst discussing the risks and benefi ts of the pro-
posed anesthetic requiring suspension of antiplatelet 
therapy with the patient and his or her cardiologist. 
ACC/AHA off ers recommendations on the approach 
of bringing patients to surgery following percutane-
ous coronary interventions and the type of interven-
tions suggested when subsequent surgery is expected 
( Figures 21–2 and  21–3 ). It should be noted that an 
isolated minor ST elevation in the mid-precordial 
leads (V 3 and V 4 ) can be a normal variant in young 
patients. Ischemia may also present as an unexplained 
intraoperative atrial or ventricular arrhythmia or the 
onset of a new conduction abnormality. Th e sensitiv-
ity of the ECG in detecting ischemia is related to the 
number of leads monitored. Studies suggest that the 
V 5 , V 4 , II, V 2 , and V 3 leads (in decreasing sensitivity) 
are most useful. Ideally, at least two leads should be 
monitored simultaneously. Usually, lead II is moni-
tored for inferior wall ischemia and arrhythmias, and 
V 5 is monitored for anterior wall ischemia. When 
only one channel can be monitored, a modifi ed V 5
lead provides the highest sensitivity. 
 B. Hemodynamic Monitoring 
 Th e most common hemodynamic abnormalities 
observed during ischemic episodes are hyperten-
sion and tachycardia. Th ey are almost always a cause 
(rather than the result) of ischemia. Hypotension 
is a late and ominous manifestation of progressive 
ventricular dysfunction. TEE readily will demon-
strate a dysfunctional ventricle and ventricular wall 
motion changes associated with myocardial ischemia. 
Ischemia is frequently, but not always, associated with 
an abrupt increase in pulmonary capillary wedge pres-
sure. Th e sudden appearance of a prominent  v wave 
on the wedge waveform is usually indicative of acute 
mitral regurgitation from ischemic papillary muscle 
dysfunction or acute left  ventricular dilatation. 
 C. Transesophageal Echocardiography 
 TEE can be helpful in detecting global and regional 
cardiac dysfunction, as well as valvular function 
in selected patients. Moreover, detection of new 
CAD; however, anemia can lead to tachycardia, 
worsening the balance between myocardial oxygen 
supply and demand. 
 MONITORING 
 Intraarterial pressure monitoring is reasonable for 
all patients with severe CAD and major or multiple 
cardiac risk factors who are undergoing any but the 
most minor procedures. Central venous (or rarely 
pulmonary artery) pressure can be monitored 
during prolonged or complicated procedures involv-
ing large fl uid shift s or blood loss. Less invasive 
methods of cardiac output determination and vol-
ume assessment have been previously discussed in 
this text. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) can 
provide valuable information, both qualitative and 
quantitative, on contractility and ventricular cham-
ber size (preload) perioperatively. Intensive care unit 
staff  increasingly use ultrasound to assist in hemo-
dynamic management. Numerous “basic” courses in 
TEE and TTE are available to assist practitioners in 
performing “hemodynamic,” as opposed to cardiac 
diagnostic TEE. 
 Intraoperative detection of ischemia depends 
on recognition of electrocardiographic chan-
ges, hemodynamic manifestations, or regional wall 
motion abnormalities on TEE. Doppler TEE also 
allows detection of the onset of mitral regurgitation 
caused by ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction. 
 A. Electrocardiography 
 Early ischemic changes are subtle and can oft en 
be overlooked. Th ey involve changes in T-wave 
morphology, including inversion, tenting, or both 
( Figure 21–1 ). More obvious ischemia may be seen 
in the form of progressive ST-segment depression. 
Down-sloping and horizontal ST depressions are of 
greater specifi city for ischemia than is up-sloping 
depression. New ST-segment elevations are rare dur-
ing noncardiac surgery and are indicative of severe 
ischemia, vasospasm, or infarction. However, the 
increasing number of individuals treated with drug-
eluting stents can be problematic perioperatively, 
especially if surgical concerns necessitate discontinu-
ation of antiplatelet therapy (eg, emergency spine 
7
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
397 
 Arrhythmias, Pacemakers, and 
Internal Cardioverter-Deﬁ brillator 
Management  
 Electrolyte disorders, heart structure defects, infl am-
mation, myocardial ischemia, cardiomyopathies, 
and conduction abnormalities can all contribute to 
the development of perioperative arrhythmias and 
heart block. Consequently, the anesthesia staff  must 
be prepared to manage both chronic and new-onset 
cardiac rhythm problems. 
 Supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs) can have 
hemodynamic consequences secondary to loss of 
AV synchrony and decreased diastolic fi lling time. 
regional  wall motion abnormalities is a rapid and 
more sensitive indicator of myocardial ischemia 
than the ECG. In animal studies in which coro-
nary blood fl ow is gradually reduced, regional wall 
motion abnormalities develop before the ECG 
changes. Although the occurrence of new intraop-
erative abnormalities correlates with postoperative 
MIs in some studies, not all such abnormalities 
are necessarily ischemic. Both regional and global 
abnormalities can be caused by changes in heart 
rate, altered conduction, preload, aft erload, or drug-
induced changes in contractility. Decreased systolic 
wall thickening may be a more reliable index for 
ischemia than endocardial wall motion alone. 
 FIGURE 211  Electrocardiographic signs of ischemia. Patterns of ischemia and injury.  (Information compiled from 
Schamroth L:  The 12 Lead Electrocardiogram. Blackwell, 1989.) 
Endocardium
Myocardium
T
T
T
S-T
S-T
Epicardium
Normal
Ischemia
Injury or
infarction
Normal
Endocardial
ischemia
Epicardial
ischemia
Endocardial
injury
Epicardial
injury
Red blood
cells
398 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Loss of the “P” wave on the ECG with a fast ven-
tricular response is consistent with SVTs. Most 
SVTs occur secondary to a reentrant mechanism. 
Reentrant arrhythmias occur when conduction tis-
sues in the heart depolarize or repolarize at varying 
rates. In this manner, a self-perpetuating loop of 
repolarization and depolarization can occur in the 
conduction pathways and/or AV node. SVTs pro-
ducing hemodynamic collapse are treated perioper-
atively with synchronized cardioversion. Adenosine 
can likewise be given to slow AV node conduction 
and potentially disrupt the reentrant loop. SVTs 
 FIGURE 212  Proposed treatment for patients 
requiring percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) who 
need subsequent surgery. ACS, acute coronary syndrome; 
COR, class of recommendation; LOE, level of evidence; 
MI, myocardial infarction. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Fleisher L, Beckman J, Brown K, et al: ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac 
surgery. Circulation 2007;116: e418.) 
Stent and continued 
dual-antiplatelet therapy
14 to 29 days
Balloon angioplasty
Not low
30 to 365 days
Acute MI, high-risk ACS, or 
high-risk cardiac anatomy
Bleeding risk of surgery
Bare-metal stent
Greater than 365 days
Drug-eluting stent
Timing of surgery
Low
 FIGURE 213  Proposed approach to the management 
of patients with previous percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) who require non-cardiac surgery, based 
on expert opinion.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Fleisher L, 
Beckman J, Brown K, et al: ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on perioperative 
cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac surgery. Circulation 
2007;116: e418.) 
Balloon angioplasty
Delay for elective or 
nonurgent surgery
Proceed to the operating 
room with aspirin
Delay for elective or 
nonurgent surgery
Proceed to the operating 
room with aspirin
Bare-metal stent
Drug-eluting stent
Previous PCI
Time
since PCI
<14 days
>14 days
>30–45
days
<30–45
days
<365 days
>365 days
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
399 
 Th e ACC/AHA guidelines also recommend anti-
thrombotic therapy in patients with long-standing 
AF. Consequently, many patients with AF will pres-
ent to the operating room on some form of anti-
thrombotic therapy—oft en the vitamin K antagonist 
warfarin. However, ACC/AHA guidelines suggest 
that aspirin can be an alternative to vitamin K antag-
onists in low-risk patients or those with contraindi-
cations to oral anticoagulation. Likewise, in patients 
with AF without mechanical prosthetic heart valves, 
the guidelines suggest that it is acceptable to discon-
tinue anticoagulation for up to 1 week in advance 
of surgical procedures, without instituting heparin 
anticoagulation. 
 When AF develops perioperatively, rate control 
with β-blockers can oft en be instituted. Chemical 
cardioversion can be attempted with amiodarone 
or procainamide. Of note, if the duration of AF is 
greater than 48 hours, or unknown, ACC/AHA 
guidelines recommend anticoagulation for 3 weeks 
prior to and 4 weeks following either electrical or 
chemical cardioversion. Alternatively, TEE can be 
performed to rule out the presence of left  atrial or 
left  atrial appendage thrombus. 
in patients without accessory conduction bundles 
(Wolff –Parkinson–White [WPW] syndrome) are 
treated with β-blockers and calcium channel block-
ers. In patients with known WPW, procainamide 
or amiodarone can be used to treat SVTs. At times, 
SVTs manifest with a broad QRS complex and seem 
to be similar to VTs. Such rhythms, when they 
present, should be treated like VT, until proven 
otherwise. 
 Atrial fi brillation (AF) can complicate the peri-
operative period ( Figure 21–4 ) Up to 35% of car-
diac surgery patients develop postoperative AF. 
Moreover, many patients present with AF for anes-
thesia and noncardiac surgery. Th e ACC/AHA has 
issued voluminous guidelines for the outpatient 
management of AF. Th e guidelines recommend use 
of β-blockers or nondihydropyridine calcium antag-
onists for ventricular rate control in patients without 
accessory conduction pathways. Amiodarone, pro-
cainamide, disopyramide, and ibutilide are sug-
gested for ventricular rate control in patients with 
accessory pathways. Th e use of digitalis and nondi-
hyropryidine calcium channel blockers is contrain-
dicated in patients with accessory pathways. 
 FIGURE 214  Posterior view of principal 
electrophysiological mechanisms of atrial ﬁ brillation. 
 A: Focal activation. The initiating focus (indicated by the 
dot) often lies within the region of the pulmonary veins. 
The resulting wavelets represent ﬁ brillatory conduction, 
as in multiple-wavelet reentry.  B: Multiple-wavelet reentry. 
Wavelets (indicated by arrows) randomly reenter tissue 
previously activated by the same or another wavelet. 
The routes the wavelets travel vary. LA, left atrium; PV, 
pulmonary vein; ICV, inferior vena cava; SCV, superior 
vena cava; RA, right atrium.  (Reproduced with permission, 
from Konings KT, Kirchhof CJ, Smeets JR, et al: High-density mapping 
of electrically induced atrial ﬁ brillation in humans. Circulation 
1994 Apr;89(4):1665-1680.) 
Focal
activation
Multiple
wavelets
LA
LA
A
B
PV’s
PV’s
IVC
IVC
RA
RA
SVC
SVC
400 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
the QRS complex morphology changes, it is desig-
nated as polymorphic VT. Torsades de pointes is a 
form of VT associated with a prolonged QT inter-
val, producing a sine wave-like VT pattern on the 
ECG. Ventricular fi brillation requires immediate 
resuscitative eff orts and defi brillation. 
 Patients presenting with ventricular ectopy and 
nonsustained runs of VT should undergo investiga-
tion prior to surgery. Supraventricular and ventricu-
lar arrhythmias constitute active cardiac conditions 
that warrant evaluation and treatment prior to elec-
tive, noncardiac surgery. Exercise testing, echo-
cardiography, and nuclear perfusion studies are all 
recommended by the ACC/AHA in patients with 
ventricular arrhythmias as part of their workup 
and management. Electrophysiologic studies are 
undertaken to determine the possibility for catheter-
mediated ablation of ventricular tachycardias. 
 Should VT present perioperatively, cardiover-
sion is recommended at any point where hemody-
namic compromise occurs. Otherwise, treatment 
with amiodarone or procainamide can be attempted. 
At all times, therapy should also be directed at iden-
tifying any causative sources of the arrhythmia. 
β-Blockers are useful in the treatment of VT, espe-
cially if ischemia is a suspected causative factor in 
the development of rhythm. Th e use of β-blockers 
following myocardial infarction has reduced the 
incidence of post-MI ventricular fi brillation. 
 Torsades de pointes is associated with condi-
tions that lengthen the QT interval. If the arrhyth-
mia develops in association with pauses, pacing can 
be eff ective. Likewise, some patients may benefi t 
from isoproterenol infusions, if they develop pause-
dependent torsades de pointes. Magnesium sulfate 
may be useful in patients with long QT syndrome 
and episodes of torsades. 
 Th e development of perioperative ventricular 
fi brillation (VF) requires defi brillation and the use 
of resuscitation algorithms. Amiodarone can be 
used to stabilize the rhythm following successful 
defi brillation. 
 Following VF, patients can present to sur-
gery for both ICD placement and other surgical 
procedures. ICDs are recommended in patients 
with a history of survived sudden cardiac death 
(SCD), decreased ventricular function following 
 Should AF develop postoperatively, ventricu-
lar rate response can be controlled with AV nodal 
blocking agents, unless contraindicated. Should AF 
result in hemodynamic instability, synchronized 
cardioversion can be attempted. Patients at high risk 
of AF following cardiac surgery can be treated with 
prophylactic amiodarone. 
 AF is most frequently associated with loss 
of atrial muscle and the development of fi brosis. 
Fibrosis may contribute to reentrant mechanisms 
of AF as depolarization/repolarization becomes 
nonhomogeneous. AF may also develop from a 
focal source oft en located in the pulmonary veins. 
In patients with an accessory bundle, AF can pro-
duce rapid ventricular responses and hemody-
namic collapse. Drugs that slow conduction across 
the AV node (eg, digitalis, verapamil, diltiazem) do 
not slow conduction across the accessory pathway, 
potentially leading to hemodynamic collapse. Th e 
ACC/AHA guidelines likewise recommend cau-
tion in the use of β-blockers for AF in patients with 
preexcitation syndromes. 
 Ventricular arrhythmias have been the sub-
ject of much review by the AHA ( Table 21–11 ). 
Ventricular premature contractions (VPCs) can 
appear perioperatively secondary to electrolyte 
abnormalities 
(hypokalemia, 
hypomagnesium, 
hypocalcemia), acidosis, ischemia, embolic phe-
nomenon, mechanical irritation of the heart from 
central lines, cardiac manipulation, and drug 
eff ects. Correction of the underlying source of 
any arrhythmia should be addressed. Patients can 
likewise present with VPCs secondary to vari-
ous cardiomyopathies (dilated, hypertrophic, and 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular). 
 Th e incidence of sudden cardiac death (SCD) 
is estimated at 1-2/1000 per year. Consequently, 
some patients will experience an unexpected death 
in the perioperative period. All anesthesia providers 
must be prepared to resuscitate and manage patients 
with ventricular arrhythmias, including VT (non-
sustained and sustained) and ventricular fi brillation. 
 Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia is a short 
run of ventricular ectopy that lasts <30 sec and spon-
taneously terminates, whereas sustained VT persists 
longer than 30 seconds. VT is either monomorphic 
or polymorphic, depending on the QRS complex. If 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
401 
TABLE 2111 Classiﬁ cation of ventricular arrhythmias.
Classiﬁ cation by Clinical Presentation
Hemodynamically stable
Asymptomatic
The absence of symptoms that could result from an arrhythmia.
Minimal symptoms, 
e.g., palpitations
Patient reports palpitations felt in either the chest, throat, or neck as 
described by the following:
• Heartbeat sensations that feel like pounding or racing
• An unpleasant awareness of heartbeat
• Feeling skipped beats or a pause
Hemodynamically unstable
Presyncope
Patient reports presyncope as described by the following:
• Dizziness
• Lightheadedness
• Feeling faint
• “Graying out”
Syncope
Sudden loss of consciousness with loss of postural tone, not related to 
anesthesia, with spontaneous recovery as reported by the patient or 
observer. Patient may experience syncope when supine.
Sudden cardiac 
death
Death from an unexpected circulatory arrest, usually due to a cardiac 
arrhythmia occurring within an hour of the onset of symptoms.
Sudden cardiac 
arrest
Death from an unexpected circulatory arrest, usually due to a cardiac 
arrhythmia occurring within an hour of the onset of symptoms, in 
whom medical intervention (e.g., defibrillation) reverses the event.
Classiﬁ cation by Electrocardiography
Nonsustained VT
Three or more beats in duration, terminating spontaneously in less 
than 30 s.
VT is a cardiac arrhythmia of three or more consecutive complexes 
in duration emanating from the ventricles at a rate of greater than 
100 bpm (cycle length less than 600 ms)
Monomorphic
Nonsustained VT with a single QRS morphology.
Polymorphic
Nonsustained VT with a changing QRS morphology at cycle length 
between 600 and 180 ms.
Sustained VT
VT greater than 30 s in duration and/or requiring termination due to 
hemodynamic compromise in less than 30 s.
Monomorphic
Sustained VT with a stable single QRS morphology.
Polymorphic
Sustained VT with a changing or multiform QRS morphology at cycle 
length between 600 and 180 ms.
Bundle-branch reentrant 
tachycardia
VT due to reentry involving the His-Purkinje system, usually with LBBB 
morphology; this usually occurs in the setting of cardiomyopathy.
Bidirectional VT
VT with a beat-to-beat alternans in the QRS frontal plane axis, often 
associated with digitalis toxicity.
Torsades de pointes
Characterized by VT associated with a long QT or QTc, and 
electrocardiographically characterized by twisting of the peaks of the 
QRS complexes around the isoelectric line during the arrhythmia:
•  “Typical,” initiated following “short-long-short” 
coupling intervals.
•  Short coupled variant initiated by normal-short coupling.
(continued)
402 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
TABLE 2111 Classiﬁ cation of ventricular arrhythmias. (continued)
Classiﬁ cation by Electrocardiography
Ventricular flutter
A regular (cycle length variability 30 ms or less) ventricular arrhythmia 
approximately 300 bpm (cycle length—200 ms) with a monomorphic 
appearance; no isoelectric interval between successive QRS 
complexes.
Ventricular fibrillation
Rapid, usually more than 300 bpm/200 ms (cycle length 180 ms or 
less), grossly irregular ventricular rhythm with marked variability in 
QRS cycle length, morphology, and amplitude.
Classiﬁ cation by Disease Entity
Chronic coronary heart disease
Heart failure
Congenital heart disease
Neurological disorders
Structurally normal hearts
Sudden infant death syndrome
Cardiomyopathies: 
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy
LBBB, left bundle-branch block; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Reproduced, with permission, from Zipes DP, Camm AJ, Borggrefe M, et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for management of patients with 
ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death—executive summary. Circulation 2006;114:1088.
MI, and left  ventricular ejection fractions <35%. 
Additionally, ICDs are used to treat potential sud-
den cardiac death in patients with dilated, hypertro-
phic, arrhythmogenic right ventricular, and genetic 
cardiomyopathies. 
 ICDs usually have a biventricular pacing func-
tion that improves the eff ectiveness of left  ventricu-
lar contraction. Patients with heart failure frequently 
have a widened QRS complex >120 msec. In such 
patients, ventricular systole is less effi  cient, as the 
lateral and septal left  ventricular walls do not eff ec-
tively contract because of the conduction delay. 
Cardiac resynchronizaton therapy (CRT) has been 
shown to improve functional status in patients with 
heart failure ( Table 21–12 ). 
 Anesthetic management for the placement of 
ICDs and other electrophysiologic procedures (eg, 
catheter ablation) depends on the patient’s under-
lying conditions. Many patients present with sys-
tolic and diastolic heart failure, and, as such, are 
dependent on sympathetic tone to maintain blood 
pressure. Many patients tolerate ICD placement 
 TABLE 2112 Functional beneﬁ ts of CRT. 
 ↑ 6-Minute walking distance 
 ↑ Health-related quality-of-life score 
 ↑ Peak oxygen consumption 
 ↓ Hospitalizations for decompensated heart failure 
 ↓ NYHA functional classification 
↑ indicates increased;  ↓ , decreased.
Reproduced, with permission, from Strickberger SA, Conti J, Daoud EG, 
et al: Patient selection for cardiac resynchronization therapy: from the 
Council on Clinical Cardiology Subcommittee on Electrocardiogrpahy 
and Arrhythmias and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research 
Interdisciplinary Working Group, in Collaboration with the Heart 
Rhythm Society. Circulation 2005;111:2146.
using deep sedation rather than general anesthesia. 
However, catheter-based electrophysiologic stud-
ies can be quite time consuming, and patients can 
develop atelectasis and airway obstruction. Should 
the patient’s blood pressure suddenly decline during 
electrophysiololgic studies, development of peri-
cardial tamponade should be ruled out. Emergent 
drainage of tamponade may be necessary. 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
403 
Careful monitoring of the arterial pulse with pulse 
oximetry or an arterial waveform is necessary to 
ensure that the pacemaker is not inhibited and that 
there is arterial perfusion during episodes of ECG 
artifact from surgical cautery. Th e manufacturer 
should be contacted to determine the best method 
for managing the device (eg, reprogramming or 
applying a magnet) prior to surgery. A large num-
ber of ICD models are in use; however, most sus-
pend their antitachycardia function in response to 
a magnet. 
 HEART FAILURE 
 An increasing number of patients present for sur-
gery with either systolic and/or diastolic heart 
failure. Congestive heart failure aff ects more than 
5 million Americans. Heart failure may be second-
ary to ischemia, valvular heart disease, infectious 
agents, and many types of cardiomyopathy. Most 
patients seek medical attention secondary to heart 
failure because of complaints of dyspnea and fatigue. 
Heart failure develops over time, as symptoms 
worsen ( Figure 21–5 ). Patients generally undergo 
echocardiography to diagnose structural heart 
defects, to detect signs of cardiac “remodeling”, to 
determine the left  ventricular ejection fraction, and 
to assess the heart’s diastolic function. Laboratory 
evaluations of concentration of brain natriuretic 
peptide (BNP) are likewise obtained to distinguish 
heart failure from other causes of dyspnea. BNP is 
released from the heart, and its elevation is associ-
ated with impaired ventricular function. 
 In response to ventricular failure, the body 
attempts to compensate for LV systolic function 
through the sympathetic and renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system. Consequently, patients experi-
ence salt retention, volume expansion, sympathetic 
stimulation, and vasoconstriction. Th e heart dilates 
to maintain the stroke volume in spite of decreased 
contractility. Over time, compensatory mecha-
nisms fail and contribute to the symptoms asso-
ciated with heart failure (eg, edema, tachycardia, 
decreased tissue perfusion). Patients with systolic 
heart failure are likely to present to surgery hav-
ing been previously treated with diuretics, ACE 
inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, and 
 Many patients present to surgery with ICDs in 
place. Published guidelines of the American Society 
of Anesthesiologists can provide assistance in the 
management of such patients. 
 Management is a three-step process, as follows: 
 • Preoperative . Identify the type of device and 
determine if it is used for antibradycardia 
functions. Consult with the patient’s 
cardiologist preoperatively as to the device’s 
function and use history. 
 • Intraoperative. Determine what 
electromagnetic interference is likely to 
present intraoperatively and advise the use of 
bipolar electrocautery where possible. Assure 
the availability of temporary pacing and 
defi brillation equipment and apply pads as 
necessary. Patients who are pacer dependent 
can be programmed to an asynchronous 
mode to mitigate electrical interference. 
Magnet application to ICDs may disable the 
antitachycardia function, but not convert to an 
asynchronous pacemaker. Consultation with 
the patient’s cardiologist and interrogation of 
the device is advised. 
 • Postoperative . Th e device must be interrogated 
to ensure that therapeutic functions have been 
restored. Patients should be continuously 
monitored until the antitachycardia functions 
of the device are restored and its function has 
been confi rmed. 
 ICDs are particularly problematic intraop-
eratively when electrocautery is used because the 
device may (1) interpret cautery as ventricular fi bril-
lation; (2) inhibit pacemaker function due to cautery 
artifact; (3) increase the pacing rate due to activation 
of a rate-responsive sensor; or (4) temporarily or 
permanently reset to a backup or reset mode. Use of 
bipolar cautery, placement of the grounding pad far 
from the ICD device, and limiting use of the cautery 
to only short bursts help to reduce the likelihood of 
problems, but will not eliminate them. 
 ICD devices should have the defi brillator func-
tion programmed off  immediately before surgery 
and reprogrammed back on immediately aft erward. 
External defi brillation pads should be applied and 
attached to a defi brillator machine intraoperatively. 
 FIGURE 215  Stages in the development of heart 
failure/recommended therapy by stage. ACEI, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin II receptor 
blocker; EF, ejection fraction; FHx CM, family history of 
cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; LVH, left ventricular 
hypertrophy; MI, myocardial infarction.  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Jessup M, Abraham W, Casey D, et al: 2009 Focused 
update: ACCF/AHA guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
heart failure in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation 2009;119:1977.) 
At Risk for Heart Failure
Heart Failure
A: high risk for HF 
but without 
structural heart 
disease or 
symptoms of HF. 
Structural heart 
disease but without 
signs or symptoms 
of HF.
Structural heart 
disease with prior 
or current 
symptoms of HF.
Refractory HF 
requiring specialized 
interventions.
e.g., Patients with:
• hypertension
• atheroscleroitic 
disease
• diabetes
• obesity
• metabolic 
syndrome
or
Patients  
• using cardiotoxins
• with FHx CM
Therapy
Goals
• Treat hypertension
• Encourage 
smoking cessation
• Treat lipid disorders
• Encourage regular 
exercise
• Discourage alcohol 
intake, illicit drug use
• Control metabolic 
syndrome
Drugs
• ACEI or ARB in 
appropriate patients  
for vascular 
disease or diabetes
Therapy
Goals
• All measures 
under Stage A
Drugs
• ACEI or ARB in 
appropriate patients 
• Beta-blockers in 
appropriate patients 
Devices in 
Selected Patients
• Implantable 
defibrillators
Therapy
Goals
• All measures under 
Stages A and B
• Dietary salt 
restriction
Drugs For
Routine Use
• Diuretics for fluid 
retention
• ACEI
• Beta-blockers
Drugs in
Selected Patients
• Aldosterone 
antagonist
• ARBs
• Digitalis
• Hydralazine/nitrates
Devices in
Selected Patients
• Biventricular 
pacing
• Implantable 
defibrillators
Therapy
Goals
• Appropriate 
measures under 
Stages A, B, C
• Decision re: 
appropriate level 
of care
Options
• Compassionate 
end-of-life 
care/hospice
• Extraordinary 
measures
- heart transplant
- chronic inotropes
- permanent 
mechanical 
support
- experimental 
surgery or drugs
e.g., Patients with:
• previous MI
• LV remodeling 
including LVH and 
low EF
• asymptomatic 
valvular disease
e.g., Patients with:
• known structural  
heart disease
and
• shortness of 
breath and 
fatigue, reduced 
exercise tolerance
e.g., Patients
who have marked 
symptoms at rest 
despite maximal 
medical therapy 
(e.g., those who 
are recurrently 
hospitalized or 
cannot be safely 
discharged from 
the hospital without 
specialized 
interventions)
Stage D
Stage C
Stage B
Stage A
Structural
heart
disease
Development
of symptoms
of HF
Refractory
symptoms
of HF at rest
404 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
405 
the mitral valve abuts the intraventricular septum 
( Figure 21–6 ), producing obstruction and a late 
systolic murmur. 
 Perioperative management is aimed at mini-
mizing the degree of LVOT obstruction. Th is is 
accomplished by maintaining adequate intravas-
cular volume, avoiding vasodilatation, and reduc-
ing myocardial contractility through the use of 
β-blockers. 
 Valvular Heart Disease 
 1. General Evaluation of Patients 
 Regardless of the lesion or its cause, preoperative 
evaluation should be primarily concerned with 
determining the identity and severity of the lesion 
and its hemodynamic signifi cance, residual ven-
tricular function, and the presence of any secondary 
eff ects on pulmonary, renal, and hepatic function. 
possibly aldosterone antagonists. Electrolytes must 
be measured, as heart failure therapies frequently 
lead to changes in serum potassium concentration. 
Angiotensin receptor blocker or ACE inhibitor use 
may contribute to periinduction hypotension in the 
patient with heart failure. ACE inhibitors are rarely 
associated with angioedema requiring emergent 
airway management. 
 Diastolic 
ventricular 
dysfunction 
pro-
duces symptoms of congestion and heart failure. 
Myocardial relaxation is a dynamic, not passive, 
process. Th e heart with preserved diastolic func-
tion accommodates volume during diastole, with 
minimal increases in left  ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure. Conversely, the heart with diastolic dys-
function relaxes poorly and produces increased 
left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure. Th e left  ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure is transmitted to the 
left  atrium and pulmonary vasculature resulting in 
symptoms of congestion. 
 Anesthetic management of the patient with 
heart failure requires careful assessment and opti-
mization of intravascular fl uid volume—especially 
if positive inotropic agents, vasoconstrictors, or 
 vasodilators are used. In particular, patients with 
diastolic dysfunction may tolerate increases in 
 volume poorly, leading to pulmonary congestion. 
 HYPERTROPHIC 
CARDIOMYOPATHY 
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an auto-
somal dominant trait that aff ects 1 in 500 adults. 
Many patients are unaware of the condition, and 
some will present with SCD as an initial manifesta-
tion. Symptoms include dyspnea, exercise intoler-
ance, palpitations, and chest pain. Clinically, HCM 
is detected by the murmur of dynamic left  ventricu-
lar outfl ow tract (LVOT) obstruction in late systole. 
Symptomatic patients frequently have a thickened 
intraventricular septum of 20 to 30 mm. Mutations 
in the genes that code for the cardiac sarcomeres and 
their supporting proteins are implicated. Th e myo-
cardium of the intraventricular septum is abnormal, 
and many patients can develop diastolic dysfunction 
and SCD without pronounced dynamic obstruc-
tive gradients. During systole, the anterior leafl et of 
Left
atrium
Mitral
valve
Left
ventricle
LVOT
obstruction
 FIGURE 216  The midesophageal long axis view 
is shown. As a consequence of the hypertrophied 
interventricular septum, ﬂ ow patterns within the heart 
are altered so that the anterior leaﬂ et of the mitral valve is 
drawn during ventricular systole into the left ventricular 
outﬂ ow tract (LOVT), producing obstruction. This is known 
as systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve (SAM). 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al: 
 Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 
2011.) 
406 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Physical Examination 
 Th e most important signs to identify on physical 
examination are those of congestive heart failure. 
Left -sided (S 3 gallop or pulmonary rales) and right-
sided (jugular venous distention, hepatojugular 
refl ux, hepatosplenomegaly, or pedal edema) signs 
may be present. Auscultatory fi ndings may confi rm 
the valvular dysfunction ( Figure 21–7 ), but echocar-
diographic studies are more reliable. Neurological 
defi cits, usually secondary to embolic phenomena, 
should be documented. 
 Laboratory Evaluation 
 In addition to the laboratory studies discussed for 
patients with hypertension and CAD, liver function 
tests may be useful in assessing hepatic dysfunction 
caused by passive hepatic congestion in patients with 
severe or chronic right-sided failure. Arterial blood 
gases can be measured in patients with signifi cant 
pulmonary symptoms. Reversal of warfarin or hepa-
rin should be documented with a prothrombin time 
and international normalized ratio (INR) or partial 
thromboplastin time, respectively, prior to surgery. 
 Electrocardiographic fi ndings are generally 
nonspecifi c. Th e chest radiograph is useful to assess 
cardiac size and pulmonary vascular congestion. 
 Special Studies 
 Echocardiography, imaging studies, and cardiac 
catheterization provide important diagnostic and 
prognostic information about valvular lesions, but 
should only be obtained if the results will change 
therapy or outcomes. More than one valvular lesion 
is oft en found. In many instances, noninvasive stud-
ies obviate the need for cardiac catheterization, 
unless there are concerns about CAD. Information 
from these studies is best reviewed with a cardiolo-
gist. Th e following questions must be answered: 
 • Which valvular abnormality is most important 
hemodynamically? 
 • What is the severity of an identifi ed lesion? 
 • What degree of ventricular impairment is 
present? 
 • What is the hemodynamic signifi cance of other 
identifi ed abnormalities? 
 • Is there any evidence of CAD? 
Concomitant CAD should not be overlooked, par-
ticularly in older patients and those with known 
risk factors (see above). Myocardial ischemia may 
also occur in the absence of signifi cant coronary 
occlusion in patients with severe aortic stenosis or 
regurgitation. 
 History 
 Th e preanesthesia history should focus on symptoms 
related to decreased ventricular function. Symptoms 
and signs should be correlated with laboratory data. 
Questions should evaluate exercise tolerance, fatiga-
bility, and pedal edema and shortness of breath in 
general (dyspnea), when lying fl at (orthopnea), or 
at night (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea). Th e New 
York Heart Association functional classifi cation of 
heart disease ( Table 21–13 ) is useful for grading the 
severity of heart failure symptoms and estimating 
prognosis. Patients should also be questioned about 
chest pains and neurological symptoms. Some val-
vular lesions are associated with thromboembolic 
phenomena. Prior procedures, such as valvotomy or 
valve replacement and their eff ects, should also be 
well documented. 
 A review of medications should evaluate effi  -
cacy and exclude serious side eff ects. Commonly 
used agents include diuretics, vasodilators, ACE 
inhibitors, β-blockers, antiarrhythmics, and anti-
coagulants. Preoperative vasodilator therapy may 
be used to decrease preload, aft erload, or both. 
Excessive vasodilatation worsens exercise tolerance 
and is oft en fi rst manifested as postural (orthostatic) 
hypotension. 
 TABLE 2113 Modiﬁ ed New York 
Association functional classiﬁ cation of 
heart disease. 
Class
Description
I
Asymptomatic except during severe 
exertion
II
Symptomatic with moderate activity
III
Symptomatic with minimal activity
IV
Symptomatic at rest
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
407 
 FIGURE 217  Strategy for evaluating heart murmurs. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Bonow RO, Carabello BA, 
Chatterjee K, et al: 2008 focused update incorporated in the ACC/AHA 
2006 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart 
disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (writing committee 
to revise the 1998 guidelines for the management of patients with 
valvular heart disease): endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular 
Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation 
2008;118:e523.) 
Cardiac murmur
Systolic murmur
Diastolic murmur
Continuous murmur
Midsystolic, grade 2 
or less 
• Early systolic
• Midsystolic, 
grade 3 or more
• Late systolic
• Holosystolic
Asymptomatic and 
no associated 
findings
Symptomatic or 
other signs of 
cardiac disease
Catheterization 
and angiography 
if appropriate
• Venous hum
• Mammary souffle 
of pregnancy
No further workup
Echocardiography
 Th e ACC/AHA have prepared detailed guide-
lines to assist in the management of the patient with 
valvular heart disease. Although the evaluation of 
the patient with a heart murmur generally rests with 
the cardiologist, anesthesia providers will on occa-
sion discover the presence of a previously undetected 
murmur on preanesthetic examination. In particu-
lar, anesthetists are concerned that undiagnosed, 
critical aortic stenosis might be present, which could 
potentially lead to hemodynamic collapse with either 
regional or general anesthesia. In the past, most val-
vular heart diseases were a consequence of rheumatic 
heart disease; however, with an aging surgical popu-
lation, increasing numbers of patients have degener-
ative valve problems. More than one in eight patients 
older than age 75 years may manifest at least one 
form of moderate to severe valvular heart disease. 
A study conducted in the Netherlands reported that 
the prevalence of aortic stenosis was 2.4% in patients 
older than age 60 years who were scheduled for 
elective surgery. Underdiagnosed valvular disease is 
particularly prevalent in elderly females. 
 According to the ACC/AHA guidelines, auscul-
tation of the heart is the most widely used method 
to detect valvular heart disease. Murmurs occur as a 
consequence of the accelerated blood fl ow through 
narrowed openings in stenotic and regurgitant 
lesions. Although systolic murmurs may be related to 
increased blood fl ow velocity, the ACC/AHA guide-
lines note that all diastolic and continuous murmurs 
refl ect pathology. Other than murmurs that are 
thought to be innocent, such as mid-systolic fl ow 
murmurs (grade 2 or soft er), the ACC/AHA guide-
lines recommend echocardiographic evaluation. 
408 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
AF (which is usually responsible for 20% to 30% of 
ventricular fi lling) necessitates even higher diastolic 
fl ow across the valve to maintain the same cardiac 
output and increases the transvalvular gradient. 
 Acute elevations in left  atrial pressure are rap-
idly transmitted back to the pulmonary capillaries. 
If mean pulmonary capillary pressure acutely and 
signifi cantly rises transudation of capillary fl uid may 
result in pulmonary edema. Chronic elevations in pul-
monary capillary pressure are partially compensated 
by increases in pulmonary lymph fl ow, but eventually 
result in pulmonary vascular changes, leading to irre-
versible increases in pulmonary vascular resistance 
(PVR) and pulmonary hypertension. Reduced lung 
compliance and a secondary increase in the work of 
breathing contribute to chronic dyspnea. Right ven-
tricular failure is frequently precipitated by acute 
or chronic elevations in right ventricular aft erload. 
Marked dilatation of the right ventricle can result in 
tricuspid or pulmonary valve regurgitation. 
 Embolic events are common in patients with 
mitral stenosis and AF. Dislodgment of clots from 
the left  atrium results in systemic emboli, most com-
monly to the cerebral circulation. Patients also have 
an increased incidence of pulmonary emboli, pulmo-
nary infarction, hemoptysis, and recurrent bronchi-
tis. Hemoptysis most commonly results from rupture 
of pulmonary–bronchial venous communications. 
Chest pain occurs in 10% to 15% of patients with 
mitral stenosis, even in the absence of CAD; its etiol-
ogy oft en remains unexplained, but may be emboli 
in the coronary circulation or acute right ventricu-
lar pressure overload. Patients may develop hoarse-
ness as a result of compression of the left  recurrent 
laryngeal nerve by the enlarged left  atrium. 
 Left  ventricular function is normal in the 
majority of patients with pure mitral stenosis 
( Figure 21–8 ), but impaired left  ventricular func-
tion may be encountered in up to 25% of patients 
and presumably represents residual damage from 
rheumatic myocarditis or coexistent hypertensive or 
ischemic heart disease. 
 Th e left  ventricle is chronically underloaded in 
the patient with mitral stenosis. At the same time, 
the left  atrium, right ventricle, and right atrium are 
frequently dilated and dysfunctional. Vasodilatation 
that occurs following both neuraxial and general 
When new murmurs are detected in a preoperative 
evaluation, consultation with the patient’s personal 
physician is helpful to determine the need for echo-
cardiographic evaluation. In many centers, immedi-
ate echocardiographic evaluation can be performed 
in the preoperative area. 
 2. Speciﬁ c Valvular Disorders 
 MITRAL STENOSIS 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Mitral stenosis almost always occurs as a delayed 
complication of rheumatic fever. However, mitral 
stenosis can also occur in dialysis-dependent 
patients. Two-thirds of patients with mitral stenosis 
are female. Th e stenotic process is estimated to begin 
aft er a minimum of 2 years following rheumatic 
heart disease and results from progressive fusion and 
calcifi cation of the valve leafl ets. Symptoms gener-
ally develop aft er 20–30 years, when the mitral valve 
orifi ce is reduced from its normal 4–6 cm 2 opening 
to less than 1.5 cm 2 . Less than 50% of patients have 
isolated mitral stenosis; the remaining patients also 
have mitral regurgitation, and up to 25% of patients 
also have rheumatic involvement of the aortic valve 
(stenosis or regurgitation). 
 Pathophysiology 
 Th e rheumatic process causes the valve leafl ets to 
thicken, calcify, and become funnel shaped; annu-
lar calcifi cation may also be present. Th e mitral 
commissures fuse, the chordae tendinae fuse and 
shorten, and the valve cusps become rigid; as a 
result, the valve leafl ets typically display bowing or 
doming during diastole on echocardiography. 
 Signifi cant restriction of blood fl ow through 
the mitral valve results in a transvalvular pressure 
gradient that depends on cardiac output, heart rate 
(diastolic time), and cardiac rhythm. Increases in 
either cardiac output or heart rate (decreased dia-
stolic time) necessitate higher fl ows across the valve 
and result in higher transvalvular pressure gradients. 
Th e left  atrium is oft en markedly dilated, promoting 
SVTs, particularly AF. Blood fl ow stasis in the atrium 
promotes the formation of thrombi, usually in the left  
atrial appendage. Loss of normal atrial systole with 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
409
is based on the observation that T 1/2 remains rela-
tively constant for a given orifi ce over a wide range 
of fl ows. A pressure half-time of 220 msec corre-
sponds to a mitral valve area of 1 cm 2 . 
 Mitral valve areas less than 1 cm 2 are typically 
associated with transvalvular gradients of 20 mm 
Hg at rest and dyspnea with minimal exertion; a 
mitral valve area less than 1 cm 2 is oft en referred to 
as critical mitral stenosis. Patients with valve areas 
between 1.5 and 2.0 cm 2 are generally asymptomatic 
or have only mild symptoms with exertion. When 
the mitral valve area is between 1 and 1.5 cm 2 , most 
patients are symptomatic with mild to moderate 
exertion. Although cardiac output may be normal at 
rest, it fails to increase appropriately during exertion 
because of decreased left  ventricular preload. 
 Treatment 
 Th e time from onset of symptoms to incapacitation 
averages 5–10 years. At that stage, most patients 
die within 2–5 years. Surgical correction is there-
fore usually undertaken once signifi cant symptoms 
develop. Percutaneous transseptal balloon valvulo-
plasty may be used in selected young or pregnant 
patients, as well as older patients who are poor sur-
gical candidates. Medical management is primarily 
supportive and includes limitation of physical activ-
ity, sodium restriction, and diuretics. Small doses of 
a β-adrenergic blocking drug may also be useful in 
controlling heart rate in patients with mild to mod-
erate symptoms. Patients with a history of emboli 
and those at high risk (age older than 40 years; a 
large atrium with chronic atrial fi brillation) are usu-
ally anticoagulated. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 A. Objectives 
 Th e principal hemodynamic goals are to main-
tain a sinus rhythm (if present preoperatively) 
and to avoid tachycardia, large increases in cardiac 
output, and both hypovolemia and fl uid overload by 
judicious administration of intravenous fl uids. 
 B. Monitoring 
 Invasive hemodynamic monitoring is oft en used for 
major surgical procedures, particularly those associ-
ated with large fl uid shift s. TEE can also be used to 
8
anesthesia can lead to peripheral venous blood pool-
ing and inadequate volume delivery to the left 
ventricle. Th is can precipitate hemodynamic collapse. 
 Calculating Mitral Valve Area 
& Transvalvular Gradient 
 Two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography 
can be used to estimate both the pressure drop 
across a stenotic valve and the valve area. Based on 
the assumption that the velocity of blood fl ow is 
much greater distal than proximal to an obstruction, 
the Bernoulli equation can be simplifi ed: 
∆P = 4V2
 where ∆ P is the pressure gradient (mm Hg) and  V
is blood fl ow velocity (m/s) distal to the obstruc-
tion. Valve orifi ce can be estimated from the time it 
takes for the initial peak pressure gradient to fall to 
one-half of its original value, the pressure half-time 
( T 1/2 ). Th is relationship is approximated by 
A = T1/2
220
 where  A is valve orifi ce (cm 2 ) and  T 1/2 is the time from 
peak fl ow velocity (Vmax) to V /1.4
max
.  Th is relationship 
 FIGURE 218  Pressure–volume loops in patients with 
valvular heart disease. A, normal; B, mitral stenosis; C, 
aortic stenosis; D, mitral regurgitation (chronic); E, aortic 
regurgitation (chronic). LV, left ventricular. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Jackson JM, Thomas SJ, Lowenstein E: Anesthetic 
management of patients with valvular heart disease. Semin Anesth 
1982;1:239.) 
A
C
D
E
B
LV volume (cc)
LV pressure (mm Hg)
100
200
300
200
100
410 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
usually due to myocardial ischemia or infarction 
(papillary muscle dysfunction or rupture of a chorda 
tendinea), infective endocarditis, or chest trauma. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Th e principal derangement is a reduction in forward 
stroke volume due to backward fl ow of blood into the 
left  atrium during systole. Th e left  ventricle compen-
sates by dilating and increasing end-diastolic volume 
( Figure 21–8 ). Regurgitation thorugh the mitral valve 
initially maintains a normal end systolic volume in 
spite of an increased end diastolic volume. However, 
as the disease progresses the end systolic volume 
increases. By increasing end-diastolic volume, the 
volume-overloaded left  ventricle can maintain a 
normal cardiac output despite blood being ejected 
retrograde into the atrium. With time, patients with 
chronic mitral regurgitation eventually develop 
eccentric left  ventricular hypertrophy and progres-
sive impairment in contractility. In patients with 
severe mitral regurgitation, the regurgitant volume 
may exceed the forward stroke volume. In time, wall 
stress increases, resulting in an increased demand for 
myocardial oxygen supply. 
 Th e regurgitant volume passing through the 
mitral valve is dependent on the size of the mitral 
valve orifi ce (which can vary with ventricular cav-
ity size), the heart rate (systolic time), and the left  
 ventricular–left  atrial pressure gradient during 
systole. Th e last factor is aff ected by the relative 
resistances of the two outfl ow paths from the left 
ventricle, namely, SVR and left  atrial compliance. 
Th us, a decrease in SVR or an increase in mean left  
atrial pressure will reduce the regurgitant volume. 
Atrial compliance also determines the predomi-
nant clinical manifestations. Patients with normal or 
reduced atrial compliance (acute mitral regurgita-
tion) have primarily pulmonary vascular congestion 
and edema. Patients with increased atrial compli-
ance (long-standing mitral regurgitation resulting in 
a large dilated left  atrium) primarily show signs of a 
reduced cardiac output. Most patients are between 
the two extremes and exhibit symptoms of both pul-
monary congestion and low cardiac output. Patients 
with a regurgitant fraction of less than 30% of the 
total stroke volume generally have mild symptoms. 
Regurgitant fractions of 30% to 60% generally cause 
help guide perioperative management. Overzealous 
fl uid replacement readily precipitates pulmonary 
edema in patients with severe disease. Pulmonary cap-
illary wedge pressure measurements in the presence of 
mitral stenosis refl ect the transvalvular gradient and 
not necessarily left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure. 
Prominent  a waves and a decreased  y descent are typi-
cally present on the pulmonary capillary wedge pres-
sure waveform in patients who are in sinus rhythm. 
A prominent  cv wave on the central venous pressure 
waveform is usually indicative of secondary tricuspid 
regurgitation. Th e ECG typically shows a notched P 
wave in patients who are in sinus rhythm. 
 C. Choice of Agents 
 Patients may be very sensitive to the vasodilating 
eff ects of spinal and epidural anesthesia. Epidural 
anesthesia may be easier to manage than spinal 
 anesthesia because of the more gradual onset of sym-
pathetic blockade. Th ere is no “ideal” general anes-
thetic, and agents should be employed to achieve the 
desired eff ects of permitting suffi  cient diastolic time 
to adequately load the left  ventricle. Vasopressors 
are oft en needed to maintain vascular tone following 
anesthetic induction. 
 Intraoperative tachycardia may be controlled 
by deepening anesthesia with an opioid (excluding 
meperidine) or β-blocker (esmolol or metoprolol). 
In the presence of atrial fi brillation, ventricular rate 
should be controlled.  Marked hemodynamic dete-
rioration from sudden SVT necessitates cardiover-
sion. Phenylephrine is preferred over ephedrine as a 
vasopressor because the former lacks β-adrenergic 
agonist activity. Vasopressin can also be employed 
to restore vascular tone should hypotension develop 
secondary to anesthetic induction. 
 MITRAL REGURGITATION 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Mitral regurgitation can develop acutely or insidiously 
as a result of a large number of disorders. Chronic 
mitral regurgitation is usually the result of rheumatic 
fever (oft en with concomitant mitral stenosis); con-
genital or developmental abnormalities of the valve 
apparatus; or dilatation, destruction, or calcifi cation 
of the mitral annulus. Acute mitral regurgitation is 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
411 
leafl et motion is oft en described as normal, prolaps-
ing, or restrictive ( Figure 21–9 ). Excessive motion or 
prolapse is defi ned by systolic movement of a leafl et 
beyond the plane of the mitral valve and into the left  
atrium (see the section below on mitral valve prolapse). 
moderate symptoms, whereas fractions greater than 
60% are associated with severe disease. 
 Echocardiography, particularly TEE, is useful in 
delineating the underlying pathophysiology of mitral 
regurgitation and guiding treatment. Mitral valve 
 FIGURE 219  Classiﬁ cation of mitral valve leaﬂ et 
motion (as seen from transesophageal echocardiography). 
Note that with prolapse, the free edge of the leaﬂ et(s) 
extends beyond the plane of the mitral annulus producing 
an eccentric jet. With restricted motion, the leaﬂ ets fail to 
coapt, resulting in a central jet. 
Anterior
leaflet
LA
LV
Posterior
leaflet
Chordae
tendineae
Regurgitant jet
Papillary
muscle
Normal motion
Prolapse
(excessive motion)
Restricted motion
Bileaflet prolapse
412 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
with moderate to severe symptoms. Valvuloplasty 
or valve repair are performed whenever possible to 
avoid the problems associated with valve replace-
ment (eg, thromboembolism, hemorrhage, and 
prosthetic failure). Catheter-mediated valve repairs 
are continually being refi ned, potentially reduc-
ing the need for “open” surgery. Anesthesiologists 
skilled in advanced perioperative echocardiogra-
phy assist in correctly identifying the leafl et(s) to 
be repaired and determining the repair’s success. 
Th ree-dimensional echocardiography is increas-
ingly employed to assist in the assessment of the 
mitral valve (see  Figure 5-29 ). 
 Anesthetic Management 
 A. Objectives 
 Anesthetic management should be tailored to 
the severity of mitral regurgitation as well as 
the underlying left  ventricular function. Factors that 
exacerbate the regurgitation, such as slow heart rates 
and acute increases in aft erload, should be avoided. 
Bradycardia can increase the regurgitant volume by 
increasing left  ventricular end-diastolic volume and 
acutely dilating the mitral annulus. Th e heart rate 
should ideally be kept between 80 and 100 beats/min. 
Acute increases in left  ventricular aft erload, such as 
with endotracheal intubation and surgical stimula-
tion under “light” anesthesia, should be treated rap-
idly but without excessive myocardial depression. 
Excessive volume expansion can also worsen the 
regurgitation by dilating the left  ventricle. 
 B. Monitoring 
 Monitors are based on the severity of ventricular 
dysfunction, as well as the procedure. Mitral regur-
gitation may be recognized on the pulmonary artery 
wedge waveform as a large  v wave and a rapid  y
descent ( Figure 21–10 ). Th e height of the  v wave is 
inversely related to atrial and pulmonary vascular 
compliance, but is directly proportional to pulmo-
nary blood fl ow and the regurgitant volume; thus, 
the  v wave may not be prominent in patients with 
chronic mitral regurgitation, except during acute 
deterioration. Very large  v waves are oft en apparent 
on the pulmonary artery pressure waveform, even 
without wedging the catheter. Color-fl ow Doppler 
TEE can be invaluable in quantitating the severity of 
9
 Calculating Regurgitant Fraction 
 To calculate regurgitant fraction (RF), forward 
stroke volume (SV) and the regurgitant stroke vol-
ume (RSV) must be measured. Although they can 
both be estimated by catheterization data, pulsed 
Doppler echocardiography provides reasonably 
acute calculations. Stroke volume is measured at 
the left  ventricular outfl ow tract (LVOT) and at the 
mitral valve (MV), where 
 Stroke volume = cross-sectional area ( A ) × (TVI) 
 and cross-sectional area ( A ) can be approximated as, 
 A = 0.785 × (diameter) 2 
 Th e time–velocity integral (TVI) is the integral 
of the velocity versus the time signal obtained with 
pulsed Doppler. Th e TVI refl ects the distance the 
blood has traveled during a heart beat. By knowing 
the area through which the blood travels and the 
distance traveled, it is possible to estimate the stroke 
volume. Th is is the case because the area is expressed 
in centimeters squared, and the distance is expressed 
in centimeters. Th e product of these measures is 
cubic centimeters or milliliters—hence, the stroke 
volume for each heartbeat. 
 Th us, the volume of blood that enters through 
the mitral valve must be the same as that passing 
through the left  ventricular outfl ow track. Any dif-
ference between the two represents the amount of 
the volume that initially entered the left  ventricle, 
but that did not pass the LVOT. Th is is the volume 
that regurgitated into the left  atrium. 
 RSVmitral regurgitation = (AMV × VTIMV) 
− (ALVOT × TVILVOT),
 and 
RF = RSV/SV 
 An RSV greater than 65 mL usually correlates 
with severe mitral regurgitation. 
 Treatment 
 Aft erload reduction is benefi cial in most patients 
and may even be lifesaving in patients with acute 
mitral regurgitation. Reduction of SVR increases 
forward SV and decreases the regurgitant volume. 
Surgical treatment is usually reserved for patients 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
413 
murmur oft en have some element of mitral regurgi-
tation. Th e posterior mitral leafl et is more commonly 
aff ected than the anterior leafl et. Th e mitral annulus 
may also be dilated. Pathologically, most patients 
have redundancy or some myxomatous degenera-
tion of the valve leafl ets. Most cases of mitral valve 
prolapse are sporadic or familial, aff ecting otherwise 
normal persons. A high incidence of mitral valve 
prolapse is found in patients with connective tissue 
disorders (particularly Marfan syndrome). 
 Th e overwhelming majority of patients with 
mitral valve prolapse are asymptomatic, but in a 
small percentage of patients, the myxomatous degen-
eration is progressive. Manifestations, when they 
occur, can include chest pains, arrhythmias, embolic 
events, fl orid mitral regurgitation, infective endocar-
ditis, and, rarely, sudden death. Th e diagnosis can be 
made preoperatively by auscultation of the charac-
teristic click, but must be confi rmed by echocardiog-
raphy. Th e prolapse is accentuated by maneuvers that 
decrease ventricular volume (preload). Both atrial 
and ventricular arrhythmias are common. Although 
bradyarrhythmias have been reported, paroxysmal 
supraventricular tachycardia is the most commonly 
encountered sustained arrhythmia. An increased 
incidence of abnormal AV bypass tracts is reported 
in patients with mitral valve prolapse. 
the regurgitation and guiding therapeutic interven-
tions in patients with severe mitral regurgitation. 
By defi nition, blood fl ow reverses in the pulmonary 
veins during systole with severe mitral regurgitation. 
 C. Choice of Agents 
 Patients with relatively well-preserved ventricular 
function tend to do well with most anesthetic tech-
niques. Spinal and epidural anesthesia are well toler-
ated, provided bradycardia is avoided. Patients with 
moderate to severe ventricular impairment may be 
sensitive to depression from high concentrations of 
volatile agents. An opioid-based anesthetic may be 
more suitable for those patients—again, provided 
bradycardia is avoided. 
 MITRAL VALVE PROLAPSE 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Mitral valve prolapse is classically characterized by a 
mid-systolic click, with or without a late apical sys-
tolic murmur on auscultation. It is a relatively com-
mon abnormality that is present in up to 1% to 2.5% 
of the general population. Th e diagnosis is based on 
auscultatory fi ndings and is confi rmed by echocar-
diography, which shows systolic prolapse of mitral 
valve leafl ets into the left  atrium. Patients with the 
 FIGURE 2110  The pulmonary capillary wedge waveform in mitral regurgitation, demonstrating a large  v wave. 
Time
Wedge
ECG
100
50
0
Pulmonary artery
pressure (mm Hg)
414 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Pathophysiology 
 Left  ventricular outfl ow obstruction caused by val-
vular aortic stenosis is almost always gradual, allow-
ing the ventricle, at least initially, to compensate and 
maintain SV. Concentric left  ventricular hypertrophy 
enables the ventricle to maintain SV by generating the 
needed transvalvular pressure gradient and to reduce 
ventricular wall stress. 
 Critical aortic stenosis is said to exist when the 
aortic valve orifi ce is reduced to 0.5–0.7 cm 2 (normal 
is 2.5–3.5 cm 2 ). With this degree of stenosis, patients 
generally have a transvalvular gradient of approxi-
mately 50 mm Hg at rest (with a normal cardiac 
output) and are unable to increase cardiac output 
in response to exertion. Moreover, further increases 
in the transvalvular gradient do not signifi cantly 
increase SV. With long-standing aortic stenosis, 
myocardial contractility progressively deteriorates 
and compromises left  ventricular function. 
 Classically, patients with advanced aortic ste-
nosis have the triad of dyspnea on exertion, angina, 
and orthostatic or exertional syncope. A promi-
nent feature of aortic stenosis is a decrease in left  
ventricular compliance as a result of hypertrophy. 
 Most patients have a normal life span. About 
15% develop progressive mitral regurgitation. A 
smaller percentage develops embolic phenomena 
or infective endocarditis. Patients with both a click 
and a systolic murmur seem to be at greater risk of 
developing complications. Anticoagulation or anti-
platelet agents may be used for patients with a his-
tory of emboli, whereas β-adrenergic blocking drugs 
are commonly used for arrhythmias. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 Th e management of these patients is based on their 
clinical course. Most patients are asymptomatic and 
do not require special care. Ventricular arrhyth-
mias may occur intraoperatively, particularly fol-
lowing sympathetic stimulation, and will generally 
respond to lidocaine or β-adrenergic blocking 
agents. Mitral regurgitation caused by prolapse is 
generally exacerbated by decreases in ventricular 
size. Hypovolemia and factors that increase ven-
tricular emptying or decrease aft erload should 
be avoided. Vasopressors with pure α-adrenergic 
agonist activity (such as phenylephrine) may be 
preferable to those that are primarily β-adrenergic 
agonists (ephedrine). 
 AORTIC STENOSIS 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Valvular aortic stenosis is the most common cause 
of obstruction to left  ventricular outfl ow. Left  ven-
tricular outfl ow obstruction is less commonly due 
to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, discrete congenital 
subvalvular stenosis, or, rarely, supravalvular ste-
nosis. Valvular aortic stenosis is nearly always con-
genital, rheumatic, or degenerative. Abnormalities 
in the number of cusps (most commonly a bicuspid 
valve) or their architecture produce turbulence that 
traumatizes the valve and eventually leads to steno-
sis. Rheumatic aortic stenosis is rarely isolated; it is 
more commonly associated with aortic regurgita-
tion or mitral valve disease. In the most common 
degenerative form, calcifi c aortic stenosis, wear and 
tear results in the buildup of calcium deposits on 
normal cusps, preventing them from opening com-
pletely ( Figure 21–11 ). 
 FIGURE 2111  A stenotic aortic valve is clearly 
seen in this midesophageal short axis aortic valve view. 
Calciﬁ cation of the aortic valve is usually associated with 
senile degeneration. However, congenitally abnormal 
(bicuspid) and rheumatic presentations also occur. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, 
et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & Transesophageal Echocardiography, 
McGraw-Hill , 2011.) 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
415
 where  A 2 is valve area,  A 1 is the cross-sectional area 
of the LVOT,  V 1 is maximum blood fl ow velocity in 
LVOT, and  V 2 is maximum fl ow velocity through the 
aortic valve. 
 Treatment 
 Once symptoms develop, most patients, with-
out surgical treatment, will die within 2–5 years. 
Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty is generally used 
in younger patients with congenital aortic stenosis; it 
can also be used in elderly patients with calcifi c aor-
tic stenosis who are poor candidates for aortic valve 
replacement. Its effi  cacy for the latter group is short-
lived, however, and restenosis usually occurs within 
6–12 months. Catheter-delivered aortic valves are 
increasingly being perfected and deployed in the 
treatment of aortic valve disease. Surgical replace-
ment of the stenotic aortic valve remains the main-
stay of therapy. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 A. Objectives 
 Maintenance of normal sinus rhythm, heart 
rate, vascular resistance, and intravascular 
volume is critical in patients with aortic stenosis. 
Loss of a normally timed atrial systole oft en leads 
to rapid deterioration, particularly when associated 
with tachycardia. Th e combination of the two (AF 
with rapid ventricular response) seriously impairs 
ventricular fi lling and necessitates immediate car-
dioversion. Th e reduced ventricular compliance 
also makes the patient very sensitive to abrupt 
changes in intravascular volume. Many patients 
behave as though they have a fi xed SV in spite of 
adequate hydration; under these conditions, car-
diac output becomes very rate dependent. Extreme 
bradycardia (<50 beats/min) is therefore poorly 
tolerated. Heart rates between 60 and 90 beats/min 
are optimal in most patients. 
 B. Monitoring 
 Close monitoring of the ECG and blood pressure 
is crucial. Monitoring for ischemia is complicated 
by baseline ST-segment and T-wave abnormali-
ties. Intraarterial pressure monitoring is desir-
able in patients with severe aortic stenosis, as 
10
Diastolic dysfunction is the result of an increase 
in ventricular muscle mass, fi brosis, or myocardial 
ischemia. In contrast to left  ventricular end-diastolic
volume, which remains normal until very late in 
the disease, left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
is elevated early in the disease. Th e decreased dia-
stolic pressure gradient between the left  atrium 
and left  ventricle impairs ventricular fi lling, which 
becomes quite dependent on a normal atrial con-
traction. Loss of atrial systole can precipitate con-
gestive heart failure or hypotension in patients with 
aortic stenosis. Cardiac output may be normal in 
symptomatic patients at rest, but characteristically, 
it does not appropriately increase with exertion. 
Patients may experience angina even in the absence 
of CAD. Myocardial oxygen demand increases 
because of ventricular hypertrophy, whereas myo-
cardial oxygen supply decreases as a result of the 
marked compression of intramyocardial coronary 
vessels caused by high intracavitary systolic pres-
sures (up to 300 mm Hg). Exertional syncope or 
near-syncope is thought to be due to an inability to 
tolerate the vasodilatation in muscle tissue during 
exertion. Arrhythmias leading to severe hypoper-
fusion may also account for syncope and sudden 
death in some patients. 
 CALCULATING AORTIC VALVE 
AREA & TRANSVALVULAR 
GRADIENT 
 As with mitral stenosis, the pressure gradient across 
the aortic valve can be determined noninvasively 
using continuous wave Doppler echocardiography: 
 ∆P = 4V2
 where ∆ P is the peak pressure gradient (mm Hg) 
and  V is peak blood fl ow velocity (m/s) distal to the 
obstruction. Peak velocities greater than 4.5 m/sec 
are usually indicative of severe stenosis. Moreover, 
if the area proximal to the stenosis (LVOT) can 
be measured, the continuity equation can then be 
applied to estimate valve area. Either TVIs or maxi-
mum velocities can be used: 
 
A
AV
V
2
1
1
2
=
416 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
poorly. Hypotension should generally be promptly 
treated with escalating doses (25–100 mcg) of phen-
ylephrine. Intraoperative supraventricular tachy-
cardias with hemodynamic compromise should be 
treated with immediate synchronized cardioversion. 
Frequent ventricular ectopy (which oft en refl ects 
ischemia) is usually poorly tolerated hemodynami-
cally and should be treated. Amiodarone is generally 
eff ective for both supraventricular and ventricular 
arrhythmias. 
 AORTIC REGURGITATION 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Aortic regurgitation usually develops slowly and is 
progressive (chronic), but it can also develop quickly 
(acute). Chronic aortic regurgitation may be caused 
by abnormalities of the aortic valve, the aortic root, 
or both. Abnormalities in the valve are usually con-
genital (bicuspid valve) or due to rheumatic fever. 
Diseases aff ecting the ascending aorta cause regur-
gitation by dilating the aortic annulus; they include 
syphilis, annuloaortic ectasia, cystic medial necro-
sis (with or without Marfan syndrome), ankylosing 
spondylitis, rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis, and 
a variety of other connective tissue disorders. Acute 
aortic insuffi  ciency most commonly follows infec-
tive endocarditis, trauma, or aortic dissection. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Regardless of the cause, aortic regurgitation produces 
volume overload of the left  ventricle. Th e eff ective 
forward SV is reduced because of backward (regur-
gitant) fl ow of blood into the left  ventricle during 
diastole. Systemic arterial diastolic pressure and SVR 
are typically low. Th e decrease in cardiac aft erload 
helps facilitate ventricular ejection. Total SV is the 
sum of the eff ective stroke volume and the regurgi-
tant volume. Th e regurgitant volume depends on the 
heart rate (diastolic time) and the diastolic pressure 
gradient across the aortic valve (diastolic aortic pres-
sure minus left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure). 
Slow heart rates increase regurgitation because of 
the associated disproportionate increase in diastolic 
time, whereas increases in diastolic arterial pressure 
favor regurgitant volume by increasing the pressure 
gradient for backward fl ow. 
many of these patients do not tolerate even brief 
episodes of hypotension. Pulmonary artery cath-
eterization data should be interpreted carefully; 
a higher than normal pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure is oft en required to maintain adequate 
left  ventricular end-diastolic volume and car-
diac output. Prominent  a waves are oft en visible 
on the pulmonary artery wedge pressure wave-
form. Vasodilators should generally be used cau-
tiously because patients are oft en very sensitive to 
these agents. TEE can be useful in these patients 
for monitoring ischemia, ventricular preload, 
contractility, valvular function, and the eff ects of 
therapeutic interventions. 
 C. Choice of Agents 
 Patients with mild to moderate aortic stenosis (gen-
erally asymptomatic) may tolerate spinal or epidural 
anesthesia. Th ese techniques should be employed 
very cautiously, however, because hypotension 
readily occurs as a result of reductions in preload, 
aft erload, or both. Epidural anesthesia may be pref-
erable to single-shot spinal anesthesia in many situ-
ations because of its slower onset of hypotension, 
which allows more timely correction. Continuous 
spinal catheters can similarly be used to gradually 
increase the level of regional anesthesia and limit 
the possibility of blood pressure collapse. Spinal and 
epidural anesthesia are relatively contraindicated in 
patients with severe aortic stenosis. 
 In the patient with severe aortic stenosis the 
choice of general anesthetic agents is less impor-
tant than managing their hemodynamic eff ects. 
Most general anesthetics can produce both vaso-
dilation and hypotension, which require treatment 
post induction. If a volatile agent is used, the con-
centration should be controlled to avoid excessive 
vasodilatation, myocardial depression, or loss of 
normal atrial systole. Signifi cant tachycardia and 
severe hypertension, which can precipitate isch-
emia, should be treated immediately by increasing 
anesthetic depth or administration of a β-adrenergic 
blocking agent. Most patients with aortic stenosis 
tolerate moderate hypertension and are sensitive 
to vasodilators. Moreover, because of an already 
precarious myocardial oxygen demand–supply bal-
ance, they tolerate even mild degrees of hypotension 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease
417
 Th us, 
 RSVaortic regurgitation = (ALOVT × TVILVOT) 
− (AMV × TVIMV)
and 
 RF = RSV/SV
 Pressure half-time ( T 1/2 , see the section on mitral 
stenosis above) of the regurgitant jet is another useful 
echocardiographic parameter for clinically assessing 
the severity of aortic regurgitation. Th e shorter the 
half-time, the more severe the regurgitation; severe 
regurgitation rapidly raises left  ventricular diastolic 
pressure and results in more rapid pressure equili-
bration. Unfortunately,  T 1/2 is aff ected not only by the 
regurgitant orifi ce area, but also by aortic and ventric-
ular pressure. An aortic regurgitation jet with a  T 1/2 less 
than 240 msec is associated with severe regurgitation. 
 Treatment 
 Most patients with chronic aortic regurgitation 
remain asymptomatic for 10–20 years. Once signifi -
cant symptoms develop, the expected survival time 
is about 5 years without valve replacement. Diuretics 
and aft erload reduction, particularly with ACE 
inhibitors, generally benefi t patients with advanced 
chronic aortic regurgitation. Th e decrease in arte-
rial blood pressure reduces the diastolic gradient for 
regurgitation. Patients with chronic aortic regurgi-
tation should receive valve replacement before irre-
versible ventricular dysfunction occurs. 
 Patients with acute aortic regurgitation typi-
cally require intravenous inotropic and vasodilator 
therapy. Early intervention is indicated in patients 
with acute aortic regurgitation: medical manage-
ment alone is associated with a high mortality rate. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 A. Objectives 
 Th e heart rate should be maintained toward the 
upper limits of normal (80–100 beats/min). 
 Bradycardia and increases in SVR increase 
the regurgitant volume in patients with aortic 
regurgitation, whereas tachycardia can contribute 
to myocardial ischemia. Excessive myocardial depres-
sion should also be avoided. Th e compensatory 
11
 With chronic aortic regurgitation, the left  ven-
tricle progressively dilates and undergoes eccentric 
hypertrophy. Patients with severe aortic regurgita-
tion have the largest end-diastolic volumes of any 
heart disease. Th e resulting increase in end- diastolic 
volume maintains an eff ective SV. Any increase in the 
regurgitant volume is compensated by an increase in 
end-diastolic volume. Left  ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure is usually normal or only slightly elevated, 
because ventricular compliance initially increases. 
Eventually, as ventricular function deteriorates, the 
ejection fraction declines, and impaired ventricular 
emptying is manifested as gradual increases in left  
ventricular end-diastolic pressure and end-systolic 
volume. 
 Sudden incompetence of the aortic valve does 
not allow compensatory dilatation or hypertrophy 
of the left  ventricle. Eff ective SV rapidly declines 
because the normal-sized ventricle is unable to 
accommodate a sudden large regurgitant volume. 
Th e sudden rise in left  ventricular end-diastolic pres-
sure is transmitted back to the pulmonary circula-
tion and causes acute pulmonary venous congestion. 
 Acute aortic regurgitation typically presents as 
the sudden onset of pulmonary edema and hypoten-
sion, whereas chronic regurgitation usually presents 
insidiously as congestive heart failure. Symptoms 
are generally minimal (in the chronic form) when 
the regurgitant volume remains under 40% of SV, 
but become severe when it exceeds 60%. Angina 
can occur even in the absence of coronary disease. 
Th e myocardial oxygen demand is increased from 
muscle hypertrophy and dilatation, whereas the 
myocardial blood supply is reduced by low diastolic 
pressures in the aorta as a result of the regurgitation. 
 Calculating Regurgitant Fraction & 
Other Measurements of Severity 
 As with mitral regurgitation, RSV and RF for aortic 
regurgitation can be estimated by pulsed Doppler 
echocardiography. Stroke volume is measured at 
the left  ventricular outfl ow tract (LVOT) and at the 
mitral valve (MV). Th e stroke volume ejected at the 
LVOT includes both the stroke volume that entered 
the left  ventricle through the mitral valve and 
the volume of blood that entered the left  ventricle 
through the leaky aortic valve. 
418 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
that is associated with chronic left  ventricular fail-
ure. Tricuspid regurgitation can also follow infec-
tive endocarditis (usually in injecting drug abusers), 
rheumatic fever, carcinoid syndrome, or chest 
trauma or may be due to Ebstein’s anomaly (down-
ward displacement of the valve because of abnormal 
attachment of the valve leafl ets). 
 Pathophysiology 
 Chronic left  ventricular failure oft en leads to sus-
tained increases in pulmonary vascular pressures. Th e 
chronic increase in aft erload causes progressive dila-
tation of the thin-walled right ventricle, and exces-
sive dilatation of the tricuspid annulus eventually 
results in regurgitation. An increase in end- diastolic 
volume allows the right ventricle to compensate for 
the regurgitant volume and maintain an eff ective 
forward fl ow. Because the right atrium and the vena 
cava are compliant and can usually accommodate 
the volume overload, mean right atrial and central 
venous pressures are generally only slightly elevated. 
Acute or marked elevations in pulmonary artery 
pressures increase the regurgitant volume and are 
refl ected by an increase in central venous pressure. 
Moreover, sudden marked increases in right ven-
tricular aft erload sharply reduce the eff ective right 
ventricular output, reduce left  ventricular preload, 
and can precipitate systemic hypotension. 
 Chronic venous hypertension leads to pas-
sive congestion of the liver and progressive hepatic 
dysfunction. Severe right ventricular failure with 
underloading of the left  heart may also produce 
right-to-left  shunting through a patent foramen 
ovale, which can result in marked hypoxemia. 
 Th e normal right ventricle does not extend to the 
apex of the heart when visualized using echocardiog-
raphy. As the right heart dilates, it acquires a more 
spherical shape, the right ventricle extends to the apex 
of the heart, and the interventricular septum is fl at-
tened. Th ese changes can impair left  heart function. 
 Calculating Pulmonary Artery Pressure 
 With severe tricuspid regurgitation, the normal sys-
tolic infl ow into the right atrium is reversed, and the 
reversal of fl ow is also observed in the hepatic veins. 
 Systolic pulmonary artery pressure (PAS) can be 
estimated from the peak velocity of the regurgitant jet: 
 ∆P = 4 × V2
increase in cardiac preload should be maintained, 
but overzealous fl uid replacement can readily result 
in pulmonary edema. 
 B. Monitoring 
 Invasive hemodynamic monitoring should be 
employed in patients with acute aortic regurgita-
tion and in those with severe chronic regurgita-
tion. Premature closure of the mitral valve oft en 
occurs during acute aortic regurgitation and may 
cause pulmonary capillary wedge pressure to give a 
falsely high estimate of left  ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure. Th e appearance of a large v wave suggests 
mitral regurgitation secondary to dilatation of the 
left  ventricle. Th e arterial pressure wave in patients 
with aortic regurgitation characteristically has a 
very wide pulse pressure.  Pulsus bisferiens may also 
be present in patients with moderate to severe aor-
tic insuffi  ciency and is thought to result from the 
rapid ejection of a large SV. Color-fl ow Doppler TEE 
can be invaluable in quantitating the severity of the 
regurgitation and guiding therapeutic interventions. 
By defi nition, some reversal of blood fl ow is pres-
ent in the aorta during all of diastole (holodiastolic) 
with severe aortic regurgitation; moreover, the more 
distal the detection of holodiastolic fl ow reversal is 
in the aorta, the more severe the regurgitation. 
 C. Choice of Agents 
 Most aortic insuffi  ciency patients tolerate spinal 
and epidural anesthesia well, provided intravascu-
lar volume is maintained. When general anesthesia 
is required, inhalational agents may be ideal because 
of the associated vasodilatation. Phenylephrine 
(25–50 mcg) can be used to treat hypotension second-
ary to anesthetic-induced vasodilatation. Large doses 
of phenylephrine increase SVR (and arterial diastolic 
pressure) and may exacerbate the regurgitation. 
 TRICUSPID REGURGITATION 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Up to 70% to 90% of patients have trace to mild 
tricuspid regurgitation on echocardiography; the 
regurgitant volume in these cases is almost always 
insignifi cant. Clinically signifi cant tricuspid regurgi-
tation, however, is most commonly due to dilatation 
of the right ventricle from pulmonary hypertension 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
419 
and epidural anesthesia well. Coagulopathy second-
ary to hepatic dysfunction should be excluded prior 
to any regional technique. During general anesthesia, 
nitrous oxide may exacerbate pulmonary hyperten-
sion and should be administered cautiously, if at all. 
 ENDOCARDITIS PROPHYLAXIS 
 Th e ACC/AHA guidelines regarding prophylac-
tic antibiotic regimens in patients with prosthetic 
heart valves and other structural heart abnormali-
ties have dramatically changed in recent years, 
decreasing the number of indications for antibiotic 
administration. Th e risk of antibiotic administra-
tion is oft en considered greater than the potential 
for developing perioperative endocarditis. At pres-
ent, the ACC/AHA guidelines suggest the use of 
endocarditis prophylaxis in the highest risk patients 
undergoing dental procedures involving gingival 
manipulation or perforation of the oral mucosa 
(class IIa); see  Tables 21–14 and  21–15 . Such con-
ditions include: 
 • Patients with prosthetic cardiac valves or 
prosthetic heart materials 
 • Patients with a past history of endocarditis 
 where ∆ P is the systolic pressure gradient (mm Hg) 
between the right ventricle and right atrium, and  V 
is peak blood fl ow velocity (m/s) of the regurgitant 
jet. If the central venous pressure (CVP) is known or 
assumed, then 
 PAS = CVP + ∆P
 Treatment 
 Tricuspid regurgitation is generally well tolerated by 
most patients. Because the underlying disorder is 
generally more important than the tricuspid regur-
gitation itself, treatment is aimed at the underlying 
disease process. With moderate to severe regurgi-
tation, tricuspid annuloplasty may be performed 
in conjunction with replacement of another valve. 
Recent studies suggest that correction of signifi cant 
tricuspid regurgitation is benefi cial when patients are 
brought to surgery for replacement of another valve. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 A. Objectives 
 Hemodynamic goals should be directed primar-
ily toward the underlying disorder. Hypovolemia 
and factors that increase right ventricular aft erload, 
such as hypoxia and acidosis, should be avoided to 
maintain eff ective right ventricular SV and left  ven-
tricular preload. Positive end-expiratory pressure and 
high mean airway pressures may also be undesirable 
during mechanical ventilation because they reduce 
venous return and increase right ventricular aft erload. 
 B. Monitoring 
 In these patients, invasive monitoring may be use-
ful. Pulmonary artery catheterization is not always 
possible; rarely a large regurgitant fl ow may make 
passage of a pulmonary artery catheter across the tri-
cuspid valve diffi  cult. Increasing CVP implies wors-
ening right ventricular dysfunction. Th e  x descent is 
absent, and a prominent  cv wave is usually present 
on the CVP waveform. Th ermodilution cardiac out-
put measurements are falsely elevated because of the 
tricuspid regurgitation. Color-fl ow Doppler TEE is 
useful in evaluating the severity of the regurgitation 
and other associated abnormalities. 
 C. Choice of Agents 
 Th e selection of anesthetic agents should be based on 
the underlying disorder. Most patients tolerate spinal 
 TABLE 2114 Endocarditis prophylaxis for 
dental procedures (UPDATED) 1 . 
Reasonable
Not Recommended
Endocarditis prophylaxis 
is reasonable for 
patients with the 
highest risk of adverse 
outcomes who undergo 
dental procedures that 
involve manipulation of 
either gingival tissue or 
the periapical region of 
teeth or perforation of 
the oral mucosa.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is not 
recommended for:
 •  Routine anesthetic injections 
through noninfected tissue 
 • Dental radiographs 
 •  Placement or removal of 
prosthodontic or orthodontic 
appliances 
 •  Adjustment of orthodontic 
appliances 
 •  Placement of orthodontic 
brackets 
 • Shedding of deciduous teeth 
 •  Bleeding from trauma to the 
lips or oral mucosa 
 1 Corresponds to the 2008 focused update incorporated into the ACC/
AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular 
heart disease.
Reproduced, with permission, from Dajani AS, Taubert KA, Wilson W, 
et al: Prevention of bacterial endocarditis: recommendations by the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 1997;96:358.
420 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
bacteremia, bacteria can be deposited and multiply. 
Areas of increased myocardial blood fl ow velocity 
lead to damaged endothelium, providing a template 
for bacterial adherence and growth. Indeed, the lat-
est ACC/AHA guidelines do not suggest prophylaxis 
for genitourinary or gastrointestinal procedures; 
however, the AHA does note that it is reasonable to 
administer antibiotics to prevent wound infection. 
Moreover, they note that although prophylaxis is 
not suggested for respiratory tract procedures, it is a 
reasonable strategy in high-risk patients in whom an 
incision has been made in the respiratory tract (eg, in 
tonsillectomy). 
 In spite of these much reduced indications, 
the ACC/AHA notes that many patients and phy-
sicians expect the administration of endocarditis 
 • Patients with congenital heart disease 
that is either partially repaired or unrepaired 
 • Patients with congenital heart disease 
with residual defects following repair 
 • Patients with congenital heart disease within 
6 months of a complete repair, whether 
catheter-based or surgical 
 • Cardiac transplant patients with structurally 
abnormal valves 
 Class III recommendations indicate that pro-
phylaxis is not necessary for nondental procedures, 
including TEE and esophagogastroduodenoscopy, 
except in the presence of an active infection. 
 Endocarditis is believed to occur in areas 
of cardiac endothelial damage, where in cases of 
 TABLE 2115 Regimens for a dental procedure (UPDATED). 
Regimen: Single Dose 30 to 60 min 
Before Procedure
Situation
Agent
Adults
Children
Oral
Amoxicillin
2 g
50 mg/kg
Unable to take oral medication
Ampicillin
2 g IM or IV
50 mg/kg IM or IV
OR
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone
1 g IM or IV
50 mg/kg IM or IV
Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin—oral
Cephalexin 1, 2 
2 g
50 mg/kg
OR
Clindamycin
600 mg
20 mg/kg
OR
Azithromycin or 
clarithromycin
500 mg
15 mg/kg
Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin and 
unable to take oral medication
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone ‡ 
1 g IM or IV
50 mg/kg IM or IV
OR
Clindamycin
600 mg IM or IV
20 mg/kg IM or IV
 1 Or use other ﬁ rst- or second-generation oral cephalosporin in equivalent adult or pediatric dosage.
 2 Cephalosporins should not be used in an individual with a history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria with penicillins or ampicillin.
IM indicates intramuscular; and IV, intravenous.
Reproduced, with permission, from Nishimura RA, Carabello BA, Faxon DP, et al: ACC/AHA 2008 guideline update on valvular heart disease: focused 
update on infective endocarditis prophylaxis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;52:676.
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
421 
 ANTICOAGULATION 
 Patients with mechanical prosthetic heart valves 
require anticoagulation, which is currently accom-
plished with warfarin. Aspirin is also indicated 
in this population, as well as in patients with bio-
prosthetic valves, to prevent thrombus formation. 
Warfarin is sometimes also used initially for mitral 
bioprosthetic valves ( Table 21–16 ). 
 Patients with prosthetic valves oft en present 
for noncardiac surgery that will require temporary 
discontinuation of anticoagulation. Th e ACC/AHA 
guidelines indicate that patients at low risk of throm-
bosis, such as those with bileafl et mechanical valves 
prophylaxis in patients with valvular heart dis-
ease, aortic coarctation, and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy. As always, the risk of antibiotic 
administration must be considered in offering 
prophylaxis to patients outside of the ACC/AHA 
high-risk category. Guidelines are ever chang-
ing, and although not considered to be “standard 
of care,” they are increasingly present in medi-
cal practice; furthermore, deviation from guide-
lines often requires explanation as being outside 
of “evidenced-based” practice. Review of ACC/
AHA guidelines, which are now available online, 
are recommended when high-risk patients are 
encountered. 
 TABLE 2116 Recommendations for antithrombotic therapy in patients with prosthetic heart 
valves. 
Aspirin (75–100 mg)
Warfarin (INR 2.0–3.0)
Warfarin (INR 2.5–3.5)
No Warfarin
Mechanical prosthetic valves
 AVR-low risk
  Less than 3 months
Class I
Class I
Class IIa
  Greater than 3 months
Class I
Class I
 AVR–high risk
Class I
Class I
 MVR
Class I
Class I
Biological prosthetic valves
 AVR–low risk
  Less than 3 months
Class I
Class IIa
Class IIb
  Greater than 3 months
Class I
Class IIa
 AVR–high risk
Class I
Class I
 MVR–low risk
  Less than 3 months
Class I
Class IIa
  Greater than 3 months
Class I
Class IIa
 MVR-high risk
Class I
Class l
Depending on patients’ clinical status, antithrombotic therapy must be individualized (see special situations in text). In patients receiving 
warfarin, aspirin is recommended in virtually all situations. Risk factors: atrial ﬁ brillation, left ventricular dysfunction, previous thromboembolism, 
and hypercoagulable condition. International normalized ratio (INR) should be maintained between 2.5 and 3.5 for aortic disc valves and 
Starr-Edwards valves.
AVR indicates aortic valve replacement; and MVR, mitral valve replacement.
Data from McAnuty JH, Rahimtoola SH. Antithrombotic therapy in valvular heart disease. In: Schlant R, Alexarder RW. editors.  Hurst’s The Heart. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 1998:1867-1874.
422 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
anatomy of the original heart structure defect and of 
any corrective repairs is essential prior to anesthetiz-
ing the patient with congental heart disease (CHD). 
 Th e complex nature and varying pathophysiol-
ogy of congenital heart defects make classifi cation 
diffi  cult. A commonly used scheme is presented in 
 Table 21–18 . Most patients present with cyano-
sis, congestive heart failure, or an asymptomatic 
abnormality. Cyanosis is typically the result of an 
abnormal intracardiac communication that allows 
unoxygenated blood to reach the systemic arterial 
circulation (right-to-left  shunting). Congestive 
heart failure is most prominent with defects that 
either obstruct left  ventricular outfl ow or mark-
edly increase pulmonary blood fl ow. Th e latter is 
usually due to an abnormal intracardiac commu-
nication that returns oxygenated blood to the right 
heart (left -to-right shunting). Whereas right-to-left  
shunts generally decrease pulmonary blood fl ow, 
some complex lesions increase pulmonary blood 
fl ow—even in the presence of right-to-left  shunt-
ing. In many cases, more than one lesion is present. 
in the aortic position with no additional problems 
(eg, no AF or no hypercoaguable state) can discon-
tinue warfarin 48–72 hours preoperatively so that 
the INR falls below 1.5. In patients at greater risk 
of thrombosis, warfarin should be discontinued 
and heparin, either unfractionated or low molecular 
weight, started when the INR falls below 2.0. Heparin 
can be discontinued 4–6 hours prior to surgery and 
then restarted as soon as surgical bleeding permits, 
until the patient can be restarted on warfarin therapy. 
Fresh frozen plasma may be given, if needed, in an 
emergency situation to interrupt warfarin therapy. 
Vitamin K should not be administered, as it could 
potentially lead to a hypercoaguable state. Anesthesia 
staff  should always consult with the patient’s surgeon 
and the physician responsible for prescribing the 
anticoagulation before adjusting anticoagulation or 
antiplatelet regimens perioperatively. 
 Congenital Heart Disease 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Congenital heart disease encompasses a seemingly 
endless list of abnormalities that may be detected in 
infancy, early childhood, or, less commonly, adult-
hood. Th e incidence of congenital heart disease in 
all live births approaches 1%. Th e natural history of 
some defects is such that patients oft en survive to 
adulthood ( Table 21–17 ). Moreover, the number 
of surviving adults with congenital heart disease is 
steadily increasing, possibly as a result of advances 
in surgical and medical treatment. An increasing 
number of patients with congenital heart disease 
may therefore be encountered during noncardiac 
surgery and obstetric deliveries. Knowledge of the 
 TABLE 2117 Common congenital heart 
defects in which patients typically survive to 
adulthood without treatment. 
 Bicuspid aortic valve 
 Coarctation of the aorta 
 Pulmonic valve stenosis 
 Ostium secundum atrial septal defect 
 Ventricular septal defect 
 Patent ductus arteriosus 
 TABLE 2118 Classiﬁ cation of congenital 
heart disease. 
 Lesions causing outflow obstruction 
 Left ventricle
  Coarctation of the aorta 
  Aortic stenosis 
 Right ventricle
  Pulmonic valve stenosis 
 Lesions causing left-to-right shunting 
 Ventricular septal defect 
  Patent ductus arteriosus 
  Atrial septal defect 
  Endocardial cushion defect 
  Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return 
 Lesions causing right-to-left shunting 
 With decreased pulmonary blood flow
  Tetralogy of Fallot 
  Pulmonary atresia 
  Tricuspid atresia 
  With increased pulmonary blood flow
  Transposition of the great vessels 
  Truncus arteriosus 
  Single ventricle 
  Double-outlet right ventricle 
  Total anomalous pulmonary venous return 
   Hypoplastic left heart 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
423 
conditions are inoperable and may be awaiting car-
diac transplantation. Although the management of 
the fi rst group of patients may be the same as that of 
normal patients (except for consideration of prophy-
lactic antibiotic therapy), the care of others requires 
familiarity with the complex pathophysiology of 
these defects. Even patients who have had corrective 
surgery may be prone to the development of periop-
erative problems ( Tables 21–19 and  21–20 ). Some 
surgical procedures eliminate the risk of endocar-
ditis, whereas others increase the risk through the 
use of prosthetic valves or conduits or the creation 
of new shunts. 
 For the purpose of anesthetic management, con-
genital heart defects may be divided into obstructive 
lesions, predominantly left -to-right shunts, or pre-
dominantly right-to-left  shunts. In reality, shunts 
can also be bidirectional and may reverse under cer-
tain conditions. 
In fact, survival (prior to surgical correction) with 
some anomalies (eg, transposition, total anoma-
lous venous return, pulmonary atresia) depends 
on the simultaneous presence of another shunting 
lesion (eg, patent ductus arteriosus, patent foramen 
ovale, ventricular septal defect). Chronic hypox-
emia in patients with cyanotic heart disease typi-
cally results in erythrocytosis. Th is increase in red 
cell mass, which is due to enhanced erythropoietin 
secretion from the kidneys, serves to restore tissue 
oxygen concentration to normal. Unfortunately, 
blood viscosity can also rise to the point at which 
it may interfere with oxygen delivery. When tissue 
oxygenation is restored to normal, the hematocrit is 
stable (usually <65%), and symptoms of the hyper-
viscosity syndrome are absent, the patient is said 
to have compensated erythrocytosis. Patients with 
uncompensated erythrocytosis do not establish 
this equilibrium; they have symptoms of hypervis-
cosity and may be at risk of thrombotic complica-
tions, particularly stroke. Th e last is aggravated by 
dehydration. Children younger than age 4 years 
seem to be at greatest risk of stroke. Phlebotomy is 
generally not recommended if symptoms of hyper-
viscosity are absent and the hematocrit is <65%. 
 Coagulation abnormalities are common in 
patients with cyanotic heart disease. Platelet counts 
tend to be low-normal, and many patients have 
subtle or overt defects in the coagulation cascade. 
Phlebotomy may improve hemostasis in some patients. 
Hyperuricemia oft en occurs because of increased 
urate reabsorption secondary to renal hypoperfusion. 
Gouty arthritis is uncommon, but the hyperuricemia 
can result in progressive renal impairment. 
 Preoperative Doppler echocardiography is 
invaluable in helping to defi ne the anatomy of the 
defect(s) and to confi rm or exclude the existence 
of other lesions or complications, their physiologi-
cal signifi cance, and the eff ects of any therapeutic 
interventions. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 Th is population of patients includes four groups: 
those who have undergone corrective cardiac sur-
gery and require no further operations, those who 
have had only palliative surgery, those who have not 
yet undergone any cardiac surgery, and those whose 
 TABLE 2119 Common problems in 
survivors of surgery for congenital heart 
defects. 
 Arrhythmias 
 Hypoxemia 
 Pulmonary hypertension 
 Existing shunts 
 Paradoxical embolism 
 Bacterial endocarditis 
 TABLE 2120 Congenital cardiac lesions 
and perioperative risk for noncardiac 
surgery. 
 High risk
 Pulmonary hypertension, primary or secondary 
 Cyanotic congenital heart disease 
 New York Heart Association class III or IV 
 Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (ejection 
fraction less than 35%) 
 Severe left-sided heart obstructive lesions 
 Moderate risk
 Prosthetic valve or conduit 
 Intracardiac shunt 
 Moderate left-sided heart obstruction 
 Moderate systemic ventricular dysfunction 
Warnes C, Williams R, Bashore T, et al: ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for 
the management of adults with congenital heart disease. Circulation 
2008;118:2395.
424 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
pulmonary blood fl ow. Th e ratio of pulmonary (Qp) 
to systemic (Qs) blood fl ow is useful to determine 
the directionality of the shunt. 
 A ratio greater than 1 usually indicates a left -to-
right shunt, whereas a ratio less than 1 indicates a right-
to-left  shunt. A ratio of 1 indicates either no shunting 
or a bidirectional shunt of opposing magnitudes. 
 Large increases in pulmonary blood fl ow pro-
duce pulmonary vascular congestion and increase 
extravascular lung water. Th e latter interferes with 
gas exchange, decreases lung compliance, and 
increases the work of breathing. Left  atrial distention 
also compresses the left  bronchus, whereas distention 
of pulmonary vessels compresses smaller bronchi. 
 Over the course of several years, chronic 
increases in pulmonary blood fl ow produce vascu-
lar changes that irreversibly increase PVR. Elevation 
of right ventricular aft erload produces hypertro-
phy and progressively raises right-sided cardiac 
pressures. With advanced disease, the pressures 
within the right heart can exceed those within the 
left  heart. Under these conditions, the intracardiac 
shunt reverses and becomes a right-to-left  shunt 
(Eisenmenger syndrome). 
 When a communication is small, shunt fl ow 
depends primarily on the size of the communication 
(restrictive shunt). When the communication is 
large (nonrestrictive shunt), shunt fl ow depends 
on  the relative balance between PVR and SVR. 
 An increase in SVR relative to PVR favors left -
to-right shunting, whereas an increase in PVR 
relative to SVR favors right-to-left  shunting. 
Common chamber lesions (eg, single atrium, single 
ventricle, truncus arteriosus) represent the extreme 
form of nonrestrictive shunts; shunt fl ow with these 
lesions is bidirectional and totally dependent on 
relative changes in the ventricular aft erload. 
 Th e presence of shunt fl ow between the right 
and left  hearts, regardless of the direction of 
blood fl ow, mandates the meticulous exclusion of air 
bubbles and particulate material from intravenous 
fl uids to prevent paradoxical embolism into the 
cerebral or coronary circulations. 
 Atrial Septal Defects 
 Ostium secundum atrial septal defects (ASDs) are 
the most common type and usually occur as isolated 
12
13
 1. Obstructive Lesions 
 Pulmonic Stenosis 
 Pulmonary valve stenosis obstructs right ventricu-
lar outfl ow and causes concentric right ventricular 
hypertrophy. Severe obstruction presents in the 
neonatal period, whereas lesser degrees of obstruc-
tion may go undetected until adulthood. Th e valve 
is usually deformed and is either bicuspid or tricus-
pid. Valve leafl ets are oft en partially fused and dis-
play systolic doming on echocardiography. Th e right 
ventricle undergoes hypertrophy, and poststenotic 
dilatation of the pulmonary artery is oft en present. 
Symptoms are those of right ventricular heart fail-
ure. Symptomatic patients readily develop fatigue, 
dyspnea, and peripheral cyanosis with exertion as 
a result of the limited pulmonary blood fl ow and 
increased oxygen extraction by tissues. With severe 
stenosis, the pulmonic valve gradient exceeds 60–80 
mm Hg, depending on the age of the patient. Right-
to-left  shunting may also occur in the presence of a 
patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect. Cardiac 
output is very dependent on an elevated heart rate, 
but excessive increases in the latter can compromise 
ventricular fi lling. Percutaneous balloon valvulo-
plasty is generally considered the initial treatment 
of choice in most patients with symptomatic pul-
monic stenosis. Anesthetic management for patients 
undergoing surgery should maintain a normal or 
slightly high heart rate, augment preload, and avoid 
factors that increase PVR. 
 2. Predominantly Left-to-Right 
(Simple) Shunts 
 Simple shunts are isolated abnormal communica-
tions between the right and left  sides of the heart. 
Because pressures are normally higher on the left 
side of the heart, blood usually fl ows across from 
left  to right, and blood fl ow through the right heart 
and the lungs increases. Depending on the size and 
location of the communication, the right ventricle 
may also be subjected to the higher left -sided pres-
sures, resulting in both pressure and volume over-
load. Right ventricular aft erload is normally 5% 
that of the left  ventricle, so even small left -to-right 
pressure gradients can produce large increases in 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
425 
 Th e resulting functional abnormality of a VSD 
is dependent on the size of the defect, PVR, and the 
presence or absence of other abnormalities. Small 
VSDs, particularly of the muscular type, oft en close 
during childhood. Restrictive defects are associated 
with only small left -to-right shunts (pulmonary–
systemic blood fl ow ratios less than 1.75:1). Large 
defects produce large left -to-right shunts (shunts 
larger than 2:1) that vary directly with SVR and 
indirectly with PVR. Recurrent pulmonary infec-
tions and congestive heart failure are common with 
pulmonary–systemic fl ow ratios of 3–5:1. Patients 
with small VSDs are treated medically and fol-
lowed by electrocardiography (for signs of right 
ventricular hypertrophy) and echocardiography. 
Surgical closure is usually undertaken in patients 
with large VSDs before pulmonary vascular disease 
and Eisenmenger physiology develop. As with atrial 
defects, in the absence of heart failure, anesthetic 
responses to inhalation and intravenous agents 
are generally not signifi cantly altered. Similarly, 
increases in SVR worsen the left -to-right shunting. 
 When right-to-left  shunting is present, abrupt 
increases in PVR or decreases in SVR are poorly 
tolerated. 
 Atrioventricular Septal Defects 
 Endocardial cushion (AV canal) defects produce 
contiguous atrial and ventricular septal defects, 
oft en with very abnormal AV valves. Th is is a com-
mon lesion in patients with Down syndrome. Th e 
defect can produce large shunts both at the atrial 
and ventricular levels. Mitral and tricuspid regurgi-
tation exacerbate the volume overload on the ven-
tricles. Initially, shunting is predominately left  to 
right; however, with increasing pulmonary hyper-
tension, Eisenmenger syndrome with obvious cya-
nosis develops. 
 Patent Ductus Arteriosus 
 Persistence of the communication between the 
main pulmonary artery and the aorta can produce 
restrictive or nonrestrictive left -to-right shunts. Th is 
abnormality is commonly responsible for the car-
diopulmonary deterioration of premature infants 
and occasionally presents later in life when it can be 
lesions in the area of the fossa ovalis. Th e defect is 
sometimes associated with partial anomalous pul-
monary venous return, most commonly of the right 
upper pulmonary vein. A secundum ASD may result 
in single or multiple (fenestrated) openings between 
the atria. Th e less common sinus venosus and ostium 
primum ASDs are typically associated with other car-
diac abnormalities. Sinus venosus defects are located 
in the upper interatrial septum close to the superior 
vena cava; one or more of the right pulmonary veins 
oft en abnormally drains into the superior vena cava. 
In contrast, ostium primum ASDs are located in the 
lower interatrial septum and overlie the mitral and 
tricuspid valves; most patients also have a cleft  in the 
anterior leafl et of the mitral, valve and some have an 
abnormal septal leafl et in the tricuspid valve. 
 Most children with ASDs are minimally symp-
tomatic; some have recurrent pulmonary infections. 
Congestive heart failure and pulmonary hyperten-
sion are more commonly encountered in adults with 
ASDs. Patients with ostium primum defects oft en 
have large shunts and may also develop signifi cant 
mitral regurgitation. In the absence of heart failure, 
anesthetic responses to inhalation and intravenous 
agents are generally not signifi cantly altered in 
patients with ASDs.  Large increases in SVR should 
be avoided because they may worsen the left -to-
right shunting . 
 Ventricular Septal Defects 
 Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is a common con-
genital heart defect, accounting for up to 25% to 
35% of congenital heart disease. Th e defect is most 
frequently found in the membranous part of the 
interventricular septum (membranous or infracris-
tal VSD) in a posterior position and anterior to the 
septal leafl et of the tricuspid valve. Muscular VSDs 
are the next most frequent type and are located in 
the mid or apical portion of the interventricular sep-
tum, where there may be a single defect or multiple 
openings (resembling Swiss cheese). Defects in the 
subpulmonary (supracristal) septum are oft en asso-
ciated with aortic regurgitation because the right 
coronary cusp can prolapse into the VSD. Septal 
defects at the ventricular inlet are usually similar in 
development and location to AV septal defects (see 
the following section). 
426 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
At least 20% to 25% of patients also have pulmonic 
stenosis, and a small percentage of patients has some 
element of supravalvular obstruction. Th e pulmonic 
valve is oft en bicuspid, or, less commonly, atretic. 
Infundibular obstruction may be increased by sym-
pathetic tone and is therefore dynamic; this obstruc-
tion is likely responsible for the hypercyanotic spells 
observed in very young patients.  Th e combination 
of right ventricular outfl ow obstruction and a 
VSD results in ejection of unoxygenated right ven-
tricular blood, as well as oxygenated left  ventricu-
lar blood into the aorta . Th e right-to-left  shunting 
across the VSD has both fi xed and variable compo-
nents. Th e fi xed component is determined by the 
severity of the right ventricular obstruction, whereas 
the variable component depends on SVR and PVR. 
 Neonates with severe right ventricular obstruc-
tion may deteriorate quickly, as pulmonary blood 
fl ow decreases when a PDA starts to close. 
Intravenous prostaglandin E 1 (0.05–0.2 mcg/kg/
min) is used to prevent ductal closure in such 
instances. Surgical palliation with a left -to-right sys-
temic shunt or complete correction is then usually 
undertaken. For the former, a modifi ed Blalock–
Taussig (systemic–pulmonary artery) shunt is most 
oft en used to increase pulmonary blood fl ow. In this 
procedure, a synthetic graft  is anastomosed between 
a subclavian artery and an ipsilateral pulmonary 
artery. Complete correction involves closure of the 
VSD, removal of obstructing infundibular muscle, 
and pulmonic valvulotomy or valvuloplasty, when 
necessary. 
 Th e goals of anesthetic management in patients 
with tetralogy of Fallot should be to maintain 
intravascular volume and SVR. Increases in PVR, 
such as might occur from acidosis or excessive air-
way pressures, should be avoided.  Ketamine (intra-
muscular or intravenous) is a commonly used 
induction agent because it maintains or increases 
SVR and therefore does not aggravate the right-
to-left  shunting . Patients with milder degrees of 
shunting generally tolerate inhalation induction. 
Th e right-to-left  shunting tends to slow the uptake 
of inhalation anesthetics; in contrast, it may accel-
erate the onset of intravenous agents. Oxygenation 
oft en improves following induction of anesthesia. 
Muscle relaxants that release histamine should be 
14
corrected thoracoscopically. Anesthetic goals should 
be similar to atrial and ventricular septal defects. 
 Partial Anomalous Venous Return 
 Th is defect is present when one or more pulmo-
nary veins drains into the right side of the heart; 
the anomalous veins are usually from the right lung. 
Possible anomalous entry sites include the right 
atrium, the superior or inferior vena cava, and the 
coronary sinus. Th e resulting abnormality produces 
a variable amount of left -to-right shunting. Th e 
clinical course and prognosis are usually excellent 
and similar to that of a secundum ASD. A very large 
coronary sinus on TEE suggests anomalous drainage 
into the coronary sinus, which may complicate the 
management of cardioplegia during cardiac surgery. 
Total anomalous venous return is corrected imme-
diately aft er birth. 
 3. Predominantly Right-to-Left 
(Complex) Shunts 
 Lesions within this group (some also called  mixing 
lesions ) oft en produce both ventricular outfl ow 
obstruction and shunting. Th e obstruction favors 
shunt fl ow toward the unobstructed side. When 
the obstruction is relatively mild, the amount of 
shunting is aff ected by the ratio of SVR to PVR, 
but increasing degrees of obstruction fi x the direc-
tion and magnitude of the shunt. Atresia of any 
one of the cardiac valves represents the extreme 
form of obstruction. Shunting occurs proximal to 
the atretic valve and is completely fi xed; survival 
depends on another distal shunt (usually a patent 
ductus arteriosus [PDA], patent foramen ovale, 
ASD, or VSD), where blood fl ows in the opposite 
direction. Th is group of defects may also be divided 
according to whether they increase or decrease 
pulmonary blood fl ow. 
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Th is anomaly classically includes right ventricu-
lar outfl ow obstruction, right ventricular hyper-
trophy, and a VSD with an overriding aorta. Right 
ventricular obstruction in most patients is due to 
infundibular stenosis, which is due to hypertrophy 
of the subpulmonic muscle (crista ventricularis). 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
427 
if surgical correction is delayed. Corrective surgical 
treatment involves an arterial switch procedure in 
which the aorta is divided and reanastomosed to the 
left  ventricle, and the pulmonary artery is divided 
and reanastomosed to the right ventricle. Th e coro-
nary arteries must also be reimplanted into the old 
pulmonary artery root. A VSD, if present, is closed. 
Less commonly, an atrial switch (Senning) proce-
dure may be carried out if an arterial switch is not 
possible. In this latter procedure, an intraatrial baffl  e 
is created from the atrial wall, and blood from the 
pulmonary veins fl ows across an ASD to the right 
ventricle, from which it is ejected into the systemic 
circulation. 
 Transposition of the great vessels may occur 
with a VSD and pulmonic stenosis. Th is combina-
tion of defects mimics tetralogy of Fallot; however, 
the obstruction aff ects the left  ventricle, not the right 
ventricle. Corrective surgery involves patch closure 
of the VSD, directing left  ventricular outfl ow into 
the aorta, ligation of the proximal pulmonary artery, 
and connecting the right ventricular outfl ow to the 
pulmonary artery with a valved conduit (Rastelli 
procedure). 
 Truncus Arteriosus 
 With a truncus arteriosus defect, a single arte-
rial trunk supplies the pulmonary and systemic 
circulation. Th e truncus always overrides a VSD, 
allowing both ventricles to eject into it. As PVR 
gradually decreases aft er birth, pulmonary blood 
fl ow increases greatly, resulting in heart failure. If 
left  untreated, PVR increases, and cyanosis develops 
again, along with Eisenmenger physiology. Surgical 
correction closes the VSD, separates the pulmonary 
artery from the truncus, and connects the right 
ventricle to the pulmonary artery with a conduit 
(Rastelli repair). 
 Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome 
 Th is syndrome describes a group of defects charac-
terized by aortic valve atresia and marked under-
development of the left  ventricle. Th e right ventricle 
is the main pumping chamber for both systemic 
and pulmonary circulations. It ejects normally 
into the pulmonary artery, and all (or nearly all) 
blood fl ow entering the aorta is usually derived 
avoided. Hypercyanotic spells may be treated with 
intravenous fl uid and phenylephrine (5 mcg/kg). 
Beta blockers (eg, propranolol) may also be eff ective 
in relieving infundibular spasm. Sodium bicarbon-
ate to correct the resulting metabolic acidosis, may 
also be helpful when the hypoxemia is severe and 
prolonged. 
 Tricuspid Atresia 
 With tricuspid atresia, blood can fl ow out of the right 
atrium only via a patent foramen ovale (or an ASD). 
Moreover, a PDA (or VSD) is necessary for blood 
to fl ow from the left  ventricle into the pulmonary 
circulation. Cyanosis is usually evident at birth, and 
its severity depends on the amount of pulmonary 
blood fl ow that is achieved. Early survival is depen-
dent on prostaglandin E 1 infusion, with or without 
a percutaneous Rashkind balloon atrial septostomy. 
Severe cyanosis requires a modifi ed Blalock–Taussig 
shunt early in life. Th e preferred surgical manage-
ment is a modifi ed Fontan procedure, in which the 
venous drainage is directed to the pulmonary circu-
lation. In some centers, a superior vena cava to the 
main pulmonary artery (bidirectional Glenn) shunt 
may be employed before or instead of a Fontan 
procedure. With both procedures, blood from the 
systemic veins fl ows to the left  atrium without the 
assistance of the right ventricle. Success of the pro-
cedure depends on a high systemic venous pressure 
and maintaining both low PVR and a low left  atrial 
pressure. Heart transplantation may be necessary for 
a failed Fontan procedure. 
 Transposition of the Great Arteries 
 In patients with transposition of the great arteries, 
pulmonary and systemic venous return fl ows nor-
mally back to the right and left  atrium, respectively, 
but the aorta arises from the right ventricle, and 
the pulmonary artery arises from the left  ventricle. 
Th us, deoxygenated blood returns back into the 
systemic circulation, and oxygenated blood returns 
back to the lungs. Survival is possible only through 
mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood 
across the foramen ovale and a PDA. Th e presence 
of a VSD increases mixing and reduces the level of 
hypoxemia. Prostaglandin E 1 infusion is usually 
necessary. Rashkind septostomy may be necessary 
428 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Rejection may be heralded by arrhythmias (in the 
fi rst 6 months) or decreased exercise tolerance from 
a progressive deterioration of myocardial perfor-
mance. Periodic echocardiographic evaluations are 
commonly used to monitor for rejection, but the 
most reliable technique is endomyocardial biopsy. 
Accelerated atherosclerosis in the graft  is a very 
common and serious problem that limits the life of 
the transplant. Moreover, myocardial ischemia and 
infarction are almost always silent because of the 
denervation. Because of this, patients must undergo 
periodic evaluations, including angiography, for 
assessment of coronary atherosclerosis. 
 Immunosuppressive therapy usually includes 
cyclosporine, 
azathioprine, 
and 
prednisone. 
Important side eff ects include nephrotoxicity, bone 
marrow suppression, hepatotoxicity, opportunistic 
infections, and osteoporosis. Hypertension and fl uid 
retention are common and typically require treat-
ment with a diuretic and an ACE inhibitor. Stress 
doses of corticosteroids are needed when patients 
undergo major procedures. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 Almost all anesthetic techniques, including regional 
anesthesia, have been used successfully for trans-
planted patients. Th e preload-dependent func-
tion of the graft  makes maintenance of a normal 
or high cardiac preload desirable. Moreover, the 
absence of refl ex increases in heart rate can make 
patients particularly sensitive to rapid vasodilata-
tion. Indirect vasopressors, such as ephedrine, are 
less eff ective than direct-acting agents because of 
the absence of catecholamine stores in myocardial 
neurons. Isoproterenol or epinephrine infusions 
should be readily available to increase the heart rate 
if necessary. 
 Careful electrocardiographic monitoring for 
ischemia is necessary. Th e ECG usually demon-
strates two sets of P waves, one representing the 
recipient’s own sinoatrial node (SA) (which is left 
intact), and the other representing the donor’s SA 
node. Th e recipient’s SA node may still be aff ected 
by autonomic infl uences, but it does not aff ect car-
diac function. Direct arterial pressure monitoring 
should be used for major operations; strict asepsis 
should be observed during placement. 
from a PDA. Surgical treatment includes both the 
Norwood repair and a hybrid approach to pallia-
tion. In the Norwood repair, a new aorta is created 
from the hypoplastic aorta and the main pulmo-
nary artery. Pulmonary blood fl ow is delivered via a 
Blalock–Taussig shunt. Th e right ventricle becomes 
the heart’s systemic pumping ventricle. A hybrid 
approach has also been advocated for the treatment 
of hypoplastic left  heart syndrome. In this approach, 
the pulmonary arteries are banded to reduce pul-
monary blood fl ow, and the PDA is stented to pro-
vide for systemic blood fl ow. 
 The Patient with a 
Transplanted Heart 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Th e number of patients with cardiac transplants 
is  increasing because of both the increasing 
 frequency of transplantation and improved post-
transplant survival rates. Th ese patients may pres-
ent to the operating room early in the postoperative 
period for mediastinal exploration or retransplan-
tation, or they may appear later for incision and 
drainage of infections, orthopedic surgery, or 
unrelated procedures. 
 Th e transplanted heart is totally denervated, 
so direct autonomic infl uences are absent. 
Cardiac impulse formation and conduction are nor-
mal, but the absence of vagal infl uences causes a rel-
atively high resting heart rate (100–120 beats/min). 
Although sympathetic fi bers are similarly inter-
rupted, the response to circulating catecholamines 
is normal or even enhanced because of denervation 
sensitivity (increased receptor density). Cardiac out-
put tends to be low-normal and increases relatively 
slowly in response to exercise because the response 
is dependent on an increase in circulating catechol-
amines. Because the Starling relationship between 
end-diastolic volume and cardiac output is normal, 
the transplanted heart is also oft en said to be preload 
dependent. Coronary autoregulation is preserved. 
 Preoperative evaluation should focus on evalu-
ating the functional status of the transplanted organ 
and detecting complications of immunosuppre ssion. 
15
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
429 
abnormalities, drug toxicity, hypothermia, or myo-
cardial ischemia. Irreversible abnormalities, which 
initially may be only intermittent before they 
become permanent, reﬂ ect either isolated con-
duction system abnormalities or underlying heart 
disease (most commonly hypertensive, coronary 
artery, or valvular heart disease). 
 What is the pathophysiology of 
sinus node dysfunction? 
 Patients with sinus node dysfunction may 
have a normal baseline 12-lead ECG but abrupt 
pauses in SA node activity (sinus arrest) or inter-
mittent block of conduction of the SA impulse 
to the surrounding tissue (exit block). Symptoms 
are usually present when pauses are prolonged 
 In a recently transplanted patient, the right ven-
tricle of the transplanted heart may not be able to 
overcome the resistance of the pulmonary vascu-
lature. Right ventricular failure can occur periop-
eratively, requiring the use of inhaled nitric oxide, 
inotropes, and, at times, right ventricular assist 
devices. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Hip Fracture in an Elderly 
Woman who Fell 
 A 71-year-old woman presents for open reduc-
tion and internal ﬁ xation of a left hip fracture. 
She gives a history of two episodes of lighthead-
edness several days prior to her fall today. When 
questioned about her fall, she can only recall 
standing in her bathroom while brushing her 
teeth and then awakening on the ﬂ oor with hip 
pain. The preoperative ECG shows a sinus rhythm 
with a P–R interval of 220 msec and a right bun-
dle-branch block (RBBB) pattern. 
 Why should the anesthesiologist be 
concerned about a history of syncope? 
 A history of syncope in elderly patients should 
always raise the possibility of arrhythmias and 
underlying organic heart disease. Although arrhyth-
mias can occur in the absence of organic heart 
disease, the two are commonly related. Cardiac 
syncope usually results from an abrupt arrhythmia 
that suddenly compromises cardiac output and 
impairs cerebral perfusion. Lightheadedness and 
presyncope, may reﬂ ect lesser degrees of cerebral 
impairment. Both bradyarrhythmias and tachyar-
rhythmias (see  Chapter 20 ) can produce syncope. 
 Table 21–21 lists other cardiac and noncardiac 
causes of syncope. 
 How do bradyarrhythmias commonly arise? 
 Bradyarrhythmias may arise from either SA 
node dysfunction or abnormal AV conduction of 
the cardiac impulse. A delay or block of the impulse 
can occur anywhere between the SA node and the 
distal His-Purkinje system). Reversible abnormali-
ties may be due to abnormal vagal tone, electrolyte 
 TABLE 2121 Causes of syncope. 
Cardiac
 Arrhythmias
 Tachyarrhythmias (usually >180 beats/min) 
 Bradyarrhythmias (usually <40 beats/min) 
 Impairment of left ventricular ejection
 Aortic stenosis 
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
 Massive myocardial infarction 
 Atrial myxoma 
 Impairment of right ventricular output
 Tetralogy of Fallot 
 Primary pulmonary hypertension 
 Pulmonary embolism 
 Pulmonic valve stenosis 
 Biventricular impairment
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Massive myocardial infarction 
 Noncardiac 
 Accentuated reflexes
 Vasodepressor reflex (ie, vasovagal syncope) 
 Carotid sinus hypersensitivity 
 Neuralgias 
 Postural hypotension
 Hypovolemia 
 Sympathectomy 
 Autonomic dysfunction 
 Sustained Valsalva maneuver 
 Cerebrovascular disease 
 Seizures 
 Metabolic
 Hypoxia 
 Marked hypocapnia 
 Hypoglycemia 
430 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
(<40 beats/min) and is often unstable; it results in 
a wide QRS complex. 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of isolated bundle-
branch block with a normal P–R interval? 
 A conduction delay or block in the right bun-
dle-branch results in a typical RBBB QRS pattern 
on the surface ECG (M-shape or rSR’ in V 1 ) and may 
represent a congenital abnormality or underlying 
organic heart disease. In contrast, a delay or block 
in the main left bundle-branch results in a left bun-
dle-branch block (LBBB) QRS pattern (wide R with 
a delayed upstroke in V 5 ) and nearly always rep-
resents underlying heart disease. The term hemi-
block is often used if only one of the two fascicles 
of the left bundle-branch is blocked (left anterior 
or left posterior hemiblock). When the P–R interval 
is normal—and in the absence of an acute MI—a 
conduction block in either the left or right bundle 
rarely leads to complete heart block. 
 Can the site of an AV block always 
be determined from a 12-lead ECG? 
 No. A ﬁ rst-degree AV block (P–R interval >200 
ms) can reﬂ ect abnormal conduction anywhere 
between the atria and the distal His-Purkinje sys-
tem. Mobitz type I second-degree AV block, which 
is characterized by progressive lengthening of the 
P–R interval before a P wave is not conducted (a 
QRS does not follow the P wave), is usually due to 
a block in the AV node itself, and can be caused by 
digitalis toxicity or myocardical ischemia; progres-
sion to a third-degree AV block is uncommon. 
 In patients with Mobitz type II second-degree 
AV block, atrial impulses are periodically not con-
ducted into the ventricle without progressive pro-
longation of the P–R interval. The conduction block 
is nearly always in or below the His bundle and fre-
quently progresses to complete (third-degree) AV 
block, particularly following an acute anteroseptal 
MI. The QRS is typically wide. 
 In patients with a third-degree AV block, the 
atrial rate and ventricular depolarization rates 
are independent (AV dissociation) because atrial 
impulses completely fail to reach the ventricles. If 
the site of the block is in the AV node, a stable His 
(>3 s) or the eﬀ ective ventricular rate is less than 
40 beats/min. Patients may experience inter-
mittent dizziness, syncope, confusion, fatigue, 
or shortness of breath. Symptomatic SA node 
dysfunction, or sick sinus syndrome, is often 
unmasked by β-adrenergic blocking agents, cal-
cium channel blockers, digoxin, or quinidine. 
The term tachycardia–bradycardia syndrome is 
often used when patients experience paroxysmal 
tachyarrhythmias (usually atrial ﬂ utter or ﬁ brilla-
tion) followed by sinus pauses or bradycardia. The 
latter, bradycardia, probably represents failure of 
the SA node to recover normal automaticity fol-
lowing suppression by the tachyarrhythmia. The 
diagnosis must be based on electrocardiographic 
recordings made during symptoms (Holter moni-
toring) or after provocative tests (carotid barore-
ceptor stimulation or rapid atrial pacing). 
 How are AV conduction abnormalities 
manifested on the surface 12-lead ECG? 
 AV conduction abnormalities are usually mani-
fested by abnormal ventricular depolarization 
(bundle-branch block), prolongation of the P–R 
interval (ﬁ rst-degree AV block), failure of some 
atrial impulses to depolarize the ventricles (sec-
ond-degree AV block), or AV dissociation (third-
degree AV block; also called complete heart block). 
 What determines the signiﬁ cance 
of these conduction abnormalities? 
 The signiﬁ cance of a conduction system 
abnormality depends on its location, its likeli-
hood for progression to complete heart block, 
and the likelihood that a more distal pacemaker 
site will be able to maintain a stable and adequate 
escape rhythm (>40 beats/min). The His bundle is 
normally the lowest area in the conduction sys-
tem that can maintain a stable rhythm (usually 
40–60 beats/min). When conduction fails any-
where above it, a normal His bundle can take 
over the pacemaker function of the heart and 
maintain a normal QRS complex, unless a distal 
intraventricular conduction defect is present. 
When the escape rhythm arises farther down the 
His-Purkinje system, the rhythm is usually slower 
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
431 
of life-threatening bradyarrhythmias (third-degree 
AV block). Intracardiac electrocardiographic record-
ings would be necessary to conﬁ rm the site of the 
conduction delay. 
 What is appropriate management 
for this patient? 
 Cardiological evaluation is required because 
of the symptomatic bifascicular block. One of two 
approaches can be recommended, depending on 
the urgency of the surgery. If the surgery is truly 
emergent, a temporary transvenous pacing cath-
eter or a transcutaneous pacemaker is indicated 
prior to induction of general or regional anesthe-
sia. If the surgery can be postponed 24–48 hr (as in 
this case), continuous electrocardiographic moni-
toring, serial 12-lead ECGs, and measurements of 
cardiac isoenzymes are required to exclude myo-
cardial ischemia or infarction and to try to record 
ﬁ ndings during symptoms. 
 What are general perioperative indications 
for temporary pacing? 
 Suggested indications include the following: 
any documented symptomatic  bradyarrhythmia; 
second-degree (type II) AV block, or third-
degree AV block and refractory supraventricular 
tachyarrhythmias. 
 The ﬁ rst three indications generally require 
ventricular pacing, whereas the fourth requires 
atrial pacing electrodes and a programmable rapid 
atrial pulse generator. 
 How can temporary cardiac pacing 
be established? 
 Pacing can be established by transvenous, 
transcutaneous, epicardial, or transesophageal 
electrodes. The most reliable method is generally 
via a transvenous pacing electrode in the form 
of a pacing wire or a balloon-tipped pacing cath-
eter. A pacing wire should always be positioned 
ﬂ uoroscopically, but a ﬂ ow-directed pacing cath-
eter can also be placed in the right ventricle under 
pressure monitoring. A pacing wire must be used 
when blood ﬂ ow has ceased. If the patient has a 
rhythm, intracardiac electrocardiographic record-
ing showing ST-segment elevation when the 
bundle rhythm will result in a normal QRS complex, 
and the ventricular rate will often increase follow-
ing administration of atropine. If the block involves 
the His bundle, the origin of the ventricular rhythm 
is more distal, resulting in wide QRS complexes. A 
wide QRS complex does not necessarily exclude a 
normal His bundle, as it may represent a more dis-
tal block in one of the bundle branches. 
 Can AV dissociation occur in the 
absence of AV block? 
 Yes. AV dissociation may occur during anesthe-
sia with volatile agents in the absence of AV block 
and results from sinus bradycardia or an accelerated 
AV junctional rhythm. During isorhythmic dissocia-
tion, the atria and ventricles beat independently at 
nearly the same rate. The P wave often just precedes 
or follows the QRS complex, and their relationship 
is generally maintained. In contrast, interference AV 
dissociation results from a junctional rhythm that is 
faster than the sinus rate—such that sinus impulses 
always ﬁ nd the AV node refractory. 
 How do bifascicular and trifascicular 
blocks present? 
 A bifascicular block exists when two of the 
three major His bundle-branches (right, left ante-
rior, or left posterior) are partially or completely 
blocked. If one fascicle is completely blocked and 
the others are only partially blocked, a bundle-
branch block pattern will be associated with either 
ﬁ rst-degree or second-degree AV block. If all three 
are aﬀ ected, a trifascicular block is said to exist. A 
delay or partial block in all three fascicles results 
in either a prolonged P–R interval (ﬁ rst-degree AV 
block) or alternating LBBB and RBBB. Complete 
block in all three fascicles results in third-degree AV 
block. 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of the 
electrocardiographic ﬁ ndings 
in this patient? 
 The electrocardiographic ﬁ ndings (ﬁ rst-degree 
AV block plus RBBB) suggest a bifascicular block. 
Extensive disease of the conduction system is 
likely. Moreover, the patient’s syncopal and near-
syncopal episodes suggest that she may be at risk 
432 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
ﬁ lling is lost. When the AV conducting system is 
diseased, atrial contraction can still be maintained 
by sequential stimulation by separate atrial and 
ventricular electrodes. The P–R interval can be var-
ied by adjusting the delay between the atrial and 
ventricular impulses (usually set at 150–200 ms). 
 How are pacemakers classiﬁ ed? 
 Pacemakers are categorized by a ﬁ ve-letter 
code, according to the chambers paced, chambers 
sensed, response to sensing, programmability, and 
arrhythmia function ( Table 21–22 ). The two most 
commonly used pacing modes are VVI and DDD 
(the last two letters are frequently omitted). 
 If a pacemaker is placed in this patient, 
how can its function be evaluated? 
 If the patient’s underlying rhythm is slower 
than the rate of a demand pacemaker, pacing 
spikes should be seen on the ECG. The spike rate 
should be identical to the programmed (perma-
nent pacemaker—usually 72/min) or set (tempo-
rary) pacemaker rate; a slower rate may indicate a 
low battery. Every pacing spike should be followed 
by a QRS complex (100% capture). Moreover, every 
impulse should be followed by a palpable arterial 
pulse. If the patient has a temporary pacemaker, 
the escape rhythm can be established by tempo-
rarily slowing the pacing rate or decreasing the 
current output. 
 When the patient’s heart rate is faster than the 
set pacemaker rate, pacing spikes should not be 
observed if the generator is sensing properly. In this 
instance, ventricular capture cannot be evaluated 
electrode comes in contact with the right ven-
tricular endocardium conﬁ rms placement of either 
type of electrode. Specially designed pulmonary 
artery catheters have an extra port for passage of 
a right ventricular pacing wire. These catheters are 
particularly useful in patients with LBBB, who can 
theoretically develop complete heart block during 
catheter placement. Transcutaneous ventricular 
pacing is also possible via large stimulating adhe-
sive pads placed on the chest and should be used 
whenever transvenous pacing is not readily avail-
able. Epicardial electrodes are usually used dur-
ing cardiac surgery. Pacing the left atrium via an 
esophageal electrode is a simple, relatively nonin-
vasive technique, but it is useful only for symptom-
atic sinus bradycardias and for terminating some 
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. 
 Once positioned, the pacing electrodes are 
attached to an electrical pulse generator that peri-
odically delivers an impulse at a set rate and mag-
nitude. Most pacemaker generators can also sense 
the heart’s spontaneous (usually ventricular) elec-
trical activity: when activity is detected, the gen-
erator suppresses its next impulse. By altering the 
generator’s sensing threshold, the pacemaker gen-
erator can function in a ﬁ xed (asynchronous) mode 
or in a demand mode (by increasing sensitivity). 
The lowest current through the electrode that can 
depolarize the myocardium is called the threshold 
current (usually <2 mA for transvenous electrodes). 
 What is AV sequential pacing? 
 Ventricular pacing often reduces cardiac out-
put because the atrial contribution to ventricular 
 TABLE 2122 Classiﬁ cation of pacemakers. 
Chamber-Paced
Chamber-Sensed
Response to Sensing
Programmability
Antitacharrhythmia Function
O = none
O = none
O = none
O = none
O = none
A = atrium
A = atrium
T = triggered
P = simple
P = pacing
V = ventricle
V = ventricle
l = inhibited
M = multi-
programmable
S = shock
D = dual (atrium 
and ventricle)
D = dual (atrium 
and ventricle)
D = dual (triggered 
and inhibited)
C = communicating
R = rate modulation
D = dual (pacing and shock)
 
CHAPTER 21 Anesthesia for Patients with Cardiovascular Disease 
433 
may be useful until the problem is resolved. If an 
adequate arterial blood pressure cannot be main-
tained with adrenergic agonists, cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation should be instituted until another 
pacing electrode is placed or a new generator 
box is obtained. Transcutaneous pacing can be 
employed. 
 If a permanent pacemaker malfunctions (as with 
electrocautery), it should generally be converted to 
an asynchronous mode. Some units will automati-
cally reprogram themselves to the asynchronous 
mode if malfunction is detected. Other pacemaker 
units must be reprogrammed by placing either an 
external magnet, or, preferably, a programming 
device over the generator. The eﬀ ect of an external 
magnet on some pacemakers—particularly during 
electrocautery—may be unpredictable and should 
generally be determined prior to surgery. 
 Which anesthetic agents are appropriate 
for patients with pacemakers? 
 All anesthetic agents have been safely used 
in patients who already have pacemakers. Even 
volatile agents seem to have no eﬀ ect on pacing 
electrode thresholds. Local anesthesia with moder-
ate to deep intravenous sedation is usually used for 
placement of permanent pacemakers. 
unless the pacemaker rate increases or the sponta-
neous heart rate decreases. Fortunately, when the 
battery is low, sensing is generally aﬀ ected before 
pacing output decreases. A chest radiograph is use-
ful in excluding fracture or displacement of pacing 
leads. If pacemaker malfunction is suspected, car-
diological consultation is essential. 
 What intraoperative conditions may cause the 
pacemaker to malfunction? 
 Electrical interference from surgical elec-
trocautery units can be interpreted as myo-
cardial electrical activity and can suppress the 
pacemaker generator.  Problems with electro-
cautery may be minimized by limiting its use to 
short bursts, limiting its power output, placing 
its grounding plate as far from the pacemaker 
generator as possible, and using bipolar cautery. 
Moreover, continuous monitoring of an arterial 
pulse wave (pressure, plethysmogram, or oximetry 
signal) is mandatory to ensure continuous perfu-
sion during electrocautery. 
 Both hypokalemia and hyperkalemia can alter 
the pacing electrodes’ threshold for depolarizing 
the myocardium and can result in failure of the pac-
ing impulse to depolarize the ventricle. Myocardial 
ischemia, infarction, or scarring can also increase 
the electrodes’ threshold and cause failure of ven-
tricular capture. 
 What are appropriate measures if a pacemaker 
fails intraoperatively? 
 If a temporary pacemaker fails intraoperatively, 
the inspired oxygen concentration should be 
increased to 100%. All connections and the gener-
ator battery should be checked. Most units have a 
battery-level indicator and a light that ﬂ ashes with 
every impulse. The generator should be set into the 
asynchronous mode, and the ventricular output 
should be set on maximum. Failure of a temporary 
transvenous electrode to capture the ventricle is 
usually due to displacement of the electrode away 
from the ventricular endocardium; careful slow 
advancement of the catheter or wire while pacing 
often results in capture. Pharmacological manage-
ment (atropine, isoproterenol, or epinephrine) 
GUIDELINES
 Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K, et al: 2008 
focused update incorporated in the ACC/AHA 2006 
guidelines for the management of patients with 
valvular heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (writing committee 
to revise the 1998 guidelines for the management of 
patients with valvular heart disease): endorsed by the 
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, 
and Society of Th oracic Surgeons. Circulation 
2008;118:e523. 
 Eagle KA, Berger PB, Calkins H, et al: ACC/AHA 
guideline update for perioperative cardiovascular 
evaluation for noncardiac surgery—Executive 
summary. Anesth Analg 2002;94:1052. 
434 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Zipes D, Camm A, Borggrefe M, et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 
2006 guidelines for management of patients with 
ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden 
cardiac death—executive summary. Circulation 
2006;114:1088. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Amar D: Perioperative atrial tachyarrhythmias. 
Anesthesiology 2002;97:1618. 
 Atlee JL, Bernstein AD: Cardiac rhythm management 
devices (part I). Indications, device selection, and 
function. Anesthesiology 2001;95:1265. 
 Atlee JL, Bernstein AD: Cardiac rhythm management 
devices (part II). Perioperative management. 
Anesthesiology 2001;95:1492. 
 Braunwald E, Zipes DP, Libby P:  Heart Disease , 9th ed. 
W.B. Saunders, 2011. 
 Chassot PG, Delabays A, Spahn DR: Preoperative 
evaluation of patients with, or at risk of, CAD 
undergoing non-cardiac surgery. Br J Anaesth 
2002;89:747. 
 Howell SJ, Sear JW, Foex P: Hypertension, hypertensive 
heart disease and perioperative cardiac risk. Br J 
Anaesth 2004;92:570. 
 Lake CL:  Pediatric Cardiac Anesthesia , 4th ed. LWW, 2004. 
 Otto CM:  Valvular Heart Disease , 3rd ed. W.B. Saunders, 
2009. 
 Otto CM:  Textbook of Clinical Echocardiography , 4th ed. 
W.B. Saunders, 2009. 
 Park KW: Preoperative cardiac evaluation. Anesth Clin 
North Am 2004;22:199. 
 Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia & 
Transesophageal Echocardiography, McGraw-Hill , 2011. 
 Fleisher L, Beckman J, Brown K, et al: ACC/AHA 2007 
guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation 
and care for noncardiac surgery. Circulation 2007;116: 
e418. 
 Fuster V, Rydén L, Cannom D, et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 
2006 guidelines for the management of patients 
with atrial fi brillation-executive summary: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines and European Society of Cardiology 
Committee for Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2006;114:700. 
 Jessup M, Abraham W, Casey D, et al: 2009 Focused 
update: ACCF/AHA guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of heart failure in adults: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation 2009;119:1977. 
 Strickberger S, Conti J, Daoud E, et al: Patient selection 
for cardiac resynchronization therapy: from the 
Council of Clinical Cardiology Subcommittee 
on Electrocardiography and Arrhythmias and 
the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research 
Interdisciplinary Working Group in Collaboration 
with the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation 
2005;111:2146. 
 Warnes C, Williams R, Bashore T, et al: ACC/AHA 
2008 guidelines for the management of adults with 
congenital heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (writing committee 
to develop guidelines on the management of 
adults with congenital heart disease). Circulation 
2008;118:e714. 
 435
22
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for 
Cardiovascular Surgery 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is a 
technique that diverts venous blood 
away from the heart (most often from 
one or more cannulas in the right atrium), 
adds oxygen, removes CO 2 , and returns 
the blood through a cannula in a large 
artery (usually the ascending aorta or a 
femoral artery). As a result, nearly all blood 
bypasses the heart and lungs . 
 The ﬂ uid level in the reservoir is critical. If 
a “roller” pump is used and the reservoir is 
allowed to empty, air can enter the main 
pump and be embolized into the patient 
where it may cause organ damage or 
fatality . 
 Initiation of CPB is associated with a variable 
increase in stress hormones and systemic 
inﬂ ammatory response . 
 Establishing the adequacy of the patient’s 
preoperative cardiac function should be 
based on exercise (activity) tolerance, 
measurements of myocardial contractility 
such as ejection fraction, the severity and 
location of coronary stenoses, ventricular 
wall motion abnormalities, cardiac end-
diastolic pressures, cardiac output, and 
valvular areas and gradients . 
 Blood should be immediately available for 
transfusion if the patient has already had 
a midline sternotomy (a “redo”); in these 
1
2
3
4
5
cases, the right ventricle or coronary grafts 
may be adherent to the sternum and may 
be accidentally entered during the repeat 
sternotomy . 
 In general, pulmonary artery catheterization 
has been most often used in patients 
with compromised ventricular function 
(ejection fraction < 40–50%) or pulmonary 
hypertension and in those undergoing 
complicated procedures . 
 Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
provides valuable information about 
cardiac anatomy and function during 
surgery. Two-dimensional, multiplane TEE 
can detect regional and global ventricular 
abnormalities, chamber dimensions, valvular 
anatomy, and the presence of intracardiac 
air. Three-dimensional TEE provides a more 
complete description of valvular anatomy 
and pathology . 
 Anesthetic dose requirements are variable 
and patient tolerance of inhaled anesthetics 
generally declines with declining ventricular 
function. Severely compromised patients 
should be given anesthetic agents in 
incremental, small doses . 
 Anticoagulation must be established 
before CPB to prevent acute disseminated 
intravascular coagulation and formation of 
clots in the CPB pump . 
6
7
8
9
—Continued next page
436 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Antiﬁ brinolytic therapy may be particularly 
useful for patients who are undergoing 
a repeat operation; who refuse blood 
products, such as Jehovah’s Witnesses; 
who are at high risk for postoperative 
bleeding because of recent administration 
of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (abciximab, 
eptiﬁ batide, or tiroﬁ ban); who have 
preexisting coagulopathy; and who 
are undergoing long and complicated 
procedures involving the heart or aorta . 
 Hypotension from impaired ventricular ﬁ lling 
may occur during manipulation of the venae 
cavae and the heart . 
 Hypothermia (< 34°C) potentiates general 
anesthetic potency, but failure to give 
anesthetic agents, particularly during 
rewarming on CPB, may result in awareness 
and recall . 
 Protamine administration can result in a 
number of adverse hemodynamic eﬀ ects, 
some of which are immunological in origin. 
Protamine given slowly (5–10 min) usually 
has few eﬀ ects; when given more rapidly 
it produces a fairly consistent vasodilation 
that is easily treated with blood from the 
pump oxygenator and small doses of 
phenylephrine. Catastrophic protamine 
reactions often include myocardial 
depression and marked pulmonary 
hypertension. Diabetic patients previously 
maintained on protamine-containing insulin 
(such as NPH) may be at increased risk for 
adverse reactions to protamine . 
 Persistent bleeding often follows 
prolonged durations of bypass (>2 h) and 
in most instances has multiple causes. 
Inadequate surgical control of bleeding 
sites, incomplete reversal of heparin, 
thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction, 
hypothermia-induced coagulation defects, 
undiagnosed preoperative hemostatic 
10
11
12
13
14
defects, or newly acquired factor deﬁ ciency 
or hypoﬁ brinogenemia may be responsible . 
 Chest tube drainage in the ﬁ rst 2 h of more 
than 250–300 mL/h (10 mL/kg/h)—in the 
absence of a hemostatic defect—is excessive 
and may require surgical reexploration. 
Intrathoracic bleeding at a site not 
adequately drained may cause cardiac 
tamponade, requiring immediate reopening 
of the chest . 
 Factors known to increase pulmonary 
vascular resistance (PVR) such as acidosis, 
hypercapnia, hypoxia, enhanced 
sympathetic tone, and high mean airway 
pressures are to be avoided for patients 
with right-to-left shunting; hyperventilation 
(hypocapnia) with 100% oxygen is usually 
eﬀ ective in lowering PVR. Conversely, 
patients with left-to-right shunting beneﬁ t 
from systemic vasodilation and increases 
in PVR, although speciﬁ c hemodynamic 
manipulation is generally not attempted . 
 Induction of general anesthesia in patients 
with cardiac tamponade can precipitate 
severe hypotension and cardiac arrest . 
 The sudden increase in left ventricular 
afterload after application of the aortic 
cross-clamp during aortic surgery may 
precipitate acute left ventricular failure 
and myocardial ischemia, particularly 
in patients with underlying ventricular 
dysfunction or coronary disease. The period 
of greatest hemodynamic instability follows 
the release of the aortic cross-clamp; the 
abrupt decrease in afterload together with 
bleeding and the release of vasodilating acid 
metabolites from the ischemic lower body 
can precipitate severe systemic hypotension . 
 The emphasis of anesthetic management 
during carotid surgery is on maintaining 
adequate perfusion to the brain and heart . 
15
16
17
18
19
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
437
established, the extracorporeal circuit is in series 
with the systemic circulation and provides both 
artifi cial ventilation and perfusion. Th is technique 
provides distinctly nonphysiological conditions, 
because arterial pressure is usually less than normal 
and blood fl ow is usually nonpulsatile. To minimize 
organ damage during this stressful period, various 
degrees of systemic hypothermia may be employed. 
Topical hypothermia (an ice-slush solution) and car-
dioplegia (a chemical solution for arresting myocar-
dial electrical activity) may also be used to protect 
the heart. 
 Th e operation of the CPB machine is a complex 
task requiring the attention of a perfusionist—a spe-
cialized (and certifi ed) technician. Optimal results 
with CPB require close cooperation and commu-
nication between the surgeon, anesthesiologist, and 
perfusionist. 
 BASIC CIRCUIT 
 Th e typical CPB machine has six basic components: 
a venous reservoir, an oxygenator, a heat exchanger, 
a main pump, an arterial fi lter, tubing that conducts 
venous blood to the venous reservoir, and tubing 
that conducts oxygenated blood back to the patient 
( Figure 22–1 ). Modern machines use a single dis-
posable unit that includes the reservoir, oxygen-
ator, and heat exchanger. Most machines also have 
 Anesthesia for cardiovascular surgery requires an 
understanding of circulatory physiology, pharma-
cology, and pathophysiology as well as a familiarity 
with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) pumps, fi lters, 
and circuitry; transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE); and techniques of myocardial preservation. 
Because surgical manipulations oft en have a pro-
found impact on circulatory function, the anesthe-
siologist must understand the rationale behind the 
surgical techniques, follow the progress of the sur-
gery, and anticipate the potential problems associ-
ated with each step. 
 Th is chapter presents an overview of anesthe-
sia for cardiovascular surgery and of the principles, 
techniques, and physiology of CPB. Surgery on the 
aorta, the carotid arteries, and the pericardium pres-
ents problems that require special anesthetic consid-
erations, which are also discussed herein. 
 Cardiopulmonary Bypass 
 CPB is a technique that diverts venous blood 
away from the heart (most oft en from one or 
more cannulas in the right atrium), adds oxygen, 
removes CO 2 , and returns the blood through a can-
nula in a large artery (usually the ascending aorta 
or a femoral artery). As a result, nearly all blood 
bypasses the heart and lungs. When CPB is fully 
1
 FIGURE 221  The basic design of cardiopulmonary bypass machines. 
Patient
Arterial
cannula
Arterial
filter
Main
pump
Venous
cannula
Cardiotomy
suction
Left
ventricular
vent
Venous
reservoir
Filter
Accessory
pump
Accessory
pump
Filter
Oxygenator
Heat
exchanger
438 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Oxygenator 
 Blood is drained by gravity from the bottom of the 
venous reservoir into the oxygenator, which con-
tains a blood–gas interface that allows blood to 
equilibrate with the gas mixture (primarily oxygen). 
A volatile anesthetic is frequently added to the oxy-
genator gas mixture. Th e blood–gas interface in a 
modern, membrane-type oxygenator is a very thin, 
gas-permeable silicone membrane. Arterial CO 2
tension during CPB is dependent on total gas fl ow 
past the oxygenator. By varying the inspired oxygen 
concentration, a membrane oxygenator allows inde-
pendent control of Pa o 2 and Paco 2 . 
 Heat Exchanger 
 Blood from the oxygenator enters the heat exchanger 
and can either be cooled or warmed, depending 
on the temperature of the water fl owing through 
the exchanger; heat transfer occurs by conduction. 
Because gas solubility decreases as blood tempera-
ture rises, a fi lter is built into the unit to catch any 
bubbles that may form during rewarming. 
 Main Pump 
 Modern CPB machines use either an electrically 
driven double-arm roller (positive displacement) or 
a centrifugal pump to propel blood through the CPB 
circuit. 
 A. Roller Pumps 
 Roller pumps produce fl ow by compressing large-
bore tubing in the main pumping chamber as the 
roller heads turn. Subtotal occlusion of the tubing 
prevents excessive red cell trauma. Th e rollers pump 
blood regardless of the resistance encountered, and 
produce a nearly continuous nonpulsatile fl ow. Flow 
is directly proportional to the number of revolutions 
per minute. In some pumps, an emergency back-up 
battery provides power in case of an electrical power 
failure. All roller pumps have a hand crank to allow 
manual pumping, but those who have hand cranked 
a roller pump head will confi rm that this is not a 
good long-term solution. 
 B. Centrifugal Pumps 
 Centrifugal pumps consist of a series of cones in a 
plastic housing. As the cones spin, the centrifugal 
forces created propel the blood from the centrally 
separate accessory pumps that can be used for blood 
salvage (cardiotomy suction), venting (draining) 
the left  ventricle, and administration of cardioplegia 
solutions. A number of other fi lters, alarms, and in-
line pressure, oxygen-saturation, and temperature 
monitors are also typically used. 
 Prior to use, the CPB circuit must be primed 
with fl uid (typically 1200–1800 mL for adults) that 
is devoid of bubbles. A balanced salt solution, such 
as lactated Ringer’s solution, is generally used, but 
other components are frequently added, including 
colloid (albumin or starch), mannitol (to promote 
diuresis), heparin (500–5000 units), and bicarbon-
ate. At the onset of bypass, hemodilution decreases 
the hematocrit to about 22–27% in most patients. 
Blood is included in priming solutions for smaller 
children and severely anemic adults to prevent 
severe hemodilution. 
 Reservoir 
 Th e reservoir of the CPB machine receives blood 
from the patient via one or two venous cannulas 
placed in the right atrium, the superior and inferior 
vena cava, or a femoral vein. With most circuits 
blood returns to the reservoir by gravity drainage. 
During extracorporeal circulation the patient’s 
venous pressure is normally low. Th us, the driving 
force for fl ow into the pump is directly related to the 
diff erence in height between the patient and the res-
ervoir and inversely proportional to the resistance of 
the cannulas and tubing. An appropriately primed 
CPB machine draws in blood like a siphon. 
Entrainment of air in the venous line can produce an 
air lock that may prevent blood fl ow. With some cir-
cuits (eg, use of an unusually small venous cannula) 
assisted venous drainage may be required; a regu-
lated vacuum together with a hard shell venous res-
ervoir or centrifugal pump (see below) is used in 
such instances.  Th e fl uid level in the reservoir 
is critical. If a “roller” pump is used and the 
reservoir is allowed to empty, air can enter the main 
pump and be embolized into the patient where it 
may cause organ damage or fatality. A low reservoir 
level alarm is typically present. Centrifugal pumps 
will not pump air but have the disadvantage of not 
impelling a well-defi ned volume with each turn of 
the head (unlike roller pumps). 
2
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
439 
located inlet to the periphery. In contrast to roller 
pumps, blood fl ow with centrifugal pumps is pres-
sure sensitive and must be monitored by an elec-
tromagnetic fl owmeter. Increases in distal pressure 
will decrease fl ow and must be compensated for by 
increasing the pump speed. Because these pumps are 
nonocclusive, they are less traumatic to blood than 
roller pumps. Unlike roller pumps, which are placed 
aft er the oxygenator ( Figure 22–1 ), centrifugal pumps 
are normally located between the venous reservoir 
and the oxygenator. Centrifugal (unlike roller) pumps 
have the advantage of not being able to pump air. 
 C. Pulsatile Flow 
 Pulsatile blood fl ow is possible with some roller 
pumps. Pulsations can be produced by instantaneous 
variations in the rate of rotation of the roller heads; 
they can also be added aft er fl ow is generated. Pulsatile 
fl ow is not available with centrifugal pumps. Although 
there is no consensus and the data are contradictory, 
some clinicians believe that pulsatile fl ow improves 
tissue perfusion, enhances oxygen extraction, attenu-
ates the release of stress hormones, and results in lower 
systemic vascular resistances (SVRs) during CPB. 
 Arterial Filter 
 Particulate matter (eg, thrombi, fat globules, tissue 
debris) may enter the CPB circuit via the cardiotomy 
suction line. Although fi lters are oft en used at other 
locations, a fi nal, in-line, arterial fi lter (27–40 µm) 
helps to reduce systemic embolism. Once fi ltered, 
the propelled blood returns to the patient, usually 
via a cannula in the ascending aorta, or less com-
monly in the femoral artery. A normally functioning 
aortic valve prevents blood from regurgitating into 
the left  ventricle. 
 Th e fi lter is always in parallel with a (normally 
clamped) bypass limb in case the fi lter becomes 
clogged or develops increased resistance. For the 
same reason, arterial infl ow pressure is measured 
before the fi lter. Th e fi lter is also designed to trap air, 
which can be bled out through a built-in stopcock. 
 Accessory Pumps & Devices 
 A. Cardiotomy Suction 
 Th e cardiotomy suction pump aspirates blood from 
the surgical fi eld during CPB and returns it directly 
to the main pump reservoir. Th is is a potential port 
of entry for fat and other debris to the pump that 
could embolize to organs. A so-called cell-saver suc-
tion device may also be used to aspirate blood from 
the surgical fi eld, in which case blood is returned 
to a separate reservoir on a separate device. When 
suffi  cient blood has accumulated (or at the end of 
the procedure), the cell-saver blood is centrifuged, 
washed, and returned to the patient. Excessive suc-
tion pressure can theoretically contribute to red cell 
trauma. Use of cell-saver suction (instead of cardi-
otomy suction) during bypass will deplete CPB cir-
cuit volume if blood loss is brisk. Th e high negative 
pressure of ordinary wall suction devices produces 
excessive red cell trauma precluding blood salvage 
from that source. 
 B. Left Ventricular Vent 
 With time, even with “total” CPB, blood reaccumu-
lates in the left  ventricle as a result of residual pulmo-
nary fl ow from the bronchial arteries (which arise 
directly from the aorta or the intercostal arteries) 
or thebesian vessels (see Chapter 20), or sometimes 
as a result of aortic valvular regurgitation. Aortic 
regurgitation can occur as a result of either (struc-
tural) valvular abnormalities or surgical manipula-
tion of the heart (functional). Distention by blood 
of the left  ventricle compromises myocardial pres-
ervation (see below) and requires decompression 
(venting). Most surgeons accomplish this by insert-
ing a catheter via the right superior pulmonary vein 
and left  atrium into the left  ventricle. Venting may 
also be accomplished using a catheter placed in the 
left  ventricular apex or across the aortic valve. Th e 
blood aspirated by the vent pump normally passes 
through a fi lter before being returned to the venous 
reservoir. 
 C. Cardioplegia Pump 
 Cardioplegic solutions are most oft en administered 
via an accessory pump on the CPB machine. Th is 
technique allows optimal control over the infusion 
pressure, rate, and temperature. A separate heat 
exchanger ensures control of the temperature of the 
cardioplegia solution. Less commonly, cardioplegic 
solutions may be infused from a cold intravenous 
fl uid bag given under pressure or by gravity. 
440 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
related to incomplete myocardial preservation dur-
ing CPB. Injury related to hemodynamic instability 
results from an imbalance between oxygen demand 
and supply, producing cell ischemia. Aft er ischemia, 
reperfusion injury may also play a role. Reperfusion 
following a period of ischemia may produce excess 
oxygen-derived free radicals, intracellular calcium 
overload, abnormal endothelial–leukocyte interac-
tions, and myocardial cellular edema. Patients at 
greatest risk are those with poor ventricular func-
tion (as measured preoperatively) (see  Table 21–13 ) 
those with ventricular hypertrophy, and those with 
diff use severe coronary artery disease. Inadequate 
myocardial preservation is usually manifested at 
the end of bypass as a persistently reduced cardiac 
output, worsened ventricular function by TEE, or 
cardiac arrhythmias. Electrocardiographic signs 
of myocardial ischemia are oft en diffi  cult to detect 
due to frequent use of electrical pacing. Myocardial 
“stunning,” resulting from ischemia and reperfu-
sion, produces systolic and diastolic dysfunction 
that is reversible with time. Th e stunned myocar-
dium usually responds to positive inotropic drugs. 
Myocardial necrosis, on the other hand, produces 
irreversible injury. 
 Aortic cross-clamping during CPB completely 
excludes the coronary arteries from the general-
ized bypass machine fl ow to the body, reducing 
coronary blood fl ow to 0. Although it is diffi  cult to 
estimate a safe period for cross-clamping because 
of diff ering vulnerabilities among patients and dif-
fering techniques for myocardial preservation, CPB 
times longer than 120 min (while oft en unavoid-
able) increase risk relative to shorter bypass times. 
Myocardial ischemia during bypass may occur not 
only during aortic clamping, but also aft er release 
of the cross-clamp. Low arterial pressures, coro-
nary embolism (from thrombi, platelets, air, fat, or 
atheromatous debris), reperfusion injury, coronary 
artery or bypass graft  vasospasm, and contortion 
of the heart—causing compression or distortion of 
the coronary vessels—are all possible causes. Areas 
of the myocardium distal to a high-grade coronary 
obstruction are at greatest risk. 
 Ischemia causes depletion of high-energy phos-
phate compounds and an accumulation of intracel-
lular calcium. When coronary blood fl ow ceases, 
 D. Ultraﬁ ltration 
 Ultrafi ltration can be used during CPB to increase 
the patient’s hematocrit without transfusion. 
Ultrafi lters consist of hollow capillary fi bers that can 
function as membranes, allowing separation of the 
aqueous phase of blood from its cellular and pro-
teinaceous elements. Blood can be diverted to pass 
through the fi bers either from the arterial side of the 
main pump or from the venous reservoir using an 
accessory pump. Hydrostatic pressure forces water 
and electrolytes across the fi ber membrane. Effl  uents 
of up to 40 mL/min may be removed. 
 SYSTEMIC HYPOTHERMIA 
 Intentional hypothermia is oft en used following the 
initiation of CPB. Core body temperature may be 
reduced to 20–32°C. In recent years, so-called tepid 
bypass has been used; this may be accomplished by 
allowing the patient’s temperature to “drift ” down-
ward to 30–35°C. Metabolic oxygen requirements 
are generally halved with each reduction of 10°C in 
body temperature. At the end of the surgical pro-
cedure, rewarming via the heat exchanger restores 
normal body temperature. 
 For complex repairs, profound hypothermia 
to temperatures of 15–18°C allows total circulatory 
arrest for durations of as long as 60 min. During 
that time, both the heart and the CPB machine are 
stopped. 
 Th e adverse eff ects of hypothermia include 
platelet dysfunction; reversible coagulopathy; and 
depression of myocardial contractility. 
 MYOCARDIAL PRESERVATION 
 Optimal results in cardiac surgery require an expe-
ditious and complete surgical repair with minimal 
physical trauma to the heart. Meanwhile, several 
techniques are used to prevent myocardial damage 
and maintain normal cellular integrity and function 
during CPB. Nearly all patients sustain at least mini-
mal myocardial injury during cardiac surgery. With 
good preservation techniques, however, most of the 
injury is reversible. Although myocardial injury can 
be related to the hemodynamic instability or sur-
gical technique, it most commonly appears to be 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
441 
Depending on the amount and the location of coro-
nary emboli, even small air bubbles can cause vary-
ing degrees of ventricular dysfunction at the end of 
CPB. To some extent, air emboli may preferentially 
fi nd their way into the right (versus left ) coronary 
ostium because of its superior location on the aortic 
root in the supine patient. 
 Potassium Cardioplegia 
 Th e most widely used method of arresting myo-
cardial electrical activity is the administration of 
potassium-rich crystalloid or blood–crystalloid solu-
tions. Following initiation of CPB and aortic cross-
 clamping, the coronary circulation is perfused inter-
mittently with (usually cold) cardioplegic solutions. 
Th e resulting increase in extracellular potassium 
concentration reduces the transmembrane potential. 
Eventually, the heart is arrested in diastole. Usually, 
cold cardioplegia must be repeated at intervals 
(about every 30 min) because of gradual washout 
and rewarming of the myocardium. Th e heart is sub-
ject to warming by contact with blood in the adja-
cent descending aorta and by contact with warmer 
ambient air in the surgical theater. Moreover, mul-
tiple doses of cardioplegia solutions may improve 
myocardial preservation by preventing an excessive 
accumulation of metabolites that inhibit anaerobic 
metabolism. 
 Although the exact recipe varies from center 
to center, the essential ingredient of the induction 
dose of cardioplegic solution is the same: an elevated 
potassium (10–40 mEq/L) concentration. Potassium 
concentration is kept below 40 mEq/L, because 
higher levels can be associated with an excessive 
potassium load and excessive potassium concentra-
tions at the end of termination of bypass perfusion. 
Sodium concentration in cardioplegic solutions is 
usually less than in plasma (<140 mEq/L) because 
ischemia tends to increase intracellular sodium con-
tent. A small amount of calcium (0.7–1.2 mmol/L) 
is needed to maintain cellular integrity, whereas 
magnesium (1.5–15 mmol/L) is usually added to 
control excessive intracellular infl uxes of calcium. A 
buff er—most commonly bicarbonate—is necessary 
to prevent excessive buildup of acid metabolites; in 
fact, alkalotic perfusates are reported to produce 
better myocardial preservation. Alternative buff ers 
creatine phosphate and anaerobic metabolism 
become the principal sources of cellular energy; 
fatty acid oxidation is impaired. Unfortunately, these 
energy stores rapidly become depleted, and the pro-
gressive acidosis that develops limits glycolysis. 
 Cardioplegic solutions maintain normal cellu-
lar integrity and function during CPB by reducing 
energy expenditure and preserving the availability 
of high-energy phosphate compounds. Although 
measures directed at increasing or replenishing 
energy substrates in the form of glucose or gluta-
mate/aspartate infusions are used, the emphasis of 
myocardial preservation has been on reducing cel-
lular energy requirements to minimal levels. Th is 
is accomplished initially by the use of potassium 
cardioplegia (below). Th e initial dose of cardiople-
gic solution may be hypothermic or may start warm 
(“hot shot”) and progress to cold. Maintenance of 
myocardial protection may be facilitated by sys-
temic and topical cardiac hypothermia (ice slush). 
Myocardial hypothermia reduces basal metabolic 
oxygen consumption, and potassium cardioplegia 
minimizes energy expenditure by arresting both 
electrical and mechanical activity. Myocardial 
temperature is oft en monitored directly; 10–15°C 
is usually considered desirable. Cardioplegic solu-
tions can be administered either antegrade through 
a catheter placed in the proximal aorta between 
the aortic clamp and the aortic valve, or retrograde 
through a catheter placed through the right atrium 
into the coronary sinus. 
 Ventricular fi brillation and distention (previ-
ously discussed) are important causes of myocardial 
damage. Ventricular fi brillation can dangerously 
increase myocardial oxygen demand, whereas dis-
tention not only increases oxygen demand but also 
reduces oxygen supply by interfering with suben-
docardial blood fl ow. Th e combination of the two is 
particularly bad. Other factors that might contribute 
to perioperative myocardial damage include the use 
of excessive doses of positive inotropes or calcium 
salts. In open heart procedures, de-airing of cardiac 
chambers and venting before and during initial car-
diac ejection are critically important in preventing 
cerebral or coronary air embolism (and strokes—
see below). Removing air from coronary graft s 
during bypass procedures is similarly important. 
442 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
be administered to wash out byproducts and replen-
ish metabolic substrates. Hypercalcemia should 
be avoided in the immediate reperfusion period. 
Reperfusion pressures should be controlled closely 
because of altered coronary autoregulation. Systemic 
perfusion pressure is reduced just prior to clamp 
release; it is then brought up initially to about 40 mm 
Hg before gradually being increased and maintained 
at about 70 mm Hg. To further minimize metabolic 
requirement, the heart should have the opportunity 
to recover and resume contracting in an empty state 
for some additional time (5–10 min), and acidosis 
and hypoxia should be corrected before attempting 
to wean the patient from bypass perfusion. 
 Inadequate myocardial protection or inade-
quate washout and recovery from cardioplegia can 
result in asystole, atrioventricular conduction block, 
or a poorly contracting heart at the end of bypass. 
Excessive volumes of hyperkalemic cardioplegic 
solutions may produce persisting systemic hyper-
kalemia. Although calcium salt administration par-
tially off sets hyperkalemia, excessive calcium can 
promote and enhance myocardial damage. In the 
usual patient myocardial performance improves 
with time as the contents of the cardioplegia are 
cleared from the heart. 
 PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF 
CARDIOPULMONARY BYPASS 
 Hormonal, Humoral, & 
Immunological Responses 
 Initiation of CPB is associated with a vari-
able increase in stress hormones and systemic 
infl ammatory response. Elevated levels of catechol-
amines, cortisol, arginine vasopressin, and angioten-
sin are observed. Th ese neurohormonal responses 
are variously infl uenced by depth of anesthesia, 
blood pressure, type of surgical repair, or presence 
of pulsatile CPB. 
 Multiple humoral systems are also activated, 
including complement, coagulation, fi brinolysis, 
and the kallikrein system. Contact of blood with 
the internal surfaces of the CPB system activates 
complement via the alternate pathway (C3) as well 
as the classic pathway; the latter also activates the 
3
include histidine and tromethamine (also known as 
THAM). Other components may include hypertonic 
agents to control cellular edema (mannitol) and 
agents thought to have membrane-stabilizing eff ects 
(lidocaine or glucocorticoids). Energy substrates are 
provided as glucose, glutamate, or aspartate. Th e 
question of whether to use crystalloid or blood as 
a vehicle for achieving cardioplegia remains con-
troversial, although blood cardioplegia has become 
very common in North America. Evidence suggests 
that at least some groups of high-risk patients may 
do better with blood cardioplegia. Certainly, oxy-
genated blood cardioplegia may contain more oxy-
gen than crystalloid cardioplegia. 
 Because cardioplegia may not reach areas distal 
to high-grade coronary obstructions (the areas that 
need it most), many surgeons administer retrograde 
cardioplegia through a coronary sinus catheter. 
Some centers have reported that the combination of 
antegrade plus retrograde cardioplegia is superior 
to either technique alone. Others have suggested 
that continuous warm blood cardioplegia is supe-
rior to intermittent hypothermic cardioplegia for 
myocardial preservation, but many surgeons avoid 
continuous cardioplegia so that they can operate in 
a “bloodless” surgical fi eld. Moreover, warm cardiac 
surgery raises additional concerns about loss of the 
potentially protective eff ects of systemic hypother-
mia against cerebral injury, when true normother-
mia (rather than tepid bypass) is maintained. 
 As discussed previously, with prolonged myocar-
dial ischemic times (cross-clamp time), reperfusion 
of the myocardium can lead to extensive cell injury, 
rapid accumulation of intracellular calcium, and 
potentially irreversible cellular necrosis. Th is process 
has long been attributed to depletion of endogenous 
free radical scavengers during CPB and accumulation 
of deleterious oxygen-derived free radicals. Free radi-
cal scavengers, such as mannitol, may help decrease 
reperfusion injury and are typical constituents of 
cardioplegic solutions and bypass “priming” solu-
tions. Several steps may help limit reperfusion injury 
before unclamping of the aorta. Just prior to reperfu-
sion, the heart may be perfused by a reduced potas-
sium cardioplegic solution that serves to wash out 
accumulated metabolic byproducts. Alternatively, a 
“hot shot” or warm blood cardioplegic solution may 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
443
the sudden increase in volume of distribution with 
hemodilution, decreased protein binding, and 
changes in perfusion and redistribution between 
peripheral and central compartments. Some drugs, 
such as opioids, also bind CPB components (but 
this is also minimal and inconsequential). Heparin 
potentially alters protein binding of drugs and ions 
by releasing and activating lipoprotein lipase, which 
hydrolyzes plasma triglycerides into free fatty acids; 
the latter can competitively inhibit drug binding to 
plasma proteins and bind free calcium ions. With 
the possible exception of propofol, constant infusion 
of a drug during CPB (even when adjusted to main-
tain a constant “eff ect site” concentration using data 
from patients  not undergoing CPB) generally causes 
progressively increasing blood levels as a result of 
reduced hepatic and renal perfusion (reduced elimi-
nation) and hypothermia (reduced metabolism). 
 Anesthetic Management 
of Cardiac Surgery 
 ADULTS 
 Th e preoperative evaluation and anesthetic manage-
ment of common cardiovascular diseases are dis-
cussed in Chapter 21. Th e same principles apply 
whether these patients are undergoing cardiac or 
noncardiac surgery. An important distinction is that 
patients undergoing cardiac procedures will by defi -
nition have advanced disease.  Establishing the 
adequacy of the patient’s preoperative cardiac 
function should be based on exercise (activity) toler-
ance, measurements of myocardial contractility such 
as ejection fraction, the severity and location of coro-
nary stenoses, ventricular wall motion abnormalities, 
cardiac end-diastolic pressures, cardiac output, and 
valvular areas and gradients. Fortunately, unlike non-
cardiac surgery, cardiac surgery improves cardiac 
function in the majority of patients, and these patients 
have usually been extensively evaluated before being 
off ered surgical repair. Th e anesthetic preoperative 
evaluation should also include a focus on pulmonary, 
neurological, and renal function, as preoperative 
impairment of these organ systems predisposes 
patients to myriad postoperative complications. 
4
coagulation cascade, platelets, plasminogen, and 
kallikrein. Mechanical trauma from blood contact 
with the bypass apparatus also activates platelets and 
leukocytes. Increased amounts of oxygen-derived 
free radicals are generated. A systemic infl ammatory 
response syndrome similar to that seen with sep-
sis and trauma can develop. When this response is 
intense or prolonged, patients can develop the same 
complications, including generalized edema, the 
acute respiratory distress syndrome, coagulopathy, 
and acute kidney failure. 
 CPB alters and depletes glycoprotein receptors 
on the surface of platelets. Th e resulting platelet dys-
function likely increases perioperative bleeding and 
potentiates other coagulation abnormalities (activa-
tion of plasminogen and the infl ammatory response 
described above). 
 Animal and clinical research has demon-
strated that the infl ammatory response to CPB 
can be modulated by various therapies. Leukocyte 
depletion reduces infl ammation and may similarly 
reduce complications. Leukocyte-depleted blood 
cardioplegia has been shown to improve myocar-
dial preservation in some studies. Hemofi ltration 
(ultrafi ltration) during CPB, which presumably 
removes infl ammatory cytokines, appears benefi cial 
in pediatric patients. Administration of free radical 
scavengers such as high-dose vitamins C and E and 
mannitol has improved outcome in some studies. 
Systemic corticosteroids before and during CPB can 
modulate the infl ammatory response during CPB 
but improved outcome is not well established. Two 
large randomized clinical trials are underway to test 
whether there is an outcome benefi t to the routine 
use of systemic corticosteroids with CPB. 
 One once-promising agent, aprotinin, reduced 
infl ammation and surgical bleeding following CPB. 
Unfortunately, it increased mortality and is no lon-
ger available in North America. 
 CPB Eﬀ ects on Pharmacokinetics 
 Plasma and serum concentrations of most water-
soluble drugs (eg, nondepolarizing muscle relax-
ants) acutely decrease at the onset of CPB, but the 
change can be minimal and inconsequential for 
most lipid-soluble drugs (eg, fentanyl and sufen-
tanil). Th e eff ects of CPB are complex because of 
444 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
of these should be in a large central vein, usually 
an internal or external jugular or subclavian vein. 
Central venous cannulations may be accomplished 
while the patient is awake but sedated or aft er induc-
tion of anesthesia. Studies show no benefi t from 
placing either central venous or pulmonary arterial 
catheters in awake (versus anesthetized) patients 
undergoing cardiovascular surgery. 
 Drug infusions should ideally be given into a 
central catheter, preferably directly into the catheter 
or into the injection port closest to the catheter (to 
minimize dead space). Multilumen central venous 
catheters and multilumen pulmonary artery cathe-
ter introducer sheaths allow for multiple drug infu-
sions with simultaneous measurement of vascular 
pressures. One intravenous port should be dedicated 
for drug infusions and nothing else; drug and fl uid 
boluses should be administered through another 
site. Th e side port of the introducer sheath used for a 
pulmonary catheter can be used for drug infusions 
but serves better as a fl uid bolus line when a large-
bore introducer (9F) is used. 
 Blood should be immediately available for 
transfusion if the patient has already had a 
midline sternotomy (a “redo”); in these cases, the 
right ventricle or coronary graft s may be adherent to 
the sternum and may be accidentally entered during 
the repeat sternotomy. 
 Monitoring 
 A. Electrocardiography 
 Th e electrocardiogram (ECG) is continuously 
monitored with two leads, usually leads II and V 5 . 
Baseline tracings of all leads may be recorded on 
paper for further reference. Th e advent of monitors 
with computerized ST-segment analysis and the use 
of additional monitoring leads (V 4 , aVF, and V 4R ) 
have greatly improved detection of ischemic epi-
sodes, as has the frequent intraoperative use of TEE. 
 B. Arterial Blood Pressure 
 In addition to all basic monitoring, arterial cannula-
tion is always performed either prior to or immedi-
ately aft er induction of anesthesia, as the induction 
period represents a time when major hemodynamic 
alterations may occur. Radial arterial catheters may 
5
 1. Preinduction Period 
 Premedication 
 Th e prospect of heart surgery is frightening, and 
relatively “heavy” oral or intramuscular premedica-
tion was oft en given in the past, particularly when 
patients had coronary artery disease with good left  
ventricular function (see Chapter 21). However, in 
current practice, most patients receive no sedative-
hypnotic premedication until their arrival on the 
surgical unit, at which time most will receive small 
doses of intravenous midazolam. 
 Benzodiazepine sedative-hypnotics (diazepam, 
5–10 mg orally), alone or in combination with an 
opioid (morphine, 5–10 mg intramuscularly or 
hydromorphone, 1–2 mg intramuscularly), were 
oft en used in the past. Longer acting premedicant 
agents (eg, lorazepam) are avoided by most practi-
tioners to permit “fast tracking” of patients through 
their recovery. 
 Preparation 
 Th e best practitioners of cardiac anesthesia formu-
late a simple anesthetic plan that includes adequate 
preparations for contingencies. Many patients are 
critically ill, and there is little time intraoperatively 
to have an assistant search for drugs and equipment. 
At the same time, the anesthetic plan should not be 
excessively rigid; when problems are encountered 
with one technique, one should be ready to change 
to another without delay. Preparation, organization, 
and attention to detail permit one to more effi  ciently 
deal with unexpected intraoperative problems. Th e 
anesthesia machine, monitors, infusion pumps, 
and blood warmer should all be checked before the 
patient arrives. Drugs—including anesthetic and 
vasoactive agents—should be immediately avail-
able. Many clinicians prepare one vasoconstrictor 
and one vasodilator infusion before the start of the 
procedure. 
 Venous Access 
 Cardiac surgery is sometimes associated with large 
and rapid blood loss, and with the need for multiple 
drug infusions. Ideally, two large-bore (16-gauge or 
larger) intravenous catheters should be placed. One 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
445
catheter, some clinicians opine that it makes sense to 
restrict pulmonary artery catheterization only to 
devices that off er these advanced capabilities. 
 Th e right internal jugular vein is the preferred 
approach for intraoperative central venous can-
nulation. Catheters placed through the other sites, 
particularly on the left  side, are more likely to kink 
following sternal retraction (above) and are not 
nearly as likely to pass into the superior vena cava 
as those placed through the right internal jugular 
vein. 
 Pulmonary artery catheters migrate distally 
during CPB and may spontaneously wedge with-
out balloon infl ation. Infl ation of the balloon under 
these conditions can rupture a pulmonary artery 
causing lethal hemorrhage. Pulmonary artery cath-
eters should be routinely retracted 2–3 cm during 
CPB and the balloon subsequently infl ated slowly. If 
the catheter wedges with less than 1.5 mL of air in 
the balloon, it should be withdrawn farther. 
 D. Urinary Output 
 Once the patient is anesthetized, an indwelling uri-
nary catheter is placed to monitor the hourly output. 
Bladder temperature is oft en monitored as a mea-
sure of core temperature but may not track core tem-
perature well with reduced urinary fl ow. Th e sudden 
appearance of reddish urine may indicate excessive 
red cell hemolysis caused by CPB or a transfusion 
reaction. 
 E. Temperature 
 Multiple temperature monitors are usually placed 
once the patient is anesthetized. Bladder (or rectal), 
esophageal, and pulmonary artery (blood) tempera-
tures are oft en simultaneously monitored. Because 
of the heterogeneity of readings during cooling and 
rewarming, bladder and rectal readings are gener-
ally taken to represent an average body temperature, 
whereas esophageal represents core temperature. 
Pulmonary artery temperature provides an accurate 
estimate of blood temperature, which should be the 
same as core temperature in the absence of active 
cooling or warming. Nasopharyngeal and tympanic 
probes may most closely approximate brain tem-
perature. Myocardial temperature is oft en measured 
directly during CPB. 
occasionally give falsely low readings following ster-
nal retraction as a result of compression of the sub-
clavian artery between the clavicle and the fi rst rib. 
Th ey may also provide falsely low values early aft er 
CPB due to the opening of atrioventricular shunts in 
the hand during rewarming. Th e radial artery on the 
side of a previous brachial artery cutdown should be 
avoided, because its use is associated with a greater 
incidence of arterial thrombosis and wave distor-
tion. Obviously, if a radial artery will be harvested 
for a coronary bypass conduit, it cannot be used as 
a site for arterial pressure monitoring. Other useful 
catheterization sites include the ulnar, axillary, and 
especially brachial and femoral arteries. A backup 
manual or automatic blood pressure cuff  should also 
be placed on the opposite side for comparison with 
direct measurements. 
 C. Central Venous and Pulmonary 
Artery Pressure 
 Central venous pressure is not terribly useful for 
diagnosis of hypovolemia but has been customarily 
monitored in nearly all patients undergoing cardiac 
surgery. Th e decision about whether to use a pulmo-
nary artery catheter is based on the patient, the pro-
cedure, and the preferences of the surgical team. 
Routine use of a pulmonary artery catheter, once 
nearly universal in adult cardiovascular practice, is 
controversial. Pulmonary artery catheterization has 
declined precipitously in nearly all circumstances 
except adult cardiac surgery due to lack of evidence 
of a positive eff ect on patient outcomes. Left  ven-
tricular fi lling pressures can be measured with a left  
atrial pressure line inserted by the surgeon during 
bypass.  In general, pulmonary artery catheter-
ization has been most oft en used in patients 
with compromised ventricular function (ejection 
fraction <40–50%) or pulmonary hypertension and 
in those undergoing complicated procedures. Th e 
most useful data are pulmonary artery pressures, the 
pulmonary artery occlusion (“wedge”) pressure, and 
thermodilution cardiac outputs. Specialized cathe-
ters provide extra infusion ports, continuous mea-
surements of mixed venous oxygen saturation and 
cardiac output, and the capability for right ventricu-
lar or atrioventricular sequential pacing. Given the 
risk associated with placing any pulmonary artery 
6
446 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Two-dimensional, multiplane TEE can detect 
regional and global ventricular abnormalities, cham-
ber dimensions, valvular anatomy, and the presence 
of intracardiac air. Th ree-dimensional TEE provides 
a more complete description of valvular anatomy 
and pathology. TEE can also be helpful in confi rm-
ing cannulation of the coronary sinus for cardiople-
gia. Multiple views should be obtained from the 
upper esophagus, mid-esophagus, and transgastric 
positions in the transverse, sagittal, and in-between 
planes ( Figure 22–2 ). Th e two views most com-
monly used for monitoring during cardiac surgery 
are the four-chamber view ( Figure 22–3 ) and the 
transgastric (short-axis) view ( Figure 22–4 ). Th ree-
dimensional echocardiography off ers great promise 
for better visualization of complex anatomic fea-
tures, particularly of cardiac valves. Th e following 
represent the most important applications of intra-
operative TEE. 
 1. Assessment of valvular function —Valvular mor-
phology can be assessed by multiplane and three- 
dimensional TEE. Pressure gradients, area and sever-
ity of stenosis, and severity of valvular regurgitation 
can be assessed by Doppler echocardiography and 
 F. Laboratory Parameters 
 Intraoperative laboratory monitoring is mandatory 
during cardiac surgery. Blood gases, hematocrit, 
serum potassium, ionized calcium, and glucose 
measurements should be immediately available. 
Th e  activated clotting time (ACT) approximates 
the Lee–White clotting time and is used to moni-
tor heparin anticoagulation. Some centers routinely 
use thromboelastography (TEG) to identify causes 
of bleeding aft er CPB. 
 G. Surgical Field 
 One of the most important actions in intraopera-
tive monitoring is inspection of the surgical fi eld. 
Once the sternum is opened, lung expansion can be 
observed through the pleura. When the pericardium 
is opened, the heart (primarily the right ventricle) is 
visible; thus cardiac rhythm, volume, and contractil-
ity can oft en be judged visually. Blood loss and sur-
gical maneuvers must be closely watched and related 
to changes in hemodynamics and rhythm. 
 H. Transesophageal Echocardiography 
7
 TEE provides valuable information about car-
diac anatomy and function during surgery. 
 FIGURE 222  Useful views during transesophageal 
echocardiography.  A: The relationship between the angle 
of the ultrasound beam and image orientation relative to 
the patient.  B–D: Echocardiographic views from the upper 
mid-esophagus, lower mid-esophagus, and transgastric 
position ( C ). Note that diﬀ erent views can be obtained in 
each position as the tip of the probe is tilted either upward 
(anteﬂ exion) or backward (retroﬂ exion) and the angle of 
the beam is changed from 0° to 180°. The angle of the 
beam is shown in the upper left-hand corner of each image. 
The probe is also rotated clockwise or counterclockwise 
to optimize viewing of the various structures. AO, aorta; 
AV, aortic valve; CS, coronary sinus; IVC, inferior vena cava; 
LA, left atrium; LAA, left atrial appendage; LUPV, left upper 
pulmonary vein; LV, left ventricle; MPA, main pulmonary 
artery; MV, mitral valve; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right 
atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle; SVC, 
superior vena cava. (continued)
A
Anterior
Posterior
Left
Right
Anterior
Posterior
Head
Foot
Image 
orientation
Beam 
angle
Transverse view
Longitudinal
(sagittal) view
0˚
90˚
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
447 
FIGURE 222 (continued) 
C
Lower mid
esophageal
views
LA
LA
LAA
LUPV
Two-chamber
RV
RA
CS
CS and
RV inflow
Coronary sinus
RV
LV
RA
LA
LV
LA
RV
AO
LV long axis
Two-chamber
LA
LV
LA
LV
Mitral commissural
Four-chamber
B
Ascending aorta
long axis
Upper mid
esophageal
views
Aortic valve
long axis
AO
RPA
AV
LA
LV
MPA
SVC
AO
LA
AV
Aortic valve
short axis
MPA
RA
PA
Bicaval
SVC
IVC
LA
RA
AO
448 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
regurgitation, and can detect vegetations from endo-
carditis. Th e TEE images in the upper mid-esophagus 
at 40–60° and 110–130° are useful for examining the 
aortic valve and ascending aorta ( Figure 22–6 ). Th e 
color-fl ow imaging ( Figure 22–5 ). Colors are usually 
adjusted so that fl ow toward the probe is red and fl ow 
in the opposite direction is blue. TEE also can detect 
prosthetic valve dysfunction, such as obstruction or 
Transgastric
views
Papillary muscle
Short-axis
Two-chamber
long axis
Deep transgastric
LV
RV
LA
LV
LA
AO
D
LV
FIGURE 222 (continued) 
 FIGURE 223  Transesophageal echocardiogram of 
the mid-esophageal four-chamber view, showing the right 
and left atria and ventricles. 
 FIGURE 224  Transesophageal echocardiogram at the 
lower esophageal/transgastric level looking up at the left 
ventricle at the level of the papillary muscles. 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
449 
to guide and assess the quality of mitral valve repair 
surgery. Th e commissural view (at about 60°) is par-
ticularly helpful because it cuts across many scallops 
of the mitral valve. 
 2. Assessment of ventricular function — Ventricular 
function can be assessed by global systolic function, 
estimated by means of ejection fraction (oft en cal-
culated using Simpson’s method of disks) and left 
ventricular end-diastolic volume; diastolic function 
valve annular diameter can also be estimated with 
reasonable accuracy. Doppler fl ow across the aortic 
valve must be measured looking up from the deep 
transgastric view ( Figure 22–7 ). Th e anatomic fea-
tures of the mitral valve relevant to TEE are shown in 
 Figure 22–8 . Th e mitral valve is examined from the 
mid-esophageal position, looking at the mitral valve 
apparatus with and without color in the 0° through 
150° views ( Figure 22–9 ). TEE is an invaluable aid 
 FIGURE 225  Transesophageal echocardiography 
Doppler and color-ﬂ ow imaging. Pulse-wave Doppler 
recording of mitral valve inﬂ ow showing two phases, E 
(early ﬁ lling) and A (atrial ﬁ lling) ( A ). Color-ﬂ ow imaging 
demonstrates backward ﬂ ow (regurgitant jet) across the 
mitral valve during systole (mitral regurgitation) ( B ). 
 FIGURE 226  Two views of the aortic valve. Between 40° and 60°, all three leaﬂ ets are usually visualized ( A ). Between 
110° and 130°, the left ventricular outﬂ ow, aortic valve, and ascending aorta are clearly visualized ( B ). 
450 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
(ie,  looking for abnormal relaxation and restrictive 
diastolic patterns by checking mitral fl ow velocity or 
by measuring movements of the mitral valve annulus 
using tissue Doppler techniques); and regional systolic 
function (by assessing wall motion and thickening ab-
normalities). Regional wall  abnormalities from myo-
cardial ischemia oft en  appear  before ECG changes. 
Regional wall motion abnormalities can be classifi ed 
into three categories based on severity ( Figure 22–10 ): 
hypokinesis  (reduced wall motion), akinesis (no wall 
motion), and dyskinesis (paradoxical wall motion). 
Th e  location of a regional wall motion abnormal-
ity can indicate which coronary artery is experienc-
ing  reduced fl ow. Th e left  ventricular myocardium 
is supplied by three major arteries: the left  anterior 
descending artery, the left  circumfl ex artery, and the 
right coronary artery ( Figure 22–11 ). Th e  areas of dis-
tribution of these arteries on echocardiographic views 
 FIGURE 227  Transesophageal echocardiographic 
recording of continuous-wave Doppler from the 
transgastric view looking up at the aortic valve, 
demonstrating severe aortic stenosis. Peak velocity 
of 409 cm/s indicates a gradient of 66.9 mm Hg. 
 FIGURE 228  The anatomy of the mitral valve and 
its anatomic relationships to the aortic valve and left 
circumﬂ ex coronary artery. The posterior leaﬂ et has 
three scallops, P 1 , P 2 , and P 3 . The anterior leaﬂ et is usually 
divided into A 1 and A 2 regions; in some classiﬁ cations 
the anterior leaﬂ et is divided into three areas (A 1 , A 2 , A 3 ), 
corresponding to the opposing corresponding areas of 
the posterior leaﬂ et. 
A2
A1
P1
P2
P3
Posteromedial
papillary muscle
Secondary
chorda
tendinea
Anterior
leaflet
Primary chorda
tendinea
Coronary sinus
Posterior
leaflet
Anterolateral
papillary
muscle
Circumflex
coronary artery
Intervalvular
trigone
Left main
coronary artery
Left coronary
sinus
Noncoronary
sinus
Aortic
valve
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
451 
 FIGURE 229  Multiplane imaging cuts across diﬀ erent segments of the mitral valve apparatus between 0° and 180° 
( A ). Images of the mitral valve at 0°, 71°, and 142° ( B, C , and  D , respectively). 
A
60°
120°
180° 
Vertical
Horizontal 0°
P3
A3
P2
A2
P1
A1
AL commissure
 FIGURE 2210  Classiﬁ cation of regional wall motion abnormalities. 
End-systole
End-diastole
Normal
Hypokinesis
Akinesis
Dyskinesis
452 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 3. Assessment of other cardiac structures and 
abnormalities —In an adult undergoing elective 
cardiac surgery TEE can help diagnose previously 
undetected congenital defects such as an atrial or 
ventricular septal defect; pericardial diseases such 
as pericardial eff usions and constrictive pericardi-
tis; and cardiac tumors. Doppler color-fl ow imag-
ing helps delineate abnormal intracardiac blood 
fl ows and shunts. TEE can assess the extent of 
myomectomy in patients with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy (idiopathic hypertrophic subaor-
tic stenosis).  Upper-, mid-, and lower-esophageal 
views are valuable in diagnosing aortic disease pro-
cesses such as dissection, aneurysm, and atheroma 
( Figure 22–13 ). Th e extent of dissections in the 
ascending and descending aorta can be accurately 
defi ned; however, airway structures prevent com-
plete visualization of the aortic arch. Th e presence 
of protruding atheroma in the ascending aorta in-
creases the risk of postoperative stroke and should 
prompt the use of epiaortic scanning to identify an 
atheroma-free cannulation site or a change in surgi-
cal plans. 
 4. Examination for residual air —Air is introduced 
into the cardiac chambers during all “open” heart 
procedures, such as valve surgery. Residual amounts 
of air oft en remain in the left  ventricular apex even 
aft er the best deairing maneuvers. TEE is helpful in 
defi ning the volume of residual air, to determine 
whether additional surgical maneuvers need to 
be  undertaken to help avoid cerebral or coronary 
 embolism. 
 I. Electroencephalography 
 Computer-processed electroencephalographic (EEG) 
recordings can be used to assess anesthetic depth 
during cardiac surgery, and either the processed or 
“raw” EEG can be used to ensure complete drug-
induced electrical silence (for brain protection) 
prior to circulatory arrest. Th ese recordings are gen-
erally not useful in detecting neurological insults 
during CPB. Progressive hypothermia (or progres-
sively deepened anesthesia) is typically associated 
with EEG slowing, burst suppression, and, fi nally, 
an isoelectric recording. Most strokes during CPB 
are due to small emboli that are not likely to pro-
duce changes in the EEG. Artifacts from the CPB 
roller pump may be seen on the raw EEG (due to 
are shown in  Figure 22–12 . Th e ventricular short-
axis mid view at the  mid-papillary muscle level con-
tains all three blood supplies from the major coronary 
arteries. 
 FIGURE 2211  Standard angiographic views of the 
left ( A ) and right ( B ) coronary arteries. Note the left main 
coronary artery quickly divides into the left anterior 
descending and the left circumﬂ ex arteries.  A: (1) Left 
anterior descending artery with septal branches; (2) ramus 
medianus; (3) diagonal artery; (4) ﬁ rst septal branch; (5) left 
circumﬂ ex artery; (6) left atrial circumﬂ ex artery; (7) obtuse 
marginal artery.  B: (1) Conus artery; (2) SA node artery; 
(3) acute marginal artery; (4) posterior descending artery 
with septal branches; (5) AV node artery; (6) posterior left 
ventricular artery. 
B
A
LAO
LAO
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
LAO-Cranial angulation
RAO
RAO
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
453 
 J. Transcranial Doppler (TCD) 
 Th is modality provides noninvasive measurements 
of blood fl ow velocity in the middle cerebral artery, 
which is insonated through the temporal bone. TCD 
is useful for detecting cerebral emboli. Increased 
numbers of emboli detected by TCD or Doppler 
interrogation of the carotid artery have been asso-
ciated with an increased risk of postoperative neu-
robehavioral dysfunction. 
 Induction of Anesthesia 
 Cardiac operations usually require general anesthe-
sia, endotracheal intubation, and controlled ven-
tilation. Some centers have used thoracic epidural 
anesthesia alone for minimally invasive surgery 
without CPB or combined thoracic epidural with 
light general endotracheal anesthesia for other forms 
of cardiac surgery. Th ese techniques have never been 
popular in North America due to concerns about the 
risk of spinal hematomas following heparinization, 
the associated medical–legal consequences, and the 
limited evidence of an outcome benefi t. Other cen-
ters use a single intrathecal morphine injection to 
provide postoperative analgesia. 
piezoelectric eff ects from compression of the pump 
tubing) but can usually be identifi ed as such by com-
puter processing. 
 FIGURE 2212  Coronary artery supply of the left 
and right ventricles in three views: the short-axis view 
( A ), the four-chamber view ( B ), and the three-chamber 
view ( C ). Green, right coronary artery; blue, left anterior 
descending artery; pink, left circumﬂ ex artery. 
B
A
C
 FIGURE 2213  Upper esophageal TEE views of the 
aortic arch and descending aorta. The ascending aorta can 
be visualized in the upper mid-esophagus at 110–130° 
with anteﬂ exion at the aortic valve level (see Figures 22–2B 
and 22–6B). 
Aortic arch
Desc aortic
Upper esophagus
LAX
PA
SAX
Mid to lower esophagus
Desc aortic
Aortic arch
454 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Choice of Anesthetic Agents 
 Anesthetic techniques for cardiac surgery have 
evolved over the years. Successful techniques range 
from primarily volatile inhalation anesthesia to 
high-dose opioid totally intravenous techniques. 
In recent years, total intravenous anesthesia with 
short-acting agents and combinations of intra-
venous and volatile agents have become most 
popular. 
 A. “High-Dose” Opioid Anesthesia 
 Th is technique was originally developed to circum-
vent the myocardial depression associated with 
older volatile anesthetics, particularly halothane. 
But pure high-dose opioid anesthesia (eg, fentanyl, 
50–100 mcg/kg, or sufentanil, 15–25 mcg/kg) pro-
duces prolonged postoperative respiratory depres-
sion (12–24 h), is associated with an unacceptably 
high incidence of patient awareness (recall) during 
surgery, and oft en fails to control the hypertensive 
response to stimulation in many patients with pre-
served left  ventricular function. Other undesirable 
eff ects include skeletal muscle rigidity during induc-
tion and prolonged postoperative ileus. Moreover, 
simultaneous administration of benzodiazepines 
with large doses of opioids can produce hypotension 
and myocardial depression. Patients anesthetized 
with sufentanil (and other shorter acting agents) 
generally regain consciousness and can be extubated 
sooner than those anesthetized with fentanyl. 
 B. Total Intravenous Anesthesia (TIVA) 
 Th e drive for cost containment in cardiac surgery 
was a major impetus for development of anesthe-
sia techniques with short-acting agents. Although 
the drugs may be costlier, large economic benefi ts 
resulted from earlier extubation, decreased inten-
sive care unit (ICU) stays, earlier ambulation, and 
earlier hospital discharge (“fast-track” manage-
ment). One technique employs induction with pro-
pofol (0.5–1.5 mg/kg followed by 25–100 mcg/kg/
min), and modest doses of fentanyl (total doses of 
5–7 mcg/kg) or remifentanil (0–1 mcg/kg bolus fol-
lowed by 0.25–1 mcg/kg/min). Target controlled 
infusion (TCI) employs soft ware and hardware 
(computerized infusion pump) to deliver a drug and 
achieve a set concentration at the eff ect site based 
 For elective procedures, induction of general 
anesthesia should be performed in a smooth, con-
trolled (but not necessarily “slow”) fashion oft en 
referred to as a cardiac induction. Th e principles are 
discussed in Chapter 21. Selection of anesthetic 
agents is generally less important than the way they 
are used. Indeed, studies have failed to show diff er-
ences in long-term outcome with various anesthetic 
techniques.  Anesthetic dose requirements are 
variable and patient tolerance of inhaled anes-
thetics generally declines with declining ventricular 
function. Severely compromised patients should be 
given anesthetic agents in incremental, small doses. 
A series of challenges may be used to judge when 
anesthetic depth will allow intubation without a 
marked hypertensive response, while also avoiding 
hypotension from excessive anesthetic dosing. Blood 
pressure and heart rate are continuously evaluated 
following unconsciousness, insertion of an oral air-
way, urinary catheterization, and tracheal intuba-
tion. A sudden increase in heart rate or blood 
pressure may indicate light anesthesia and the need 
for more anesthetic prior to the next challenge, 
whereas a decrease or no change suggests that the 
patient is ready for the subsequent stimulus. Muscle 
relaxant is given aft er consciousness is lost. 
Reductions in blood pressure greater than 20% gen-
erally call for administration of a vasopressor (see 
below). 
 Th e period following intubation is oft en char-
acterized by a gradual decrease in blood pressure 
resulting from the anesthetized state (oft en associ-
ated with vasodilation and decreased sympathetic 
tone) and a lack of surgical stimulation. Patients 
will usually respond to fl uid boluses or a vasocon-
strictor. Nevertheless, the administration of large 
amounts of intravenous fl uids prior to the bypass 
may serve to accentuate the hemodilution asso-
ciated with CPB (below). Small doses of phenyl-
ephrine (25–100 mcg), vasopressin (1–3 units), 
or ephedrine (5–10 mg) may be useful to avoid 
excessive hypotension. Following intubation and 
institution of controlled ventilation; arterial blood 
gases, hematocrit, serum potassium, and glu-
cose concentrations are measured. Th e baseline 
ACT (normal <130 s) is best measured aft er skin 
incision. 
8
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
455 
Th e major advantage of volatile agents or infusions 
of remifentanil or propofol, or both, is the ability 
to change the anesthetic concentration and depth 
rapidly. Isofl urane, sevofl urane, and desfl urane are 
the most commonly used volatile anesthetics. Early 
laboratory reports of isofl urane inducing intracoro-
nary steal have been overshadowed by later reports 
of myocardial protection. Isofl urane remains a com-
monly used volatile agent. Nitrous oxide is gener-
ally not used, particularly during the time interval 
between cannulation and decannulation, because of 
its tendency to expand any intravascular air bubbles 
that may form. 
 D. Other Techniques 
 Th e combination of ketamine with midazolam (or 
diazepam or propofol) for induction and mainte-
nance of anesthesia is a useful technique, particularly 
in frail patients with hemodynamic compromise. 
It is associated with stable hemodynamics, reli-
able amnesia and analgesia, minimal postoperative 
respiratory depression, and rare (if any) psychoto-
mimetic side eff ects. Ketamine and midazolam are 
compatible in solution, and may be mixed together 
in the same syringe or infusion bag in a 20:1 ratio. 
For induction, ketamine, 1–2 mg/kg, with mid-
azolam, 0.05–0.1 mg/kg, is given as a slow intrave-
nous bolus. Anesthesia can then be maintained by 
infusion of ketamine, 1.3–1.5 mg/kg/h, and mid-
azolam, 0.065–0.075 mg/kg/h, or more easily with 
an inhaled agent. Hypertension following intubation 
or surgical stimulation can be treated with propofol 
or a volatile agent. 
 E. Muscle Relaxants 
 Muscle relaxation is helpful for intubation, to 
facilitate sternal retraction, and to prevent patient 
movement and shivering. Unless airway diffi  cul-
ties are expected, intubation may be accomplished 
aft er administration of a nondepolarizing mus-
cle relaxant. Th e choice of muscle relaxant in the 
past was oft en based on the desired hemodynamic 
response. Modern, shorter acting agents such as 
rocuronium, vecuronium, and cisatracurium are 
commonly used and have almost no hemodynamic 
side eff ects of their own. Vecuronium, however, has 
been reported to markedly enhance bradycardia 
on pharmacokinetic modeling. For propofol the 
clinician sets only the patient’s age and weight, and 
the desired blood concentration on the Diprifusor, 
a TCI device widely available in countries outside 
North America. During cardiac surgery, this tech-
nique can be used for propofol with a target con-
centration of 1.5–2 mcg/mL. Whenever the very 
short-acting remifentanil is used for painful surgery, 
provision must be made for postoperative analgesia 
aft er its discontinuation. 
 C. Mixed Intravenous/Inhalation Anesthesia 
 Renewed interest in volatile agents came about fol-
lowing studies demonstrating the protective eff ects 
of volatile agents on ischemic myocardium and an 
increased emphasis on fast-track recovery of car-
diac patients. Selection of anesthetic agents is ori-
ented to hemodynamic stability as well as early 
extubation (1–6 h). Propofol (0.5–1.5 mg/kg) or 
etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg) is oft en used for induc-
tion. Induction usually follows sedation with small 
doses of midazolam (0.05 mg/kg). Opioids are 
given in small doses together with a volatile agent 
(0.5–1.5 minimum alveolar concentration [MAC]) 
for maintenance anesthesia and to blunt the sym-
pathetic response to stimulation. Th e opioid may be 
given in small intermittent boluses, by continuous 
infusion, or both ( Table 22–1 ). To facilitate fast-
track management, typical total doses of fentanyl 
and sufentanil generally do not exceed 15 and 5 
mcg/kg, respectively, and some clinicians com-
bine much smaller doses of fentanyl or sufentanil 
with an analgesic dose of hydromorphone or mor-
phine administered toward the end of CPB. Some 
clinicians also administer a low-dose infusion of 
propofol (25–50 mcg/kg/min) for maintenance. 
 TABLE 221 Opioid dosing compatible with 
early extubation after cardiac surgery. 
Opioid
Loading 
Dose 
(mcg/kg)
Maintenance 
Infusion
Boluses 
(mcg/kg)
Fentanyl
1–5
1–3 mcg/kg/h
0.5–1
Sufentanil
0.25–1.25
0.25–0.75 mcg/kg/h 0.125–0.25
Remifentanil 0.5–1
0.1–1 mcg/kg/min
0.25–1
456 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
to administer the heparin themselves directly into 
the right atrium. If heparin is administered by the 
anesthesiologist, it should be given through a reli-
able (usually central) intravenous line, and the ACT 
should be measured 3–5 min later. If the ACT is 
less than 400 s, additional heparin (100 units/kg) 
is given. Some drugs (eg, aprotinin) prolong the 
celite-activated ACT but not the kaolin-activated 
ACT; the kaolin-ACT should be used to assess ade-
quacy of anticoagulation in these circumstances. 
Heparin concentration assays (see Reversal of 
Anticoagulation, below) measure heparin levels and 
not necessarily eff ect; these assays are therefore not 
reliable for measuring the degree of anticoagulation 
but can be used as an adjunct. A whole blood hepa-
rin concentration of 3–4 units/mL is usually suffi  -
cient for CPB. Th e high-dose thrombin time (HiTT) 
is not infl uenced by aprotinin but is more compli-
cated to perform than a kaolin-ACT. HiTT cannot 
provide a preheparin control and does not provide 
an index for the adequacy of reversal with protamine 
(see below). 
Resistance to heparin is occasionally encoun-
tered; many such patients have antithrombin III 
defi ciency (acquired or congenital) . Antithrombin 
III is a circulating serine protease that irreversibly 
binds and inactivates thrombin (as well as the acti-
vated forms of factors X, XI, XII, and XIII). When 
heparin complexes with antithrombin III, the anti-
coagulant activity of antithrombin III is enhanced 
1000-fold. Patients with antithrombin III defi ciency 
will achieve adequate anticoagulation following 
infusion of 2 units of fresh frozen plasma or anti-
thrombin III concentrate. Alternatively, recombi-
nant human antithrombin III may be administered. 
Milder forms of heparin resistance can be managed 
by administration of a modestly larger than normal 
dose of heparin. 
 Patients with a history of heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia (HIT) require special consider-
ation. Th ese patients produce heparin-dependent 
(platelet factor 4) antibodies that agglutinate plate-
lets and produce thrombocytopenia, sometimes 
associated with thromboembolism. If the history 
of HIT is remote and antibodies can no longer be 
demonstrated, heparin may safely used for CPB. 
Other anticoagulants should be preferred in other 
associated with large doses of opioids, particularly 
sufentanil. Because of its vagolytic eff ects, pan-
curonium was oft en used in patients with marked 
bradycardia who were taking β-blocking agents, 
Succinylcholine remains appropriate for endotra-
cheal intubation, particularly for rapid sequence 
induction. Judicious dosing and appropriate use of 
a peripheral nerve stimulator allow fast-tracking 
with any of these agents. 
 2. Prebypass Period 
 Following induction and intubation, the anesthetic 
course is typically characterized by an initial period 
of minimal stimulation (skin preparation and drap-
ing) that is frequently associated with hypotension, 
followed by discrete periods of intense stimulation 
that can produce tachycardia and hypertension. 
Th ese periods of stimulation include the skin inci-
sion, sternotomy and sternal retraction, opening the 
pericardium, and, sometimes, aortic dissection. Th e 
anesthetic agent should be adjusted appropriately in 
anticipation of these events. 
 Accentuated vagal responses resulting in 
marked bradycardia and hypotension may occa-
sionally be seen during sternal retraction or open-
ing of the pericardium, perhaps more commonly in 
patients who have been taking β-adrenergic block-
ing agents or diltiazem. 
 Myocardial ischemia in the prebypass period 
is not always associated with hemodynamic per-
turbations such as tachycardia, hypertension, or 
hypotension. Prophylactic infusion of nitroglycerin 
(1–2 mcg/kg/min) has been studied many times and 
continues to be used but does not appear to reduce the 
incidence of ischemic episodes or to alter outcomes. 
 Anticoagulation 
 Anticoagulation must be established before 
CPB to prevent acute disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation and formation of clots in the CPB 
pump. In most centers the adequacy of anticoagula-
tion will be confi rmed by measuring the ACT. An 
ACT longer than 400–480 s is considered adequate 
at most centers. Heparin, 300–400 units/kg, is usu-
ally given while the aortic pursestring sutures are 
placed before cannulation. Some surgeons prefer 
9
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
457
cannulation is usually done fi rst because of the 
hemodynamic problems frequently associated with 
venous cannulation and to allow convenient and 
rapid transfusion from the pump oxygenator. Th e 
infl ow cannula is most oft en placed in the ascend-
ing aorta. Th e small opening of most arterial cannu-
las produces a jet stream that, when not positioned 
properly, can cause aortic dissection or preferential 
fl ow of blood to the innominate artery. Th e sys-
temic arterial pressure is customarily reduced to 
90–100 mm Hg systolic during placement of the 
aortic cannula to reduce the likelihood of dissection. 
Air bubbles should be absent from the arterial can-
nula and infl ow line, and adequacy of the connection 
between the arterial infl ow line and the patient must 
be demonstrated before bypass is initiated. Failure 
to remove all air bubbles will result in air emboli, 
possibly into the coronary or cerebral circulations, 
whereas failure to enter the aorta may result in aor-
tic dissection. Some clinicians routinely hand com-
press the carotid arteries during aortic cannulation 
to decrease the likelihood of cerebral emboli, but the 
effi  cacy of this technique is doubtful. 
 One or two venous cannulas are placed in 
the right atrium, usually through the right atrial 
appendage. One cannula is usually adequate for 
most coronary artery bypass and aortic valve opera-
tions. Th e single cannula used oft en has two por-
tals (two-stage); when it is properly positioned, one 
opening is in the right atrium and the other is in the 
inferior vena cava. 
 Separate cannulas in the superior and inferior 
venae cavae are used for open-heart procedures. 
 Hypotension from impaired ventricular fi lling 
may occur during manipulation of the venae 
cavae and the heart. Venous cannulation also fre-
quently precipitates atrial or, less commonly, ventric-
ular arrhythmias. Premature atrial contractions and 
transient bursts of a supraventricular tachycardia are 
common. Sustained paroxysmal atrial tachycardia or 
atrial fi brillation frequently leads to hemodynamic 
deterioration, which may be treated pharmacologi-
cally, electrically, or by immediate initiation of bypass 
(provided that full anticoagulation has been con-
fi rmed). Malpositioning of the venous cannulas can 
interfere with venous return or impede venous 
drainage from the head and neck (superior vena cava 
11
circumstances. When signifi cant antibody titers 
are detected, alternative anticoagulants including 
hirudin, bivalirudin, ancrod, and argatroban may 
be considered, but experience with them is limited. 
Consultation with a hematologist may be helpful. 
 Bleeding Prophylaxis 
 Bleeding prophylaxis with antifi brinolytic agents 
may be initiated before or aft er anticoagulation. 
Some clinicians prefer to administer antifi brinolytic 
agents aft er heparinization to reduce the possible 
incidence of thrombotic complications; others fear 
that delayed administration may reduce antifi brino-
lytic effi  cacy.  Antifi brinolytic therapy may be 
particularly useful for patients who are under-
going a repeat operation; who refuse blood products 
(such as Jehovah’s Witnesses); who are at high risk 
for postoperative bleeding because of recent admin-
istration of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (abcix-
imab [RheoPro], eptifi batide [Integrilin], or tirofi ban 
[Aggrastat]); who have preexisting coagulopathy; 
and who are undergoing long and complicated pro-
cedures involving the heart or aorta. Th e antiplatelet 
eff ect of abciximab typically lasts 24–48 h; those of 
eptifi batide and tirofi ban are 2–4 and 4–8 h, respec-
tively. Th e combination of aspirin and the adenosine 
diphosphate receptor antagonist clopidogrel (Plavix) 
is also associated with excessive bleeding. 
 Th e antifi brinolytic agents currently avail-
able, ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, do 
not aff ect the ACT and only rarely induce allergic 
reactions. ε-Aminocaproic acid is usually adminis-
tered as a 50–75 mg/kg loading dose followed by a 
20–25 mg/kg/h maintenance infusion (some clini-
cians use a standard 5–10 g loading dose followed by 
1 g/h). Tranexamic acid is oft en dosed at 10 mg/kg 
followed by 1 mg/kg/h, although pharmacokinetic 
studies suggest that larger doses may more reliably 
maintain eff ective blood concentrations. Intra-
operative collection of platelet-rich plasma by 
pheresis prior to CPB is employed by some centers; 
reinfusion following bypass may decrease bleeding 
and reduce transfusion requirements. 
 Cannulation 
 Placement of venous and arterial cannulas for 
CPB is a critical time.  Aft er heparinization ,  aortic 
10
458 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
temporarily stopped until a cannula can be placed 
distally in the “true” aortic lumen. Other possible 
causes for hypotension include inadequate pump 
fl ow from poor venous return or a pump malfunc-
tion, or pressure transducer error. Factitious hyper-
tension has been reported when the right radial 
artery is used for monitoring and the aortic cannula 
is directed toward the innominate artery. 
 Th e relationship between pump fl ow, SVR, and 
mean systemic arterial blood pressure may be con-
ceptualized as follows: 
 Mean arterial pressure = Pump fl ow × SVR 
 Consequently, with a constant SVR, mean arte-
rial pressure is proportional to pump fl ow. Similarly, 
at any given pump fl ow, mean arterial pressure is pro-
portional to SVR. To maintain both adequate arte-
rial pressures and blood fl ows one can manipulate 
pump fl ow and SVR. Most centers strive for blood 
fl ows of 2–2.5 L/min/m 2 (50–60 mL/kg/min) and 
mean arterial pressures between 50 and 80 mm Hg. 
Metabolic fl ow requirements generally decline with 
decreasing core body temperature. Evidence also 
suggests that during deep hypothermia (20–25°C), 
mean blood pressures as low as 30 mm Hg may still 
be consistent with adequate cerebral blood fl ow and 
cerebral oxygen delivery. SVR can be increased with 
phenylephrine, vasopressin, or norepinephrine. 
 Increased systemic arterial pressures (>150 mm 
Hg) are deleterious and may promote aortic dissec-
tion or cerebral hemorrhage. Generally, when mean 
arterial pressure exceeds 100 mm Hg, hypertension 
is said to exist and is treated by decreasing pump fl ow 
or increasing the concentration of a volatile agent to 
the oxygenator infl ow gas. In the rare instance that 
the hypertension is refractory to these maneuvers 
or if pump fl ow is already low, a vasodilator such as 
clevidipine, nicardipine, or nitroprusside is used. 
 Monitoring 
 Additional monitoring during CPB includes the 
pump fl ow rate, venous reservoir level, arterial 
infl ow line pressure (see above), blood (perfusate 
and venous) and myocardial temperatures, and in-
line (arterial and venous) oxygen saturations. In-line 
pH, CO 2 tension, and oxygen tension sensors are 
also available. Blood gas tensions and pH should be 
syndrome). Upon initiation of CPB, the former is 
manifested as inadequate volume in the venous res-
ervoir, whereas the latter produces engorgement of 
the head and neck. Under these circumstances, cen-
tral venous pressure may not increase if the tip of the 
central line is adjacent or very near the cannula. 
 3. Bypass Period 
 Initiation 
 Once the cannulas are properly placed and secured, 
the ACT is acceptable, and the perfusionist is ready, 
CPB is initiated. Th e clamps placed across the 
venous cannula(s) during insertion are removed, 
and the main CPB pump is started. Establishing the 
adequacy of venous return to the pump reservoir is 
critical. Normally, the reservoir level rises and CPB 
pump fl ow is gradually increased. If venous return 
is poor, as shown by a decreasing reservoir level, the 
pump prime will quickly empty and air can enter 
the pump circuit. When the venous reservoir falls 
the cannulas should be checked for proper place-
ment and for forgotten clamps, kinks, or an air lock. 
Under these circumstances, pump fl ow should be 
slowed until the problem is resolved. Adding volume 
(blood or colloid) to the reservoir may be necessary. 
With full CPB and unimpeded venous drainage, the 
heart should empty; failure to empty or progressive 
distention implies malpositioning of the venous 
cannula or aortic regurgitation. In the rare case of 
severe aortic insuffi  ciency that limits the extent of 
peripheral perfusion, immediate aortic cross-clamp-
ing (and cardioplegia) may be necessary. 
 Flow & Pressure 
 Systemic mean arterial pressure is closely moni-
tored as pump fl ow is gradually increased to 2–
2.5 L/min/m 2 . At the onset of CPB, systemic arte-
rial pressure usually decreases abruptly. Initial mean 
systemic arterial (radial) pressures of 30–40 mm Hg 
are not unusual. Th is decrease is usually attributed 
to abrupt hemodilution, which reduces blood vis-
cosity and eff ectively lowers SVR. It is oft en treated 
with increased fl ow and vasopressors. 
 Persistent and excessive decreases (<30 mm 
Hg) should prompt a search for unrecognized aor-
tic dissection. If dissection is present, CPB must be 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
459 
glucose should be checked even in patients with-
out a history of diabetes. Th e ACT is measured 
immediately aft er bypass and then every 20–30 min 
thereaft er. Cooling generally increases the half-life 
of heparin and prolongs its eff ect. Some centers 
calculate a heparin dose–response curve to guide 
calculation of heparin dosing and protamine rever-
sal ( Figure 22–14 ). Th e hematocrit is usually not 
allowed fall much below 20–25%. Red cell trans-
fusions into the pump reservoir may be necessary. 
Marked increases in serum potassium concentra-
tions (secondary to cardioplegia) are usually treated 
with a furosemide-induced diuresis. 
 Hypothermia & Cardioplegia 
 Moderate (26–32°C) or deep (20–25°C) hypother-
mia is used routinely for many procedures. Th e 
lower the temperature, the longer the time required 
for cooling and rewarming. Low temperatures, 
confi rmed by direct measurements (see below). In 
the absence of hypoxemia, low venous oxygen satu-
rations (<70%), a progressive metabolic acidosis, or 
reduced urinary output may indicate inadequate 
fl ow rates. 
 During bypass, arterial infl ow line pressure 
is almost always greater than the systemic arterial 
pressure recorded from a radial artery or even an 
aortic catheter. Th e diff erence in pressure represents 
the pressure drop across the arterial fi lter, the arte-
rial tubing, and the narrow opening of the aortic 
cannula. Nonetheless, monitoring this pressure is 
important in detecting problems with an arterial 
infl ow line. Infl ow pressures should remain below 
300 mm Hg; higher pressures may indicate a clogged 
arterial fi lter, obstruction of the arterial tubing or 
cannula, or aortic dissection. 
 Serial ACT, hematocrit, and potassium mea-
surements are performed during CPB. Blood 
 FIGURE 2214  Heparin dose–response curve. 
Activated clotting time (ACT) in seconds versus total 
heparin dose in milligrams per kilogram.  1. Plot the initial 
ACT on the  x -axis.  2. Plot the ACT after heparinization. 
 3. Draw the line deﬁ ned by these two points.  4. If 
additional anticoagulation is needed, ﬁ nd the desired ACT 
on that line. The amount of additional heparin needed 
is the diﬀ erence on the  y -axis between the present ACT 
and the desired ACT.  5. If the third point does not lie on 
the original line, a new line is drawn originating from the 
baseline ACT and passing midway between the other two 
points.  6. For reversal of anticoagulation, the protamine 
dose is based on the remaining heparin activity, estimated 
to be the heparin dose corresponding to the latest ACT on 
the dose–response line. 
B
C
A
0
0
1
Remaining
heparin
activity
Heparin dose
(mg/kg)
2
3
4
100
200
300
ACT(s)
400
500
A = Initial ACT
B = ACT after heparin dose
C = Measured ACT prior to reversal
460 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
during hypothermic CPB in adults. Th e controversy 
stemmed from the fact that the solubility of a gas 
increases and the neutral pH (ie, the pH at which 
concentrations of H + and OH − ions are the same) of 
water increases with hypothermia. As a result of the 
former eff ect, although total CO 2 content does not 
change (in a closed system), the partial pressure of 
CO 2 will decrease as blood temperature drops. Th e 
problem is most signifi cant for arterial CO 2 ten-
sion because of its eff ect on arterial pH and cerebral 
blood fl ow. As the temperature decreases, the plasma 
bicarbonate concentration does not change, but the 
decrease in arterial CO 2 tension tends to increase pH 
and make blood alkalotic (by normothermic defi ni-
tions). Blood with a CO 2 tension of 40 mm Hg and a 
pH of 7.40 at 37°C, when cooled to 25°C, will have 
a CO 2 tension of about 23 mm Hg and a pH of 7.60. 
 Normally—regardless of the patient’s tempera-
ture—blood samples are heated to 37°C in blood 
gas analyzers before gas tensions are measured. If a 
temperature-corrected reading is desired, a table or 
a program in the blood gas machine can be used to 
estimate what would be the gas tension and pH if 
they had been measured at the patient’s temperature. 
Th e practice of temperature correcting gas tensions 
with the goal of maintaining a constant CO 2 ten-
sion of 40 mm Hg and a constant pH of 7.40 during 
hypothermia is referred to as  pH-stat management . 
During hypothermic CPB, pH-stat management, 
which may require adding CO 2 to the oxygenator 
gas infl ow, increases total blood CO 2 content. Under 
these conditions, cerebral blood fl ow increases (due 
to increased CO 2 tension relative to α-stat manage-
ment) more than is required based on oxygen con-
sumption. Increased cerebral blood fl ow is useful to 
increase uniformity of brain cooling prior to deep 
hypothermic circulatory arrest (more oft en used in 
children than adults). On the other hand, increased 
cerebral blood fl ow can also direct a greater frac-
tion of atheromatous arterial emboli to the brain—
a greater concern than uniformity of brain cooling 
during cardiac surgery in adults. 
 Th e use of uncorrected gas tensions during 
hypothermia— α-stat management —is the rule in 
adults and is common in children when circulatory 
arrest will not be used. Th e basis of this approach 
is that preservation of normal protein function 
however, permit lower CPB fl ows to be used safely. 
At a temperature of 20°C, fl ows as low as 1.2 L/min/
m 2 may be adequate. 
 Hypothermia produces characteristic changes 
in the ECG including the Osborne wave, a charac-
teristic positive defl ection between the QRS and ST 
segments. Ventricular fi brillation oft en occurs as the 
heart is cooled below 28–29°C. Cardioplegia should 
be established immediately, as fi brillation consumes 
high-energy phosphates at a greater rate than slower 
rhythms. Cardioplegia is achieved by cross-clamping 
the ascending aorta proximal to the aortic infl ow can-
nula and (as previously described) infusing cardio-
plegia solution through a small catheter proximal to 
the cross-clamp or directly into the coronary ostia if 
the aorta is opened (eg, for aortic valve replacement). 
Many surgeons routinely employ retrograde cardio-
plegia via a catheter in the coronary sinus (see above). 
During aortocoronary bypass graft ing, cardioplegia 
solution may also be given through the graft  when the 
surgeon elects to perform the distal anastomosis fi rst. 
 Ventilation 
 Ventilation of the lungs is discontinued when ade-
quate pump fl ows are reached and the heart stops 
ejecting blood. Following institution of full CPB, 
ventricular ejection continues briefl y until the left 
ventricular volume reaches a critically low level. 
Discontinuing ventilation prematurely when there 
is any remaining pulmonary blood fl ow acts as a 
right-to-left  shunt that can promote hypoxemia. 
Th e importance of this mechanism depends on the 
relative ratio of remaining pulmonary blood fl ow 
to pump fl ow. At some centers, once ventilation is 
stopped, oxygen fl ow is continued in the anesthesia 
circuit with a small amount of continuous positive 
airway pressure (5 cm H 2 O) in the hope of prevent-
ing postoperative pulmonary dysfunction. Most 
centers either stop all gas fl ow or continue a low 
fl ow of oxygen (1–2 L/min) in the anesthesia circuit. 
Ventilation is resumed at the conclusion of CPB in 
anticipation of the heart beginning to eject blood. 
 Management of Respiratory Gases 
 Th ere formerly was controversy about whether 
to use temperature-corrected (pH stat) or uncor-
rected 
(α-stat) 
arterial 
blood 
gas 
tensions 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
461
response to perfusion with warm blood (rather 
than “light” anesthesia). During rewarming, blood 
temperature should not exceed core temperature by 
more than 2°C. 
 Cerebral Protection 
 Th e incidence of neurobehavioral defi cits aft er 
CPB varies widely, depending on how long aft er 
surgery the examination is performed and the cri-
teria for diagnosis. In the fi rst week aft er surgery 
the incidence may be as high as 80%. Fortunately, 
in most instances, these defi cits are transient. 
Neurobehavioral defi cits detectable 8 weeks or more 
(20–25%) aft er operation or strokes (2–6%) are less 
common. Factors that have been associated with 
neurological sequelae include increased numbers of 
cerebral emboli, combined intracardiac (valvular) 
and coronary procedures, advanced age, and preex-
isting cerebrovascular disease. 
 During open-heart procedures, deairing of car-
diac chambers, assumption of a head-down position, 
and venting before and during initial cardiac ejection 
are important in preventing gas emboli. Some centers 
fi ll the surgical fi eld with CO 2 , a gas that if entrained 
and embolized will more rapidly be reabsorbed. TEE 
can detect residual air within the heart and the need 
for further deairing procedures. During coronary 
bypass procedures, minimizing the amount of aortic 
manipulation, the number of aortic clampings, and 
the number of graft  sites on the surface of the aorta, 
and using sutureless proximal anastomotic devices 
may help reduce atheromatous emboli. Palpation 
of the aorta, TEE, and especially epiaortic echocar-
diography can help identify high-risk patients and 
guide management. Epiaortic echocardiography is 
the most sensitive and specifi c technique. 
 Although embolic phenomena appear respon-
sible for most neurological defi cits, the contribu-
tion of cerebral hypoperfusion remains unclear. 
Th e data are controversial and sparse that prophy-
lactic drug infusions (eg, barbiturates or propofol to 
suppress electroencephalographic activity) imme-
diately before and during intracardiac (open ven-
tricle) procedures will decrease the incidence and 
severity of neurological defi cits. Prior to circulatory 
arrest with very deep hypothermia, some clinicians 
administer a corticosteroid (methylprednisolone, 
depends on maintaining a constant state of intra-
cellular electroneutrality (the balance of charges on 
proteins). At physiological pH, these charges are 
primarily located on the imidazole rings of histi-
dine residues (referred to as α residues). Moreover, 
as temperature decreases,  K w —the dissociation 
constant for water—also decreases (p K w increases). 
Th erefore, at lower temperatures, the electroneutral-
ity of aqueous solutions, where [H + ] = [OH − ], corre-
sponds to a lower [H + ] (a higher pH). Hypothermic 
“alkalosis” thus does not necessarily refl ect [OH – ] > 
[H + ] but rather an absolute decrease in both [H + ] and 
[OH – ]. Hypothermic CPB with α-stat management 
does not require addition of CO 2 to the oxygenator: 
the total CO 2 content of blood and the electroneu-
trality are unchanged. In contrast to pH-stat man-
agement, α-stat management appears to preserve 
cerebral autoregulation of blood fl ow. Despite the 
theoretical and observed diff erences, in most stud-
ies comparisons between the two techniques fail to 
reveal appreciable diff erences in patient outcomes 
except in children undergoing circulatory arrest. 
 Anesthesia 
 Hypothermia (<34°C) potentiates general 
anesthetic potency, but failure to give anes-
thetic agents, particularly during rewarming on 
CPB, may result in awareness and recall. With light 
anesthesia hypertension may be seen and, if muscle 
paralysis is also allowed to wear off , the patient may 
move. Consequently, additional doses of anesthetic 
agents may be necessary during CPB. Reduced con-
centrations of a volatile agent (eg, 0.5–0.75% isofl u-
rane) via the oxygenator are frequently used. Th e 
volatile agent concentration may need to be reduced 
to a value that does not depress contractility imme-
diately prior to termination of bypass if residual 
myocardial depression is apparent. Th ose relying 
on opioids and benzodiazepines for anesthesia dur-
ing CPB may need to administer additional doses of 
these agents or commence a propofol infusion. Some 
clinicians routinely administer a benzodiazepine 
(eg, midazolam) or scopolamine (0.2–0.4 mg) when 
rewarming is initiated. Alternatively, a propofol, opi-
oid, or ketamine–midazolam infusion may be con-
tinued throughout CPB. Sweating during rewarming 
is common and usually indicates a hypothalamic 
12
462 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
necessary. Administration of lidocaine, 100–200 mg, 
and magnesium sulfate, 1–2 g, prior to removal of 
aortic cross-clamping is a common protocol and 
may decrease the likelihood of fi brillation. Many 
clinicians advocate a head-down position while 
intracardiac air is being evacuated to decrease the 
likelihood of cerebral emboli. Lung infl ation facili-
tates expulsion of (left -sided) intracardiac air by 
compressing pulmonary vessels and returning blood 
into the left  heart. TEE is useful in detecting resid-
ual intracardiac air. Initial reinfl ation of the lungs 
requires greater than normal airway pressure and 
should generally be done under direct visualization 
of the surgical fi eld because excessive lung expansion 
can interfere with internal mammary artery graft s. 
 General guidelines for separation from CPB 
include the following: 
•  Th e core body temperature should be at least 
37°C. 
•  A stable rhythm must be present. 
Atrioventricular pacing is oft en used and 
confers the benefi t of a properly timed atrial 
systole. Persistence of atrioventricular block 
should prompt measurement of serum 
potassium concentration. If hyperkalemia 
is present, it can be treated with calcium, 
NaHCO 3 , furosemide, or glucose and insulin. 
•  Th e heart rate must be adequate (generally 
80–100 beats/min). Slow heart rates are generally 
treated by pacing. Many inotropic agents 
will also increase heart rate. Supraventricular 
tachycardias generally require cardioversion. 
•  Laboratory values must be within acceptable 
limits. Signifi cant acidosis (pH < 7.20), 
hypocalcemia (ionized), and hyperkalemia 
(>5.5 mEq/L) should be treated; ideally the 
hematocrit should exceed 22%; however, a 
hematocrit <22% should not by itself trigger 
transfusion of red blood cells at this time. 
When CPB reservoir volume and fl ow are 
adequate, ultrafi ltration may be used to 
increase the hematocrit. 
•  Adequate ventilation with 100% oxygen must 
have been resumed. 
•  All monitors should be rechecked for proper 
function and recalibrated if necessary. 
30 mg/kg, or the equivalent dose of dexametha-
sone) and mannitol (0.5 g/kg). Th e head is also 
covered with ice bags (avoiding the eyes). Surface 
cooling delays rewarming and may also facilitate 
adequacy of brain cooling. A long list of drugs has 
been tested and has failed to improve cerebral out-
comes aft er heart surgery. Human studies during 
cardiac surgery have not shown improved neu-
robehavioral outcomes with prophylactic adminis-
tration of calcium channel blockers (nimodipine), 
 N -methyl- d -aspartate (NMDA) antagonists (rema-
cemide), free radical scavengers (pegorgotein), 
sedative-hypnotics (thiopental, propofol, or clome-
thiazole), or lazaroids (tirilazad). 
 4. Termination of CPB 
 Discontinuation of bypass is accomplished by a 
series of necessary procedures and conditions: 
1. 
 Rewarming must be completed. 
2. 
 Air must be evacuated from the heart and any 
bypass graft s. 
3. 
 Th e aortic cross-clamp must be removed and 
the heart must beat. 
4. 
 Lung ventilation must be resumed. 
 Th e surgeon’s decision about when to rewarm 
is important; adequate rewarming requires time, but 
rewarming too soon removes the protective eff ects 
of hypothermia. Rapid rewarming oft en results in 
large temperature gradients between well-perfused 
organs and peripheral vasoconstricted tissues; sub-
sequent equilibration following separation from 
CPB decreases core temperature again. An excessive 
gradient between the infusate temperature and the 
patient’s core temperature can result in deleterious 
brain hyperthermia. Infusion of a vasodilator drug 
(nitroprusside, isofl urane, or phentolamine [primar-
ily in children]) by allowing higher pump fl ows oft en 
speeds the rewarming process and decreases large 
temperature gradients. Some believe that allowing 
some pulsatile fl ow (ventricular ejection) may also 
speed rewarming. Excessively rapid rewarming, 
however, can result in the formation of gas bubbles 
in the bloodstream as the solubility of gases rapidly 
decreases. If the heart fi brillates during rewarm-
ing, direct electrical defi brillation (5–10 J) may be 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
463 
arterial pressure rises. Once the venous line is 
completely occluded and systolic arterial pressure 
is judged to be adequate (>80–90 mm Hg), pump 
fl ow is stopped and the patient is evaluated.  Some 
surgeons wean by clamping the venous line and 
then progressively “fi lling” the patient with arte-
rial infl ow . 
 Most patients fall into one of four groups 
when coming off  bypass ( Table 22–2 ) . Patients 
with good ventricular function are usually quick 
to develop good blood pressure and cardiac out-
put and can be separated from CPB immedi-
ately. Hyperdynamic patients can also be rapidly 
weaned. Th ese patients emerge from CPB with a 
very low SVR, demonstrating good contractility 
and adequate volume, but have low arterial pres-
sure; their hematocrit is oft en reduced (<22%). 
Diuresis (off  CPB) or red blood cell transfusions 
increase arterial blood pressure. 
 Hypovolemic patients include those with nor-
mal ventricular function and those with varying 
degrees of impairment. Th ose with preserved myo-
cardial function quickly respond to 100-mL aliquots 
of pump blood infused via the aortic cannula. Blood 
pressure and cardiac output rise with each bolus, 
 Weaning from CPB 
 CPB should be discontinued as systemic arterial 
pressure, ventricular volumes and fi lling pressures, 
and cardiac function (on TEE) are assessed. Central 
aortic pressure may be measured directly and should 
be compared with the radial artery pressure and 
cuff  pressure (if there is a disparity). A reversal of 
the normal systolic pressure gradient, with aortic 
pressure being greater than radial pressure, is oft en 
seen immediately postbypass. Th is has been attrib-
uted to opening of arteriovenous connections in the 
hand as a consequence of rewarming. Central aortic 
root pressure can also be estimated by palpation by 
an experienced surgeon. Right ventricular volume 
and contractility can be estimated visually, whereas 
fi lling pressures are measured directly by central 
venous, pulmonary artery, or left  atrial catheters. 
Cardiac output can be measured by thermodilution. 
TEE can defi ne adequacy of end-diastolic volumes, 
right and left  ventricular contractility, and valvular 
function. 
 Weaning is typically accomplished by pro-
gressively clamping the venous return line (tub-
ing). As the beating heart fi lls, ventricular ejection 
resumes. Pump fl ow is gradually decreased as 
 TABLE 222 Post-CPB hemodynamic subgroups. 1 
Group I: 
Vigorous
Group II: 
Hypovolemic
Group IIIA: 
LV Pump Failure
Group IIIB: 
RV Failure
Group IV: Vasodilated 
(Hyperdynamic)
Blood pressure
Normal
Low
Low
Low
Low
Central venous 
pressure
Normal
Low
Normal or high
High
Normal or low
Pulmonary 
wedge pressure
Normal
Low
High
Normal or high
Normal or low
TEE findings
Normal
Underfilled RV/LV
Reduced LV 
performance
Dilated RV
Normal or underfilled 
RV/LV
Cardiac output
Normal
Low
Low
Low
High
Systemic vascular 
resistance
Normal
Low, normal, 
or high
Low, normal or high
Normal or high
Low
Treatment
None
Volume
Inotrope; IABP, LVAD
Inotrope, pulmonary 
vasodilator; RVAD
Vasoconstrictor, volume
 1 CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular; IABP, intraaortic balloon pump; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; RVAD, right 
ventricular assist device; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography.
464 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
and the increase becomes progressively more sus-
tained. Most of these patients maintain good blood 
pressure and cardiac output with a left  ventricular 
fi lling pressure below 10–15 mm Hg. Ventricular 
impairment should be suspected (when defi nitive 
diagnosis using TEE is not available) in hypovolemic 
patients whose fi lling pressures rise during volume 
infusion without appreciable changes in blood pres-
sure or cardiac output or in those who require fi lling 
pressures above 10–15 mm Hg. Ventricular dysfunc-
tion is easily diagnosed by TEE. 
 Patients with pump failure emerge from CPB 
with a sluggish, poorly contracting heart that pro-
gressively distends. In such cases, CPB may need 
to be reinstituted while inotropic therapy is initi-
ated; alternatively, if the patient is less unstable, a 
positive inotrope (epinephrine, dopamine, dobu-
tamine) can be administered while the patient is 
observed for improvement. If the patient does not 
respond to reasonable doses of one of these three 
agents, milrinone can be added. In patients with 
poor preoperative ventricular function milrinone 
may be administered as the fi rst-line agent prior to 
separation from CPB. In the rare instance that SVR 
is increased, aft erload reduction with nitroprus-
side or milrinone can be tried. Th e patient should 
be evaluated for unrecognized ischemia (kinked 
graft  or coronary vasospasm), valvular dysfunction, 
shunting, or right ventricular failure (the distention 
is primarily right sided). TEE will facilitate the diag-
nosis in these cases. 
 If drug therapies fail,  intraaortic balloon 
pump (IABP) counterpulsation should be initiated 
while the patient is “rested” on CPB. Th e effi  cacy 
of IABP depends on proper timing of infl ation and 
defl ation of the balloon ( Figure 22–15 ).  Th e bal-
loon should infl ate just aft er the dicrotic notch is 
seen on the intraaortic pressure tracing to aug-
ment diastolic blood pressure and coronary fl ow 
aft er closure of the aortic valve . Infl ation too early 
increases aft erload and exacerbates aortic regur-
gitation, whereas late infl ation reduces diastolic 
augmentation. Balloon defl ation should be timed 
just prior to left  ventricular ejection to decrease its 
aft erload. Early defl ation makes diastolic augmen-
tation and aft erload reduction less eff ective. Use of 
a left  or right ventricular assist device (LVAD or 
 FIGURE 2215  A central arterial waveform during 
1:2 intraaortic balloon pump counterpulsation. Ideally 
the balloon, which is positioned in the descending aorta 
just distal to the left subclavian artery, should inﬂ ate at 
the dicrotic notch (1) and be completely deﬂ ated just 
as the left ventricle begins to eject (2). Note the lower 
end-diastolic pressures after balloon augmentation and 
slightly lower systolic pressure in the following beat. 
N, nonaugmented beat; A, augmented beat; B, balloon 
augmentation. 
B
B
A
A
N
N
2
2
1
1
100
50
RVAD, respectively), may be necessary for patients 
with refractory pump failure. If myocardial stun-
ning is a major contributor or there are areas of 
hibernating myocardium, a delayed improvement 
in contractile function may allow complete wean-
ing from all drugs and support devices only aft er 
12–48 h of therapy. Circulatory assist devices, such 
as the Abiomed and HeartMate, can be used as a 
bridge to cardiac transplantation; the former can 
be used for several days whereas the latter device 
can be left  in place for months to years. 
 Many clinicians believe that positive inotropes 
should not routinely be used in patients coming 
off  CPB because they increase myocardial oxy-
gen demand. Th e routine use of calcium similarly 
may worsen ischemic injury and may contribute to 
coronary spasm (particularly in patients who were 
taking calcium channel blockers preoperatively). 
Nevertheless, there are centers that administer cal-
cium salts or a positive inotrope (eg, dobutamine), 
or both, to every patient at the conclusion of CPB. 
Commonly used positive inotropes and vasopres-
sors are listed in  Table 22–3 . Epinephrine, dopa-
mine, and dobutamine are the most commonly 
used agents. Clinically, epinephrine is the most 
potent inotrope and is oft en eff ective in increasing 
both cardiac output and systemic blood pressure 
when others agents have failed. In lower doses, it 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
465 
oxygen consumption. Th e combination of an ino-
dilator (usually milrinone) and a β-adrenergic 
agonist results in at least additive (and possibly 
synergistic) inotropic eff ects. Norepinephrine is 
useful for increasing SVR but may compromise 
splanchnic and renal blood fl ow at increased doses. 
Some clinicians use norepinephrine in combina-
tion with phosphodiesterase inhibitors to prevent 
excessive reductions in systemic arterial pressure. 
Arginine vasopressin may be used in patients with 
refractory hypotension, a low SVR, and resistance 
to norepinephrine. Inhaled nitric oxide and pros-
taglandin E 1 may also be helpful for refractory pul-
monary hypertension and right ventricular failure 
( Table 22–4 ); nitric oxide has the added advantage 
of not decreasing systemic arterial pressure. Studies 
have not confi rmed outcome benefi ts to the use of 
nesiritide, a human B-type natriuretic peptide, thy-
roid hormone (T 3 ), or glucose– insulin–potassium 
has predominantly β agonist activity. Dobutamine, 
unlike dopamine, does not increase fi lling pres-
sures and  may be associated with less tachycardia 
than dopamine; unfortunately, cardiac output oft en 
increases without signifi cant changes in blood pres-
sure. On the other hand, dopamine may improve 
renal blood fl ow (at reduced doses) and is oft en 
more eff ective in increasing blood pressure than 
in increasing cardiac output. Interestingly, when 
infused to increase cardiac output to similar extents, 
epinephrine is associated with no more increase 
(and perhaps less) in heart rate than dobutamine. 
Inamrinone and milrinone, both selective phos-
phodiesterase type III inhibitors, are inotropes with 
arterial and venous dilator properties; milrinone 
may be less likely than inamrinone to decrease the 
platelet count. In studies of patients with chronic 
heart failure these two inodilators, unlike other 
inotropes, did not appreciably increase myocardial 
 TABLE 223 Vasopressors and inotropic agents. 1 
Bolus
Infusion
Adrenergic Activity
Phosphodiesterase 
Inhibition
α
β
Indirect
Epinephrine
2–10 mcg
0.01–0.03 mcg/kg/min
+
+++
0
0
0.04–0.1 mcg/kg/min
++
+++
0
0
>0.1 mcg/kg/min
+++
+++
0
0
Norepinephrine
0.01–0.1 mcg/kg/min
+++
++
0
0
Isoproterenol
1–4 mcg
0.01–0.1 mcg/kg/min
0
+++
0
0
Dobutamine
2–20 mcg/kg/min
0
++
0
0
Dopamine
2–10 mcg/kg/min
+
++
+
0
10–20 mcg/kg/min
++
++
+
0
Ephedrine
5–25 mg
+
++
+
0
Phenylephrine
50–200 mcg
10–50 mcg/min
+++
0
0
0
Inamrinone
0.5–1.5 mg/kg
5–10 mcg/kg/min
0
0
0
+++
Milrinone
50 mcg/kg
0.375–0.75 mcg/kg/min
0
0
0
+++
Vasopressin
1–2 units
2–8 units/h
0
0
0
0
 1 +, mild activity; ++, moderate activity; +++, marked activity.
466 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
arrhythmias in this setting can rapidly deteriorate 
into ventricular tachycardia and fi brillation. 
 Reversal of Anticoagulation 
 Once hemostasis is judged acceptable and the 
patient continues to remain stable, heparin activ-
ity is reversed with protamine.  Protamine is a 
highly positively charged protein that binds and 
eff ectively inactivates heparin (a highly negatively 
charged 
polysaccharide). 
Heparin–protamine 
complexes are then removed by the reticuloendo-
thelial system. Protamine can be dosed in varying 
ways, but the results of all techniques should be 
checked for adequacy by repeating the ACT 3–5 
min aft er completion of the protamine infusion. 
Additional incremental doses of protamine may 
be necessary. 
 One dosing technique bases the protamine dose 
on the amount of heparin initially required to pro-
duce the desired ACT; the protamine is then given in 
a ratio of 1–1.3 mg of protamine per 100 units 
of  heparin. A still simpler approach is to give 
adult patients a defi ned dose (eg, 3–4 mg/kg) then 
check for adequacy of reversal. Another approach 
 calculates the protamine dose based on the heparin 
dose–response curve ( Figure 22–14 ). Automated 
heparin–protamine titration assays eff ectively mea-
sure residual heparin concentration and can also be 
used to calculate the protamine dose. Th e justifi ca-
tion for using this methodology is the observation 
that when protamine is given in excess it may have 
anticoagulant activity, although this has never been 
demonstrated in humans. Th is approach also 
assumes that administered protamine remains in 
circulation for a prolonged time (which has been 
proven false in studies of patients undergoing car-
diac surgery). To accomplish the heparin:protamine 
titration, premeasured amounts of protamine are 
added in varying quantities to several wells, each 
containing a blood sample. Th e well whose prot-
amine concentration best matches the heparin con-
centration will clot fi rst. Clotting will be prolonged 
in wells containing either too much or too little prot-
amine. Th e protamine dose can then be estimated by 
multiplying the concentration in the tube that clots 
fi rst by the patient’s calculated blood volume. 
Supplemental protamine (50–100 mg) should be 
infusions for vasoactive/ inotropic support aft er 
CPB. 
 5. Postbypass Period 
 Following CPB, bleeding is controlled, bypass can-
nulas are removed, anticoagulation is reversed, 
and the chest is closed. Systolic arterial pressure 
is generally maintained at less than 140 mm Hg 
to minimize bleeding. Checking for bleeding, par-
ticularly from the posterior surface of the heart, 
requires lift ing the heart, which can cause periods 
of precipitous hypotension. Some surgeons will 
need to be informed of the extent and duration of 
the hypotension; others have greater situational 
awareness. Th e atrial cannula(s) is removed before 
the aortic cannula in case the latter must be used 
to rapidly administer volume to the patient. Most 
patients need additional blood volume aft er ter-
mination of bypass. Administration of blood, col-
loids, and crystalloid is guided by fi lling pressures 
(and observation of the left  ventricle on TEE), and 
the postbypass hematocrit. A fi nal hematocrit of 
25–30% is desirable, but is not mandatory. Blood 
remaining in the CPB reservoir can be transfused 
via the aortic cannula (while it remains in place) 
or washed and processed by a cell-saver device and 
given intravenously. Frequent ventricular ectopy 
may refl ect electrolyte disturbances or residual 
ischemia and should be treated with amiodarone 
(or lidocaine or procainamide); hypokalemia or 
hypomagnesemia should be corrected. Ventricular 
 TABLE 224 Vasodilators. 
Drug
Dosage
Clevidipine
1–16 mg/hr
Fenoldopam
0.03–0.6 mcg/kg/min
Nicardipine
2.5–10 mg/h
Nitric oxide
10–60 ppm (inhaled)
Nitroglycerin
0.5–10 mcg/kg/min
Nitroprusside
0.5–10 mcg/kg/min
Prostaglandin E 1 
0.01–0.2 mcg/kg/min
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
467
 If diff use oozing continues despite adequate 
surgical hemostasis and the ACT is normal or the 
heparin–protamine titration assay shows no residual 
heparin, thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction 
is most likely. Comparison of a conventional ACT 
with an ACT measured in the presence of hepari-
nase (an enzyme that cleaves and inactivates hepa-
rin) can confi rm that no residual heparin requiring 
protamine reversal remains present when both tests 
provide the same result. Platelet defects are recog-
nized complications of CPB, which may necessitate 
platelet transfusion. Signifi cant depletion of coagu-
lation factors, particularly factors V and VIII, dur-
ing CPB is less commonly responsible for bleeding 
but should be treated with fresh frozen plasma; both 
the prothrombin time and partial thromboplas-
tin time are usually prolonged in such instances. 
Hypofi brinogenemia (fi brinogen level <100 mg/dL 
or a prolonged thrombin time without residual 
heparin) should be treated with cryoprecipitate. 
Desmopressin (DDAVP), 0.3 mcg/kg (intravenously 
over 20 min), can increase the activity of factors VIII 
and XII and the von Willebrand factor by releasing 
them from the vascular endothelium. DDAVP may 
be eff ective in reversing qualitative platelet defects 
in some patients but is not recommended for rou-
tine use. Accelerated fi brinolysis may occasion-
ally be encountered following CPB and should be 
treated with ε-aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid 
if one or the other of these agents has not already 
being given; the diagnosis should be confi rmed by 
elevated fi brin degradation products (≥32 mg/mL), 
or evidence of clot lysis on thromboelastography. 
Increasingly, factor VII concentrate (at a cost of 
many thousands of dollars) is administered as a “last 
resort” in the setting of coagulopathic bleeding fol-
lowing cardiac surgery. 
 Anesthesia 
 Unless a continuous intravenous infusion technique 
is used, additional anesthetic agents are necessary 
following CPB; the choice may be determined by 
the hemodynamic response of the patient follow-
ing CPB. Traditional teaching would have unstable 
patients receive small amounts of an opioid, ben-
zodiazepine, or scopolamine, whereas anesthetic 
doses of a volatile agent might be recommended for 
considered aft er administration of unwashed blood 
remaining in the pump reservoir aft er CPB because 
that blood contains heparin. 
 Protamine administration can result in a num-
ber of adverse hemodynamic eff ects, some of 
which are immunological in origin. Protamine given 
slowly (5–10 min) usually has few eff ects; when 
given more rapidly it produces a fairly consistent 
vasodilation that is easily treated with blood from 
the pump oxygenator and small doses of phenyl-
ephrine. Catastrophic protamine reactions oft en 
include myocardial depression and marked pul-
monary hypertension. Diabetic patients previously 
maintained on protamine-containing insulin (such 
as NPH) may be at increased risk for adverse reac-
tions to protamine. 
 Persistent Bleeding 
 Persistent bleeding oft en follows prolonged 
durations of bypass (>2 h) and in most 
instances has multiple causes. Inadequate surgi-
cal control of bleeding sites, incomplete reversal 
of heparin, thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunc-
tion, hypothermia-induced coagulation defects, 
and undiagnosed preoperative hemostatic defects, 
or newly acquired factor defi ciency or hypofi bri-
nogenemia may be responsible. Th e absence (or 
loss) of clot formation may be noted in the surgical 
fi eld. Normally, the ACT should return to baseline 
following administration of protamine; additional 
doses of protamine (25–50 mg) may be necessary. 
Reheparinization (heparin rebound) aft er appar-
ent adequate reversal is poorly understood but 
oft en attributed to redistribution of peripherally 
bound heparin to the central compartment and to 
the exceedingly short persistence of protamine in 
blood. Hypothermia (<35°C) accentuates hemo-
static defects and should be corrected. Th e admin-
istration of platelets and coagulation factors should 
be guided by additional coagulation studies, but 
empiric therapy may be necessary when such tests 
are not readily or promptly available as well as when 
treating massive transfusion. On the other hand, 
there can be abnormalities in multiple tests of coag-
ulation whether or not there is bleeding, so the true 
diagnostic specifi city and reliability of these tests is 
oft en overstated. 
13
14
468 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
infusion. Th e emphasis in the fi rst few postoperative 
hours should be on maintaining hemodynamic sta-
bility and monitoring for excessive postoperative 
bleeding.  Chest tube drainage in the fi rst 2 h of 
more than 250–300 mL/h (10 mL/kg/h)—in 
the absence of a hemostatic defect—is excessive and 
may require surgical reexploration. Subsequent 
drainage that exceeds 100 mL/h is also worrisome. 
Intrathoracic bleeding at a site not adequately 
drained may cause cardiac tamponade, requiring 
immediate reopening of the chest. 
 Hypertension despite analgesia and sedation is 
a common postoperative problem and should gen-
erally be treated promptly so as not to exacerbate 
bleeding or myocardial ischemia. Nitroprusside, 
nitroglycerin, clevidipine, or nicardipine is gener-
ally used. β Blockade may be particularly useful for 
patients recovering from coronary artery surgery. 
 Fluid replacement may be guided by fi ll-
ing pressures, echocardiography, or by responses 
to treatment. Most patients present with relative 
hypovolemia for several hours following operation. 
Hypokalemia (from intraoperative diuretics) oft en 
develops and requires replacement. Postoperative 
hypomagnesemia is common in patients who receive 
no magnesium supplementation intraoperatively. 
 Extubation should be considered only when 
muscle paralysis has worn off  (or been reversed) 
and the patient is hemodynamically stable. Caution 
should be exercised in obese and elderly patients 
and those with underlying pulmonary disease. 
Cardiothoracic procedures are typically associated 
with marked decreases in functional residual capac-
ity and postoperative diaphragmatic dysfunction. 
 Oﬀ -Pump Coronary Artery 
Bypass Surgery 
 Th e development of advanced epicardial stabiliz-
ing devices, such as the Octopus ( Figure 22–16 ), 
has facilitated coronary artery bypass graft ing with-
out the use of CPB, also known as off -pump coro-
nary artery bypass (OPCAB). Th is type of retractor 
uses suction to stabilize and lift  the anastomotic 
site rather than compress it down, which allows for 
15
hyperdynamic patients. Nevertheless, we have found 
that most patients tolerate modest doses of volatile 
agents or propofol infusion. Patients with hyper-
tension that is unresponsive to adequate anesthesia 
with opioids and either a volatile agent or propofol 
(or both) should receive a vasodilator such as nitro-
glycerin, nitroprusside, clevidipine, or nicardipine 
( Table 22–4 ). Fenoldopam may be used and has the 
added benefi t of increasing renal blood fl ow which 
might possibly improve kidney function in the early 
postoperative period. 
 It is common for an opioid (morphine or hydro-
morphone) and either propofol or dexmedetomi-
dine to be given to provide analgesia and sedation 
during transfer to the ICU and analgesia (aft er dis-
continuation of the propofol or dexmedetomidine) 
during emergence. 
 Transportation 
 Transporting patients with critical illness from the 
operating room to the ICU is a consistently nerve-
wracking and occasionally hazardous process that is 
complicated by the possibilities of monitor failure, 
overdosage or interruption of drug infusions, and 
hemodynamic instability en route. Portable moni-
toring equipment, infusion pumps, and a full oxy-
gen cylinder with a self-infl ating bag for ventilation 
should be readied prior to the end of the operation. 
Minimum monitoring during transportation includes 
the ECG, arterial blood pressure, and pulse oximetry. 
A spare endotracheal tube, laryngoscope, succinyl-
choline, and emergency resuscitation drugs should 
also accompany the patient. Upon arrival in the ICU, 
the patient should be attached to the ventilator, breath 
sounds should be checked, and an orderly transfer of 
monitors and infusions (one at a time) should follow. 
Th e ICU staff  should be given a brief summary of the 
procedure, intraoperative problems, current drug 
therapy, and any expected diffi  culties. Many centers 
insist on a standard protocol for the “hand off .” 
 6. Postoperative Period 
 Depending on the patient, the type of surgery, and 
local practices, most patients are mechanically ven-
tilated for 1–12 h postoperatively. Sedation may be 
maintained by a propofol or dexmedetomidine 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
469 
anesthetic agents and morphine provide myocardial 
protection during prolonged periods of ischemia. 
Maintenance of anesthesia with a volatile agent may 
therefore be desirable. When the surgeon is skill-
ful, long-term graft  patency may be comparable to 
procedures done with CPB. Patients with extensive 
coronary disease, particularly those with poor target 
vessels, may not be good candidates. OPCAB may 
decrease the incidence of postoperative neurological 
complications and the need for transfusion relative 
to conventional coronary bypass with CPB. 
 PEDIATRIC PATIENTS 
 Cardiovascular function in infants and young chil-
dren diff ers from that in adults. Stroke volume is 
relatively fi xed, so that cardiac output is primarily 
dependent on heart rate. Th e immature hearts of 
neonates and infants oft en are less forgiving of pres-
sure or volume overload. Furthermore, the functions 
of both ventricles are more interdependent, so that 
failure of one ventricle oft en precipitates failure of 
the other ( biventricular heart failure ). Transition 
of the neonate from the fetal to the adult circulation 
is discussed in Chapter 40. 
 Preoperative Evaluation 
 Th e potentially complex nature of congenital heart 
defects and their operative repair require close com-
munication among the anesthesiologist, cardiolo-
gist, and surgeon. Th e hemodynamic signifi cance of 
the lesion and the planned surgical correction must 
be clearly understood. Th e patient’s condition must 
be optimized. Congestive heart failure and pulmo-
nary infections should be treated. Prostaglandin E 1 
infusion (0.05–0.1 mcg/kg/min) is used preopera-
tively to prevent closure of the ductus arteriosus in 
infants dependent on ductal fl ow for survival. 
 Assessment of disease severity relies on both 
clinical and laboratory evaluation. Deterioration in 
infants may be manifested by increasing tachypnea, 
cyanosis, or sweating, particularly during feeding. 
Older children may complain of easy fatigability. In 
infants body weight is generally a good indication 
of disease severity, with the sickest children show-
ing failure to thrive and reduced weight relative to 
expectations for age. Signs of congestive heart failure 
greater hemodynamic stability. Full (CPB) dose hep-
arinization is usually given and the CPB machine is 
usually immediately available if needed. 
 Intravenous fl uid loading together with inter-
mittent or continuous infusion of a vasopressor may 
be necessary while the distal anastomoses are sewn. 
In contrast, a vasodilator may be required to reduce 
the systolic pressure to 90–100 mm Hg during partial 
clamping of the aorta for the proximal anastomosis. 
Intravenous nitroglycerin is oft en used because of its 
ability to ameliorate myocardial ischemia. 
 Although OPCAB was initially proposed for 
“simple” one- or two-vessel bypass graft ing in 
patients with good left  ventricular function, careful 
application of the technique has allowed it to be used 
routinely for multigraft  surgery, redo operations, and 
patients with compromised left  ventricular func-
tion (and it may be the “sicker” patients who benefi t 
most from avoidance of CPB). Some surgeons use an 
intraluminal shunt to maintain coronary blood fl ow 
during sewing of distal anastomoses. Myocardial 
preconditioning, brief periods of coronary occlusion 
prior to the more prolonged occlusion, reduce areas 
of necrosis following prolonged periods of isch-
emia in animal studies, but the technique has found 
limited use in OPCAB. On the other hand, volatile 
 FIGURE 2216  Schematic illustration of the Octopus 
retractor for oﬀ -pump coronary artery bypass surgery. 
470 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
tachycardia, and myocardial depression. Th e opti-
mal heart rate should be selected according to age; 
slow rates decrease cardiac output, whereas fast rates 
may impair ventricular fi lling. Mild cardiac depres-
sion may be desirable in some hyperdynamic pa-
tients, eg, those with coarctation of the aorta. 
 2. Shunts —A favorable ratio of pulmonary vascular 
resistance (PVR) to SVR should be maintained in 
the presence of shunting.  Factors known to 
increase PVR such as acidosis, hypercapnia, 
hypoxia, enhanced sympathetic tone, and high 
mean airway pressures are to be avoided in patients 
with right-to-left  shunting; hyperventilation (hypo-
capnia) with 100% oxygen is usually eff ective in 
lowering PVR. Specifi c pulmonary vasodilators are 
not available; alprostadil (prostaglandin E 1 ) or ni-
troglycerin may be tried but they oft en cause sys-
temic hypotension. Systemic vasodilation also 
worsens right-to-left  shunting and should be avoid-
ed; phenylephrine may be used to raise SVR. In-
haled nitric oxide has no eff ect on systemic arterial 
pressure. Conversely, patients with left -to-right 
shunting benefi t from systemic vasodilation and in-
creases in PVR, although specifi c hemodynamic 
manipulation is generally not attempted. 
 B. Monitoring 
 Standard intraoperative monitors are generally 
used until the patient is anesthetized, although they 
may be “added” during the course of an inhaled 
induction in some patients. A large discrepancy 
between end-tidal and arterial CO 2 tensions should 
be anticipated in patients with large right-to-left 
shunts because of increased dead space. Following 
induction, intraarterial and central venous pressure 
monitoring are employed for thoracotomies and 
all procedures employing CPB. A 22- or 24-gauge 
catheter is used to enter the radial artery; 24-gauge 
catheters may be more appropriate for small neo-
nates and premature infants. A cutdown may be 
necessary in some instances. Th e internal jugular or 
subclavian vein is generally used for central venous 
cannulation; if this approach is unsuccessful, a right 
atrial catheter may be placed intraoperatively by the 
surgeon. Pulmonary artery catheterization is almost 
never used in pediatric patients. TEE is invaluable 
for assessing the surgical repair following CPB. Ever 
smaller probes are yielding better resolution as the 
16
include failure to thrive, tachycardia, an S 3 gallop, 
weak pulses, tachypnea, pulmonary rales, and hepa-
tomegaly. Cyanosis may be noted, but hypoxemia 
is best assessed by measurements of arterial blood 
gases and the hematocrit. In the absence of iron defi -
ciency, the degree of polycythemia is related to the 
severity and duration of hypoxemia. Clubbing of the 
fi ngers is frequent in children with cyanotic defects. 
Th e evaluation should also search for other congeni-
tal abnormalities, which are present in up to 30% of 
patients with congenital heart disease. 
 Th e results of echocardiography, heart catheter-
ization, electrocardiography, and chest radiography 
should be reviewed. Laboratory evaluation typi-
cally includes a complete blood count (with platelet 
count), coagulation studies, electrolytes, blood urea 
nitrogen, and serum creatinine. Measurements of 
ionized calcium and glucose are also useful in neo-
nates and critically ill children. 
 Preinduction Period 
 A. Fasting 
 Fasting requirements vary according to the patient’s 
age and current guidelines. A preoperative intra-
venous infusion that provides maintenance fl uid 
requirements should be used in patients susceptible 
to dehydration, in those with severe polycythemia, 
and when excessive delays occur prior to surgery. 
 B. Premedication 
 Premedication varies according to age and cardiac 
and pulmonary reserves. Atropine, 0.02 mg/kg 
intramuscularly (minimum dose, 0.15 mg), has by 
tradition been given to pediatric cardiac patients 
to counteract enhanced vagal tone. Neonates and 
infants younger than 6 months of age may receive 
no premedication or given only atropine. Sedation 
is desirable in older patients, particularly those with 
cyanotic lesions (tetralogy of Fallot), as agitation 
and crying worsen right-to-left  shunting. Patients 
older than 1 year may be given midazolam orally 
(0.5–0.6 mg/kg) or intramuscularly (0.08 mg/kg). 
 Induction of Anesthesia 
 A. Hemodynamic Anesthetic Goals 
 1. Obstructive lesions —Anesthetic management 
should strive to avoid hypovolemia, bradycardia, 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
471 
excessive secretions. Ketamine is a good choice for 
agitated and uncooperative patients as well as pa-
tients with decreased cardiac reserve. Its safety with 
cyanotic lesions (particularly in patients with Fallot’s 
tetralogy) is well established. Ketamine does not ap-
pear to increase PVR in children. 
 3. Inhalation —Sevofl urane is the most commonly 
used volatile agent. Th e technique is the same as 
for noncardiac surgery, except for greater concerns 
about avoiding excessive anesthetic doses. Sevofl u-
rane is particularly suitable for patients with good 
cardiac reserve. Th e safety of sevofl urane in patients 
with cyanotic heart disease and good cardiac reserve 
is now well established. Nitrous oxide may be used 
with inhalation inductions; its concentration should 
be limited to 50% in patients with cyanotic lesions. 
Nitrous oxide does not appear to increase PVR in 
pediatric patients. Th e uptake of inhalation agents 
may be slowed in patients with right-to-left  shunts; 
in contrast, no signifi cant eff ect on uptake is gener-
ally observed with left -to-right shunting. 
 Maintenance Anesthesia 
 Following induction, opioids or inhalation anes-
thetics are used for maintenance. Fentanyl and suf-
entanil are the most commonly used intravenous 
agents, and isofl urane and sevofl urane the most 
commonly used inhalation agents. Some clinicians 
choose the anesthetic according to the patient’s 
hemodynamic responses. Isofl urane and sevofl u-
rane may be more suitable than halothane (the 
most commonly used inhaled agent in years past) 
for most patients; in equivalent anesthetic doses, 
they cause less myocardial depression, less slow-
ing of the heart rate, and more vasodilation than 
halothane. However, one can make a theoretical 
argument in favor of halothane over sevofl urane 
for patients with tetralogy of Fallot (and similarly 
obstructive lesions such as hypertrophic subaortic 
stenosis), where myocardial depression is much 
preferred over vasodilation. 
 Cardiopulmonary Bypass 
 Th e circuit and technique used are similar to those 
used for adults. Because the smallest circuit volume 
used is still about three times an infant’s blood vol-
ume, blood is used to prime the circuit for neonates 
technology advances. Probes are currently available 
for patients as small as 3 kg. Intraoperative epicar-
dial echocardiography is commonly used either in 
addition to or instead of TEE. 
 C. Venous Access 
 Venous access is desirable but not always necessary 
for induction. Agitation and crying are particularly 
undesirable in patients with cyanotic lesions and can 
increase right-to-left  shunting. Intravenous access 
can be established aft er induction but before intu-
bation in most patients. Subsequently, at least two 
intravenous fl uid infusion portals are required; one 
is typically via a central venous catheter. Caution 
is necessary to avoid even the smallest air bubbles. 
Shunting lesions allow the passage of venous air into 
the arterial circulation; paradoxical embolism can 
occur through the foramen ovale even in patients 
without obvious right-to-left  shunting. Aspiration 
prior to each injection prevents dislodgment of any 
trapped air at stopcock injection ports. 
 D. Route of Induction 
 To a major extent, the eff ect of premedication 
and the presence of venous access determine the 
induction technique. Intubation is facilitated by a 
nondepolarizing agent (rocuronium, 1.2 mg/kg, or 
pancuronium, 0.1 mg/kg) or, much less commonly, 
succinylcholine, 1.5–2 mg/kg. Pancuronium’s 
vagolytic eff ects are particularly useful in pediat-
ric patients, but the agent itself is less oft en seen in 
North American hospitals. 
 1. Intravenous —Propofol (2–3 mg/kg), ketamine 
(1–2 mg/kg), fentanyl (25–50 mcg/kg), or sufentanil 
(5–15 mcg/kg) can be used for intravenous induc-
tion. High-dose opioids may be suitable for very 
small and critically ill patients when postoperative 
ventilation is planned. Intravenous agents’ onset of 
action may be more rapid in patients with right-to-
left  shunting; drug boluses should be given slowly to 
avoid transiently high arterial blood levels. In con-
trast, recirculation in patients with large left -to-right 
shunts dilutes arterial blood concentration and can 
delay the appearance of intravenous agents’ clinical 
eff ects. 
 2. Intramuscular —Ketamine, 4–10 mg/kg, is most 
commonly used, and onset of anesthesia is within 
5 min. Coadministration with atropine helps prevent 
472 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
and venous reservoir, passes it through an ultrafi l-
ter, and returns it to the right atrium. 
 Surgical correction of complex congenital 
lesions oft en requires a period of complete circula-
tory arrest under deep hypothermia (deep hypother-
mic circulatory arrest; DHCA). Following institution 
of CPB, cooling is accomplished by a combination of 
surface cooling and a cold perfusate. At a core tem-
perature of 15°C, up to 60 min of complete circula-
tory arrest may be safe. Ice packing around the head 
is used to delay rewarming and for surface cooling of 
the brain. Pharmacological brain protection is oft en 
attempted with methylprednisolone, 30 mg/kg, and 
mannitol, 0.5 g/kg. Following the repair, CPB fl ow is 
restarted and rewarming takes place. 
 Postbypass Period 
 Because of the large priming volumes used (oft en 
200–300% of the patient’s blood volume), hemo-
static defects from dilution of clotting factors and 
platelets are commonly seen aft er CPB in infants; in 
addition to heparin reversal, administration of fresh 
frozen plasma and platelets is oft en necessary. 
 Patients undergoing extensive or complicated 
procedures will generally remain intubated. Extu-
bation may be considered for older, relatively healthy 
patients undergoing simple procedures such as clo-
sure of a patent ductus or atrial septal defect or repair 
of coarctation of the aorta. 
 Cardiac Transplantation 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Cardiac transplantation is the treatment of choice 
for otherwise healthy patients with end-stage heart 
disease so severe that they are unlikely to survive the 
next 6–12 months. Th e procedure is generally asso-
ciated with 80–90% postoperative survival at 1 year 
and 60–90% survival at 5 years. Transplantation 
improves the quality of life and most patients 
are able to resume a relatively normal lifestyle. 
Unfortunately, the number of cardiac transplants 
performed is limited by the supply of donor hearts, 
which are obtained from brain-dead patients, most 
commonly following intracranial hemorrhage or 
head trauma. 
and infants to prevent excessive hemodilution. CPB 
may be complicated by intracardiac and extracar-
diac shunts and a very compliant arterial system 
(in very young patients); both tend to lower mean 
arterial pressure (20–50 mm Hg) and can impair 
systemic perfusion. High fl ow rates (up to 200 mL/
kg/min) may be necessary to ensure adequate per-
fusion in very young patients. As noted previously, 
some evidence suggests that pH-stat management 
during CPB may be associated with better neuro-
logical outcome in children who will undergo cir-
culatory arrest. Weaning from CPB is generally 
not a problem in pediatric patients if the surgical 
repair is adequate; primary pump failure is unusual. 
Diffi  culty in weaning should prompt the surgeon to 
check the repair and search for undiagnosed lesions. 
Intraoperative echocardiography, together with 
measurement of the pressure and oxygen saturation 
within the various chambers, may reveal the prob-
lem. Inotropic support may be provided by any of 
the agents used for adults. Calcium chloride is more 
oft en useful in critically ill young patients than in 
adults as children more oft en have impaired cal-
cium homeostasis; ionized calcium measurements 
are invaluable in such cases. Close monitoring of 
glucose is required because both hyperglycemia 
and hypoglycemia may be observed. Dopamine and 
epinephrine are the most commonly used inotro-
pes in pediatric patients. Addition of a phosphodi-
esterase inhibitor is also useful when PVR or SVR 
is increased. Hypocapnia, systemic alkalosis, and a 
high inspired oxygen concentration should also be 
used to decrease PVR in patients with pulmonary 
hypertension; additional pharmacological adjuncts 
may include prostaglandin E 1 (0.05–0.1 mcg/kg/
min) or prostacyclin (1–40 mcg/kg/min). Inhalation 
nitric oxide may also be helpful for refractory pul-
monary hypertension. 
 Children appear to have an intense infl amma-
tory response during CPB that may be related to 
their blood being exposed to very large artifi cial 
surfaces relative to their size. Corticosteroids are 
oft en given to suppress this response. Many centers 
use modifi ed ultrafi ltration aft er weaning from CPB 
to partially correct the hemodilution but remove 
infl ammatory vasoactive substances (cytokines); 
the technique takes blood from the aortic cannula 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
473 
unnecessarily prolongs the time under anesthesia 
for the recipient, whereas delayed induction may 
jeopardize graft  function by prolonging the period 
of ischemia. 
 Patients may receive little advance warning of 
the availability of a suitable organ. Many—if not 
most—will have eaten a recent meal and should be 
considered to have a full stomach. Oral cyclospo-
rine must be given preoperatively. Administration 
of a clear antacid (sodium citrate), a histamine H 2 -
receptor blocker, and metoclopramide should be 
considered. Any sedating premedication may be 
administered intravenously just prior to induction. 
 Monitoring is similar to that used for other 
cardiac procedures and is oft en established prior to 
induction. Strict asepsis should be observed dur-
ing invasive procedures. Use of the right internal 
jugular vein for central access does not appear to 
compromise its future use for postoperative endo-
myocardial biopsies. A pulmonary artery catheter 
is used in many centers for postbypass manage-
ment. It need not be placed in the pulmonary 
artery before CPB. 
 A rapid sequence induction may be performed. 
Th e principal objective of anesthetic management is 
to maintain organ perfusion until the patient is on 
CPB. Induction may be carried out with small doses 
of opioids (fentanyl, 5–10 mcg/kg) with or without 
etomidate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg). A low-dose ketamine–
midazolam technique (above) may also be suitable. 
Sufentanil, 5 mcg/kg, followed by succinylcholine, 
1.5 mg/kg, can be used as a rapid-sequence tech-
nique. Anesthesia is maintained in a similar fash-
ion as for other cardiac operations. A TEE probe is 
placed following induction, and antirejection drugs 
are given. 
 Sternotomy and cannulation for CPB may be 
complicated by scarring from prior cardiac opera-
tions. Aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid can 
be used to decrease postoperative bleeding. CPB 
is initiated following cannulation of the aorta and 
both cavae. If a pulmonary artery catheter was 
placed, it must be completely withdrawn from the 
heart with its tip in the superior vena cava. It must 
remain within its sterile, protective sheath if it is 
to be safely refl oated again into the pulmonary 
artery following CPB. Th e recipient’s heart is then 
 Patients with intractable heart failure have 
an ejection fraction of less than 20% and fall into 
NYHA functional class IV (see Chapter 21) and 
heart failure class D. For most patients, the pri-
mary diagnosis is cardiomyopathy. Intractable 
heart failure may be the result of a severe con-
genital lesion, ischemic cardiomyopathy, viral 
cardiomyopathy, peripartum cardiomyopathy, a 
failed prior transplantation, or valvular heart dis-
ease. Medical therapy should include the standard 
drugs used for heart failure, including angioten-
sin-converting enzyme inhibitors (or angiotensin 
receptor blockers, or both) and β blockade (usu-
ally with carvedilol). Other drugs may include 
diuretics, vasodilators, and even oral inotropes; 
oral anticoagulation with warfarin may also be 
necessary. Patients may not be able to survive 
without intravenous inotropes while awaiting 
transplantation. Intraaortic balloon counterpulsa-
tion, an LVAD, or even a total mechanical heart 
may also be necessary. 
 Transplant candidates must not have suff ered 
extensive end-organ damage or have other major 
systemic illnesses. Reversible renal and hepatic 
dysfunction are common because of chronic hypo-
perfusion and venous congestion. PVR must be 
normal or at least responsive to oxygen or vasodi-
lators. Irreversible pulmonary vascular disease is 
usually associated with a PVR of more than 6–8 
Wood units (1 Wood unit = 80 dyn·s·cm –5 ), and is 
a contraindication to orthotopic cardiac transplan-
tation because right ventricular failure is a major 
cause of early postoperative mortality. Patients 
with long-standing pulmonary hypertension may, 
however, be candidates for combined heart–lung 
transplantation. 
 Tissue cross-matching is generally not per-
formed. Donor–recipient compatibility is based on 
size, ABO blood-group typing, and cytomegalovirus 
serology. Donor organs from patients with hepatitis 
B or C or HIV infections are excluded. 
 ANESTHETIC MANAGEMENT 
 Proper timing and coordination are necessary 
between the donor organ retrieval team and the 
transplant center. Premature induction of anesthesia 
474 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
of the pericardium or larger pericardial fl uid collec-
tions can seriously impair cardiac output. 
 1. Cardiac Tamponade 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Cardiac tamponade exists when increased pericar-
dial pressure impairs diastolic fi lling of the heart. 
Cardiac fi lling is ultimately related to the diastolic 
transmural (distending) pressure across each cham-
ber. Consequently, any increase in pericardial pres-
sure relative to the pressure within the chamber 
reduces fi lling. Pressure is applied equally to each 
cardiac chamber when the problem is a pericardial 
fl uid collection; or, it can be applied “selectively,” 
as for example when an isolated pericardial blood 
clot compresses the left  atrium. In general, the thin-
walled atria and the right ventricle are more sus-
ceptible to pressure-induced abnormalities of fi lling 
than the left  ventricle. 
 Pericardial pressure is normally similar to pleu-
ral pressure, varying with respiration between –4 
and +4 mm Hg. Elevations in pericardial pressure 
are most commonly due to increases in pericar-
dial fl uid volume (as a consequence of eff usions or 
bleeding). Th e magnitude of the increased pressure 
depends on both the volume of fl uid and the rate 
of fl uid accumulation; sudden increases exceeding 
100–200 mL precipitously increase pericardial pres-
sure, whereas very slow accumulations up to 1000 
mL allow the pericardium to stretch with minimal 
increases in pericardial pressure. 
 Th e principal hemodynamic features of car-
diac tamponade include decreased cardiac output 
from reduced stroke volume with an increase in 
central venous pressure. In the absence of severe 
left  ventricular dysfunction, equalization of dia-
stolic pressure occurs throughout the heart (right 
atrial pressure [RAP] = right ventricular end-
diastolic pressure [RVEDP] = left  atrial pressure 
[LAP] = left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
[LVEDP]). 
 Th e central venous pressure waveform is char-
acteristic in cardiac tamponade. Impairment of 
both diastolic fi lling and atrial emptying abolishes 
the  y descent; the  x descent (systolic atrial fi lling) 
is normal or even accentuated. Refl ex sympathetic 
excised, allowing the posterior wall of both atria 
(with the caval and pulmonary vein openings) to 
remain. Th e atria of the donor heart are anasto-
mosed to the recipient’s atrial remnants (left  side 
fi rst). Th e aorta and then the pulmonary artery are 
anastomosed end to end. Th e donor heart is then 
fl ushed with saline and intracardiac air is evacu-
ated. Methylprednisolone is given before the aortic 
cross-clamp is released. 
 Inotropic support is usually started prior to 
separation from CPB to counteract bradycar-
dia from sympathetic denervation. Prolonged 
graft  ischemia may result in transient myocardial 
depression. Slow junctional rhythms are common 
and may require epicardial pacing. Although the 
transplanted heart is totally denervated and direct 
autonomic infl uences are absent, its response to 
circulating catecholamines is usually normal. Th e 
pulmonary artery catheter can be refl oated into 
position aft er CPB and is used in conjunction with 
TEE to evaluate the patient. Th e most common 
post-CPB problem is right ventricular failure from 
pulmonary hypertension, which should be treated 
with hyperventilation, prostaglandin E 1 (0.025–0.2 
mcg/kg/min), nitric oxide (10–60 ppm), and an 
RVAD, if necessary. Bleeding is a common problem 
because of extensive suture lines and preoperative 
hemostatic defects. 
 Patients will be extubated when they meet 
criteria, as with other major cardiac operations. 
Th e postoperative course may be complicated by 
acute rejection, renal and hepatic dysfunction, and 
infections. 
 PERICARDIAL DISEASE 
 Th e parietal pericardium is a fi brous membrane 
surrounding the heart, to which it normally is not 
adherent. Th e pericardium encompasses a relatively 
fi xed intrapericardiac volume that includes a small 
volume of pericardial fl uid (20–50 mL in adults), 
the heart, and blood. As a result, the pericardium 
normally limits acute dilation of the ventricles and 
promotes diastolic coupling of the two ventricles 
(distention of one ventricle interferes with fi lling of 
the other). Th e latter eff ect is also due to the inter-
ventricular septal wall they share. Moreover, diseases 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
475
infarction; aortic dissection; hypersensitivity or 
autoimmune disorders; drugs; or myxedema. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Symptomatic cardiac tamponade requires evacua-
tion of the pericardial fl uid, either surgically or by 
pericardiocentesis. Th e latter is associated with a risk 
of lacerating the heart or coronary arteries and of 
pneumothorax. Traumatic postoperative (following 
thoracotomy) cardiac tamponade is nearly always 
treated surgically, whereas tamponade from other 
causes may more oft en be amenable to pericardio-
centesis. Surgical treatment is also oft en undertaken 
for large recurrent pericardial eff usions (infec-
tious, malignant, autoimmune, uremic, or radiation 
induced) to prevent tamponade. Simple drainage of 
pericardial fl uid may be achieved through a subxi-
phoid approach, whereas drainage combined with 
pericardial biopsy or pericardiectomy may be per-
formed via a left  anterior thoracotomy or median 
sternotomy. Drainage and biopsies can also be 
accomplished through left -sided thoracoscopy. 
 Th e anesthetic approach must be tailored to the 
patient. For the intubated postoperative cardiac 
patient in extremis, the chest may be reopened 
immediately in the ICU. For awake conscious patients 
who will undergo left  thoracotomy or median ster-
notomy, general anesthesia and endotracheal intuba-
tion are necessary. Local anesthesia may be used for 
patients undergoing simple drainage through a sub-
xiphoid approach or pericardiocentesis. Removal of 
even a small volume of fl uid may be suffi  cient to 
greatly improve cardiac output and allow safe induc-
tion of general anesthesia. Small doses (10 mg intra-
venously at a time) of ketamine also provide excellent 
supplemental analgesia. 
 Induction of general anesthesia in patients 
with cardiac tamponade can precipitate severe 
hypotension and cardiac arrest. We fi nd it useful 
to have an epinephrine infusion available and we 
sometimes initiate it before induction. 
 Large-bore intravenous access is mandatory. 
Monitoring of intraarterial pressure is useful, but 
placement of monitors should not delay pericardial 
drainage if the patient is unstable. Th e anesthetic 
technique should maintain a high sympathetic 
tone until the tamponade is relieved; in other 
17
activation is a prominent compensatory response in 
cardiac tamponade. Th e resulting increases in heart 
rate and contractility help maintain cardiac output. 
Arterial vasoconstriction (increased SVR) supports 
systemic blood pressure, whereas sympathetic acti-
vation reduces vascular capacitance, having the 
eff ect of an autotransfusion. Because stroke volume 
remains relatively fi xed, cardiac output becomes pri-
marily dependent on heart rate. 
 Acute cardiac tamponade usually presents as 
sudden hypotension, tachycardia, and tachypnea. 
Physical signs include jugular venous distention, 
a narrowed arterial pulse pressure, and muffl  ed 
heart sounds. Th e patient may complain of an 
inability to lie fl at. A friction rub may be audible. 
A prominent pulsus paradoxus (a cyclic inspira-
tory decrease in systolic blood pressure of more 
than 10 mm Hg) is typically present. Th e latter 
actually represents an exaggeration of a normal 
phenomenon related to inspiratory decreases in 
intrathoracic pressure. (A marked pulsus para-
doxus may also be seen with severe airway obstruc-
tion or right ventricular infarction.) Th e heart may 
appear normal or enlarged on a chest radiograph. 
Electrocardiographic signs are generally nonspe-
cifi c and are oft en limited to decreased voltage in 
all leads and nonspecifi c ST-segment and T-wave 
abnormalities. Electrical alternans (a cyclic altera-
tion in magnitude of the P waves, QRS complex, 
and T waves) may be seen with large pericar-
dial eff usions and is thought to be due to pendu-
lar swinging of the heart within the pericardium. 
Generalized ST-segment elevation may also be 
seen in two or three limb leads as well as V 2 to V 6 in 
the early phase of pericarditis. Echocardiography is 
invaluable in diagnosing and measuring pericardial 
eff usions and cardiac tamponade, and as a guide for 
accurate needle insertion for pericardiocentesis. 
Signs of tamponade include diastolic compression 
or collapse of the right atrium and right ventricle, 
left ward displacement of the ventricular septum, 
and an exaggerated increase in right ventricular 
size with a reciprocal decrease in left  ventricular 
size during inspiration. 
 Pericardial eff usions may be due to viral, bac-
terial, or fungal infections; malignancies; bleeding 
aft er cardiac surgery; trauma; uremia; myocardial 
476 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Pericardiectomy is usually reserved for patients with 
moderate to severe disease. Th e procedure is usu-
ally performed through a median sternotomy. It is 
complicated by the necessity for extensive manipu-
lations of the heart that interfere with cardiac fi lling 
and ejection, induce frequent arrhythmias, and risk 
cardiac perforation. CPB may be required. 
 Selection of specifi c anesthetic agents is less 
important than avoiding excessive cardiac depres-
sion, vasodilation, and bradycardia. Cardiac 
output is generally rate dependent. Adequate 
large-bore intravenous access and direct arterial 
and central venous pressure monitoring are usu-
ally employed. Although cardiac function usually 
improves immediately following pericardiectomy, 
some patients display a persistently low cardiac 
output and require temporary postoperative ino-
tropic support. 
 Anesthetic Management 
of Vascular Surgery 
 ANESTHESIA FOR SURGERY 
ON THE AORTA 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Surgery on the aorta represents one of the great-
est challenges for anesthesiologists. Regardless of 
which part of the vessel is involved, the procedure 
is complicated by the need to cross-clamp the aorta 
and by the potential for large intraoperative blood 
losses. Aortic cross-clamping without CPB acutely 
increases left  ventricular aft erload and severely com-
promises organ perfusion distal to the point of occlu-
sion. Severe hypertension, myocardial ischemia, 
left  ventricular failure, or aortic valve regurgitation 
may be precipitated. Interruption of blood fl ow to 
the spinal cord, kidneys, and intestines can produce 
paraplegia, kidney failure, or intestinal infarction, 
respectively. Moreover, emergency aortic surgery 
is frequently necessary in critically ill patients who 
are acutely hypovolemic and have a high incidence 
of coexistent cardiac, renal, and pulmonary disease; 
hypertension; and diabetes. 
words, “deep” anesthesia is not the object. Cardiac 
depression, vasodilation, and slowing of the heart 
rates should be avoided. Similarly, increases in 
mean airway pressures can seriously jeopardize 
venous return. Awake intubation with mainte-
nance of  spontaneous ventilation is theoretically 
desirable, but coughing, straining, hypoxemia, and 
respiratory acidosis are equally detrimental and 
should be avoided. Th oracoscopy requires one-lung 
anesthesia. 
 Ketamine is the agent of choice for induction 
and maintenance until the tamponade is relieved. 
Small doses of epinephrine (5–10 mcg) may be 
useful as a temporary inotrope and chronotrope. 
Generous intravenous fl uid administration is useful 
in maintaining cardiac output. 
 2. Constrictive Pericarditis 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Constrictive pericarditis may develop as a sequela 
of acute or recurrent pericarditis. Pathologically, 
the pericardium is thickened, fi brotic, and oft en 
calcifi ed. Th e parietal pericardium is typically 
adherent to the visceral pericardium on the heart, 
oft en obliterating the pericardial space. Th e stiff -
ened parietal pericardium limits diastolic fi lling of 
the heart to a fi xed and reduced volume. In contrast 
to acute cardiac tamponade, fi lling during early 
diastole is typically accentuated and manifested by 
a prominent  y descent on the central venous pres-
sure waveform. 
 Patients with constrictive pericarditis display 
jugular venous distention, hepatomegaly, and oft en 
ascites. Liver function may be abnormal. In con-
trast to acute tamponade, constrictive pericardi-
tis prevents respiratory fl uctuations in pericardial 
pressure; because venous return to the heart does 
not increase during inspiration, a pulsus paradoxus 
is uncommon. In fact, venous pressure does not 
fall or may paradoxically rise during inspiration 
(Kussmaul’s sign). Th e chest radiograph will oft en 
reveal pericardial calcifi cation. Low QRS voltage 
and diff use T-wave abnormalities are usually pres-
ent on the ECG. Atrial fi brillation and conduction 
blocks may be present. Echocardiography may be 
helpful in making the diagnosis. 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
477 
blood pressure (usually to 90–120 mm Hg) and 
aortic wall stress are initiated. Th is usually includes 
intravenous vasodilators (nicardipine or nitroprus-
side) and β-adrenergic blockade (esmolol or a lon-
ger acting agent). Th e latter is important in reducing 
the shear forces related to the rate of rise of aortic 
pressure ( dP/dt ), which may actually increase with 
nitroprusside alone. 
 Aortic Aneurysms 
 Aneurysms more commonly occur in the abdominal 
than in the thoracic aorta. Th e vast majority of aortic 
aneurysms are due to atherosclerosis; cystic medial 
necrosis is also an important cause of thoracic aortic 
aneurysms. Syphilitic aneurysms characteristically 
involve the ascending aorta. Other etiologies include 
rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthropathies, and 
trauma. Dilation of the aortic root oft en produces 
aortic regurgitation. Expanding aneurysms of the 
upper thoracic aorta can also cause tracheal or 
bronchial compression or deviation, hemoptysis, 
and superior vena cava syndrome. Compression of 
the left  recurrent laryngeal nerve produces hoarse-
ness and left  vocal cord paralysis. Distortion of the 
normal anatomy may also complicate endotracheal 
or endobronchial intubation or cannulation of the 
internal jugular and subclavian veins. 
 Th e greatest danger from untreated aortic aneu-
rysms is rupture and exsanguination. A pseudoaneu-
rysm forms when the intima and media are ruptured 
and only adventitia or blood clot forms the outer layer. 
Acute expansion (from leaking), manifested as sud-
den severe pain, may herald rupture. Th e likelihood 
of catastrophic rupture is related to size. Th e normal 
aorta in adults varies from 2 to 3 cm in width (it is 
wider cephalad). Th e data are clear for abdominal 
aortic aneurysms; rupture occurs in 50% of patients 
within 1 year when an aneurysm is 6 cm or greater in 
diameter. Elective treatment is generally performed 
in most patients with aneurysms 5 cm or greater. 
Most oft en this is accomplished with an intravascular 
stent; less oft en, open surgery and a prosthetic graft  
is used. Th e operative mortality rate is about 2–5% 
in good-risk patients and exceeds 50% if leaking or 
rupture has already occurred. Th e risks are much less 
with intravascular stenting, which has become the 
preferred procedure whenever the anatomy permits. 
 Indications for aortic surgery include aortic 
dissections, aneurysms, occlusive disease, trauma, 
and coarctation. Lesions of the ascending aorta lie 
between the aortic valve and the innominate artery, 
whereas lesions of the aortic arch lie between the 
innominate and left  subclavian arteries. Disease distal 
to the left  subclavian artery but above the diaphragm 
involves the descending thoracic aorta; lesions below 
the diaphragm involve the abdominal aorta. 
 SPECIFIC LESIONS 
OF THE AORTA 
 Aortic Dissection 
 In an aortic dissection an intimal tear allows blood 
to track into the aortic wall (the media), creating 
a new pathway for blood fl ow. In many cases, a 
primary degenerative process called cystic medial 
necrosis predisposes for dissection to occur. 
Patients with hereditary connective tissue defects 
such as Marfan syndrome and Ehlers–Danlos syn-
drome eventually develop cystic medial necrosis 
and are at risk for aortic dissection. Propagation 
of the dissection is thought to occur as a result of 
hemodynamic shear forces acting on the intimal 
tear; indeed, hypertension is a common fi nding 
in patients with aortic dissection. Dissection can 
also occur from hemorrhage into an atheromatous 
plaque or at the aortic cannulation site following 
cardiac surgery. 
 Dissections may occlude the orifi ce of any 
artery arising directly from the aorta; they may 
extend into the aortic root, producing incompetence 
of the aortic valve; or may rupture into the pericar-
dium or pleura, producing cardiac tamponade or 
hemothorax, respectively. TEE plays an important 
role in diagnosing and characterizing aortic dissec-
tions. Dissections are most commonly of the proxi-
mal type (Stanford type A, De Bakey types I and II) 
involving the ascending aorta. Type II dissections do 
not extend beyond the innominate artery. Distal dis-
sections (Stanford type B, De Bakey type III) origi-
nate beyond the left  subclavian artery and propagate 
only distally. Proximal dissections are nearly always 
treated surgically, whereas distal dissections may be 
treated medically. In either case, from the time the 
diagnosis is suspected, measures to reduce systolic 
478 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
the aorta, whereas perfusion to the lower body is 
primarily from the pulmonary artery.  Postductal 
coarctation of the aorta may not be recognized until 
adulthood. Th e symptoms and hemodynamic sig-
nifi cance of this lesion depend on the severity of 
the narrowing and the extent of collateral circula-
tion that develops to the lower body (internal mam-
mary, subscapular, and lateral thoracic to intercostal 
arteries). Hypertension in the upper body, with or 
without left  ventricular failure, is usually present. 
So-called “rib notching” may be present on the chest 
radiograph as a result of dilated collateral intercostal 
arteries. 
 ANESTHETIC MANAGEMENT 
 Surgery on the Ascending Aorta 
 Surgery on the ascending aorta routinely uses 
median sternotomy and CPB. Th e conduct of 
anesthesia is similar to that for cardiac operations 
involving CPB, but the intraoperative course may 
be complicated by long aortic cross-clamp times 
and large intraoperative blood losses. TEE is espe-
cially useful. Blood loss can be reduced by adminis-
tration of ε-aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid. 
Concomitant aortic valve replacement and coro-
nary reimplantation are oft en necessary (Bentall 
procedure). Th e radial artery cannulation site 
should be guided by the possible need for clamp-
ing of either the subclavian or innominate arteries 
during the procedure. Nicardipine or nitroprusside 
may be used for precise blood pressure control. 
β-Adrenergic blockade should also be employed in 
the presence of an aortic dissection. On the other 
hand, bradycardia worsens aortic regurgitation and 
should be avoided. Th e arterial infl ow cannula for 
CPB is placed in a femoral artery for patients with 
dissections. In the event that sternotomy may rup-
ture an aneurysm, prior establishment of partial 
CPB (using the femoral artery and femoral vein) 
should be considered. 
 Surgery Involving the Aortic Arch 
 Th ese procedures are usually performed through a 
median sternotomy with deep hypothermic circula-
tory arrest (following institution of CPB). Additional 
considerations focus on achieving optimal cerebral 
 Occlusive Disease of the Aorta 
 Atherosclerotic obliteration of the aorta most com-
monly occurs near the aortic bifurcation (Leriche’s 
syndrome). Occlusion results from a combina-
tion of atherosclerotic plaque and thrombosis. 
Atherosclerosis is usually generalized and aff ects 
other parts of the arterial system, including the cere-
bral, coronary, and renal arteries (see Chapters 21 
and 28). Treatment may be accomplished by intra-
vascular stenting or by open surgery with an 
aortobifemoral bypass graft ; proximal thromboen-
darterectomy may also be necessary. 
 Aortic Trauma 
 Aortic trauma may be penetrating or nonpen-
etrating. Both types of injuries can result in mas-
sive hemorrhage and require immediate operation. 
Whereas penetrating injuries are usually obvious, 
blunt aortic trauma may be easily overlooked if 
not suspected and the appropriate diagnostic test-
ing performed. Nonpenetrating aortic trauma typi-
cally results from sudden high-speed decelerations 
such as those caused by automobile accidents (eg, in 
which the driver’s chest impacts the steering wheel) 
and falls. Th e injury can vary from a partial tear 
to a complete aortic transection. Because the aor-
tic arch is relatively fi xed whereas the descending 
aorta is relatively mobile, the shear forces are great-
est and the site of injury most common just distal 
to the subclavian artery. Th e most consistent initial 
fi nding is a widened mediastinum on a chest radio-
graph. Defi nitive diagnosis can be accomplished 
with magnetic resonance or computed tomographic 
imaging or TEE. 
 Coarctation of the Aorta 
 Th is congenital heart defect may be classifi ed 
according to the position of the narrowed segment 
relative to the position of the ductus arteriosus. In 
the  preductal (infantile) type, the narrowing occurs 
proximal to the opening of the ductus. Th is lesion, 
which is oft en associated with other congenital 
heart defects, is recognized in infancy because of a 
marked diff erence in perfusion between the upper 
and lower halves of the body; the lower half is cya-
notic. Perfusion to the upper body is derived from 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
479
excessive increases in blood pressure. In patients 
with good ventricular function, increasing anes-
thetic depth just prior to cross-clamping may also be 
helpful. 
 Excessive intraoperative bleeding may occur 
during these procedures. Prophylaxis with anti-
fi brinolytic agents may be helpful. A blood scav-
enging device (cell saver) for autotransfusion is 
routinely used. Adequate venous access and intraop-
erative monitoring are critical. Multiple large-bore 
(14-gauge) intravenous catheters (preferably with 
blood warmers) are useful. Pulmonary artery cath-
eterization and intraoperative TEE are oft en used. 
Th e period of greatest hemodynamic instability fol-
lows the release of the aortic cross-clamp; the abrupt 
decrease in aft erload together with bleeding and the 
release of vasodilating acid metabolites from the 
ischemic lower body can precipitate severe systemic 
hypotension and less commonly hyperkalemia. 
Decreasing anesthetic depth, volume loading, and 
partial or slow release of the cross-clamp are helpful 
in avoiding severe hypotension. A bolus dose of a 
vasopressor may be necessary. Sodium bicarbonate 
is oft en used, particularly for persistent severe meta-
bolic acidosis (pH < 7.20) in association with hypo-
tension. Calcium chloride may be necessary when 
symptomatic hypocalcemia follows massive transfu-
sion of citrated blood products. 
 A. Paraplegia 
 Spinal cord ischemia can complicate thoracic aortic 
cross-clamping. Th e incidence of transient post-
operative defi cits and postoperative paraplegia are 
11% and 6%, respectively. Increased rates are asso-
ciated with cross-clamping periods longer than 
30 min, extensive surgical dissections, and emer-
gency procedures. Th e classic defi cit is an anterior 
spinal artery syndrome with loss of motor function 
and pinprick sensation but preservation of vibration 
and proprioception. Anatomic variations in spinal 
cord blood supply are responsible for the unpredict-
able occurrence and variable nature of defi cits. Th e 
spinal cord receives its blood supply from the ver-
tebral arteries and from the thoracic and abdomi-
nal aorta. One anterior and two posterior arteries 
descend along the cord. Intercostal arteries feed the 
anterior and posterior arteries in the upper thoracic 
protection with systemic and topical hypother-
mia (above). Hypothermia to 15°C, barbiturate or 
propofol infusion to maintain a fl at EEG, methyl-
prednisolone or dexamethasone, mannitol, and phe-
nytoin are also commonly administered (but there is 
vanishingly small evidence for effi  cacy of these drug 
treatments). Th e necessarily long rewarming peri-
ods probably contribute to the larger intraoperative 
blood losses commonly observed aft er CPB. 
 Surgery Involving the 
Descending Thoracic Aorta 
 Surgery limited to the descending thoracic aorta may 
be performed through a left  thoracotomy without 
CPB, with or without (so-called “clamp-and–run” 
technique) a heparin-impregnated left  ventricular 
apex to femoral artery shunt; or using partial right 
atrium to femoral artery bypass. A thoracoabdomi-
nal incision is necessary for lesions that also involve 
the abdominal aorta. One-lung anesthesia greatly 
facilitates surgical exposure. Correct positioning of 
the endobronchial tube (even with fi beroptic bron-
choscopy) may be diffi  cult because of distortion of 
the anatomy. A right-sided double-lumen tube or a 
regular endotracheal tube with a bronchial blocker 
may be necessary. 
 Th e aorta must be cross-clamped above and 
below the lesion. Acute hypertension develops above 
the clamp, with hypotension below when there is no 
shunt or partial bypass. Arterial blood pressure 
should be monitored from the right radial artery, as 
clamping of the left  subclavian artery may be neces-
sary.  Th e sudden increase in left  ventricular 
aft erload aft er application of the aortic cross-
clamp during aortic surgery may precipitate acute 
left  ventricular failure and myocardial ischemia, 
particularly in patients with underlying ventricular 
dysfunction or coronary disease; it can also exacer-
bate preexisting aortic regurgitation. Cardiac output 
falls and left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure and 
volume rise. Th e magnitude of these changes is 
inversely related to ventricular function. Th ese 
eff ects can be ameliorated by the use of shunting or 
partial bypass. Moreover, the adverse eff ects of aor-
tic clamping become less pronounced the more dis-
tal on the aorta that the clamp is applied. A 
vasodilator infusion is oft en needed to prevent 
18
480 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 B. Kidney Failure 
 An increased incidence of kidney failure following 
aortic surgery is reported aft er emergency proce-
dures, prolonged cross-clamping periods, and pro-
longed hypotension, particularly in patients with 
preexisting kidney disease. A variety of “cocktails” 
have been employed in the hope of reducing the 
risk of kidney failure, including infusion of manni-
tol (0.5 g/kg) prior to cross-clamping, furosemide, 
fenoldopam (or low-dose dopamine), etc. Low 
(renal)-dose dopamine or fenoldopam will increase 
renal blood fl ow and may be used as an adjunct for a 
persistently low urinary output aft er the cross-clamp 
is released, however there is no convincing evidence 
that these treatments alter renal outcomes. 
 Surgery on the Abdominal Aorta 
 Stents are most oft en placed via catheters inserted in 
a femoral artery. When an open technique is chosen, 
either an anterior transperitoneal or an anterolat-
eral retroperitoneal approach can be used to access 
the abdominal aorta. Depending on the location 
of the lesion, the cross-clamp can be applied to the 
supraceliac, suprarenal, or infrarenal aorta. Heparin 
is usually administered prior to aortic clamping. 
Intraarterial blood pressure can be monitored from 
either upper extremity. In general, the more distally 
the clamp is applied to the aorta, the less the eff ect 
on left  ventricular aft erload. In fact, occlusion of the 
infrarenal aorta frequently results in minimal hemo-
dynamic changes. In contrast, release of the clamp 
usually produces hypotension; the same techniques 
that were described earlier (see above) may be used. 
Th e large incision and extensive retroperitoneal sur-
gical dissection increase fl uid requirements beyond 
intraoperative blood loss. We recommend colloid 
to maintain intravascular volume and crystalloid 
for maintenance fl uids. Fluid replacement may 
be guided by monitoring central venous pressure, 
noninvasive monitors of stroke volume, or TEE. 
Pulmonary artery catheters are rarely used. 
 Renal prophylaxis with mannitol should be 
considered, particularly in patients with preexist-
ing renal impairment. Clamping of the infrare-
nal aorta has been shown to decrease renal blood 
fl ow, which may contribute to postoperative kid-
ney failure. Th e decrease in renal blood fl ow is not 
aorta. Textbook descriptions suggest that in the 
lower thoracic and lumbar cord, the anterior spinal 
artery is supplied by the thoracolumbar artery of 
Adamkiewicz. Th e truth is that a single large feed-
ing artery usually cannot be identifi ed. When pres-
ent, this artery has a variable origin from the aorta, 
arising between T5 and T8 in 15%, between T9 and 
T12 in 60%, and between L1 and L2 in 25% of indi-
viduals; it nearly always arises on the left  side. It may 
be damaged during surgical dissection or occluded 
by the aortic cross-clamping. Monitoring motor and 
somatosensory evoked potentials may be useful in 
preventing paraplegia, but clearly surgical technique 
and speed are most important. 
 As noted earlier, use of a temporary heparin-
coated shunt or partial CPB with hypothermia 
maintains distal perfusion and decreases the inci-
dence of paraplegia, hypertension, and ventricular 
failure. Partial CPB has the disadvantage of requir-
ing heparinization, which increases blood loss. 
Using a heparin-coated shunt precludes the need for 
heparinization. It is usually positioned proximally 
in the left  ventricular apex and distally in a femoral 
artery. Other therapeutic measures that may be pro-
tective of the spinal cord include methylpredniso-
lone, mild hypothermia, mannitol, and drainage of 
cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) to reduce the CSF pressure 
in the spine; magnesium is also protective in some 
animal models. Th e effi  cacy of mannitol appears 
to be related to its ability to lower CSF pressure by 
decreasing its production. Spinal cord perfusion 
pressure is mean arterial blood pressure minus CSF 
pressure; the rise in CSF pressure following experi-
mental cross-clamping of the aorta may explain 
how a mannitol-induced decrease in CSF pressure 
could improve spinal cord perfusion pressure dur-
ing cross-clamping. Any protective eff ect of drain-
age of CSF via a lumbar catheter may have a similar 
mechanism. 
 Th e excessive use of vasodilators to control 
the hypertensive response to cross-clamping may 
be a contributing factor in spinal cord ischemia, as 
drug actions also occur distal to the cross-clamp. 
Excessive reduction in blood pressure above the 
cross-clamp should therefore be avoided to prevent 
inadequate blood fl ow and excessive hypotension 
below it. 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
481 
within 24 h; they may be due to a low-fl ow state at 
a tightly stenotic lesion or to emboli that arise from 
an extracranial vessel or the heart. When a stroke 
is associated with progressive worsening of signs 
and symptoms, it is frequently termed a  stroke in 
evolution . A second distinction is also oft en made 
between complete and incomplete strokes, based 
on whether the territory involved is completely 
aff ected or additional brain remains at risk for focal 
ischemia (eg, hemiplegia versus hemiparesis). Th e 
bifurcation of the common carotid artery (the ori-
gin of the internal carotid artery) is the most com-
mon site of atherosclerotic plaques that may lead 
to TIA or stroke. Th e mechanism may be embo-
lization of platelet-fi brin or plaque material, ste-
nosis, or complete occlusion. Th e last may be the 
result of thrombosis or hemorrhage into a plaque. 
Symptoms depend on the adequacy of collateral cir-
culation. Emboli distal to regions lacking collateral 
blood fl ow are more likely to produce symptoms. 
Small emboli in the ophthalmic branches can cause 
transient monocular blindness (amaurosis fugax). 
Larger emboli usually enter the middle cerebral 
artery, producing contralateral motor and sen-
sory defi cits that primarily aff ect the arm and face. 
Aphasia also develops if the dominant hemisphere 
is aff ected. Emboli in the anterior cerebral artery 
territory typically result in contralateral motor and 
sensory defi cits that are worse in the leg. It is com-
mon for TIAs or minor strokes to precede a major 
stroke. 
 Indications for open surgery or intravascular 
interventions include TIAs associated with ipsilat-
eral severe carotid stenosis (>70% occlusion), severe 
ipsilateral stenosis in a patient with a minor (incom-
plete) stroke, and 30–70% occlusion in a patient with 
ipsilateral symptoms (usually an ulcerated plaque). 
In the past, carotid endarterectomy was recom-
mended for asymptomatic but signifi cantly stenotic 
lesions (>60%). Currently, stenting would oft en be 
the recommendation. Operative mortality for open 
surgery is 1–4% and is primarily due to cardiac com-
plications (myocardial infarction). Perioperative 
morbidity is 4–10% and is principally neurological; 
patients with preexisting neurological defi cits have 
the greatest risk of perioperative neurological events. 
 Studies suggest that age greater than 75 years, 
prevented by epidural anesthesia or blockade of the 
renin–angiotensin system. 
 Some centers use continuous epidural anesthe-
sia combined with general anesthesia for abdominal 
aortic surgery. Th is combined technique decreases 
the general anesthetic requirement and appears to 
suppress the release of stress hormones. It also pro-
vides an excellent route for administering postop-
erative epidural analgesia. Systemic heparinization 
during surgery introduces concern regarding the risk 
of paraplegia secondary to an epidural hematoma; 
however, all credible studies suggest that there when 
the catheter is placed well in advance of hepariniza-
tion and removed aft er reversal of anticoagulation 
there is no increased risk of neuraxial hematomas as 
a consequence of epidural catheter placement. 
 Postoperative Considerations 
 Th ose undergoing stenting may not require intu-
bation either during or aft er the procedure. Most 
patients undergoing open surgery on the ascend-
ing aorta, the arch, or the thoracic aorta will remain 
intubated and ventilated for 1–24 h postoperatively. 
As with cardiac surgery, the initial emphasis in their 
postoperative care should be on hemodynamic sta-
bility and monitoring for postoperative bleeding. 
Patients undergoing open abdominal aortic surgery 
may be extubated at the end of the procedure. Th ese 
patients typically continue to require a marked 
increase in maintenance fl uids for several hours 
postoperatively. 
 ANESTHESIA FOR CAROTID 
ARTERY SURGERY 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Ischemic cerebrovascular disease accounts for 80% 
of strokes; the remaining 20% are due to hemor-
rhage. Ischemic strokes are usually the result of 
embolism or (less commonly) thrombosis in one 
of the blood vessels supplying the brain. Ischemic 
stroke may follow severe vasospasm aft er subarach-
noid hemorrhage. By convention, a stroke is defi ned 
as a neurological defi cit that lasts more than 24 h; 
its pathological correlate is typically focal infarction 
of brain. Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), on the 
other hand, are neurological defi cits that resolve 
482 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
endotracheal intubation. In theory, isofl urane may 
be the volatile agent of choice because it appears 
to provide the greatest protection against cerebral 
ischemia. Desfl urane qualitatively has similar cere-
bral eff ects but may not be as eff ective as isofl urane; 
however, desfl urane is very useful in accelerating 
awakening and allowing immediate neurologi-
cal assessment in the operating room. We do not 
regard the diff erences in neuroprotection among 
inhaled agents as clinically important. Some clini-
cians also prefer remifentanil as the opioid for rapid 
emergence. 
 Intraoperative hypertension is common and 
generally necessitates the use of an intravenous 
vasodilator. Nitroglycerin is usually a good choice 
for mild to moderate hypertension because of 
its benefi cial eff ects on the coronary circulation. 
Marked hypertension requires a more potent agent, 
such as nicardipine, nitroprusside, or clevidipine. 
β-Adrenergic blockade facilitates management of 
the hypertension and prevents refl ex tachycardia 
from vasodilators, but should be used cautiously. 
Hypotension should be treated with vasopressors. 
Many clinicians consider phenylephrine the vaso-
pressor of choice; if selected, it should be admin-
istered in small increments to prevent excessive 
hypertension. 
 Pronounced or sustained refl ex bradycardia or 
heart block caused by manipulation of the carotid 
baroreceptor can be treated with atropine. To pre-
vent this response, some surgeons infi ltrate the area 
of the carotid sinus with lidocaine, but the infi ltra-
tion itself can induce bradycardia. Arterial CO 2
tension should be maintained in the normal range 
because hypercapnia can induce intracerebral steal, 
whereas extreme hypocapnia decreases cerebral 
perfusion. Ventilation should be adjusted to main-
tain normocapnia. Maintenance intravenous fl uids 
should consist of glucose-free solutions because of 
the potentially adverse eff ects of hyperglycemia. 
Heparin (5000–7500 units intravenously) is usually 
administered prior to occlusion of the carotid artery. 
Some clinicians routinely use a shunt (see below). 
Protamine, 50–150 mg, is usually given to reverse 
heparin prior to skin closure. 
 Rapid emergence from anesthesia is desir-
able because it allows immediate neurological 
symptomatic lesions, uncontrolled hypertension, 
angina, carotid thrombus, and occlusions near the 
carotid siphon increase operative risk. 
 Preoperative Anesthetic 
Evaluation & Management 
 Most patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy 
are elderly and hypertensive, with generalized arte-
riosclerosis. Many are also diabetic. Preoperative 
evaluation and management should focus on 
defi ning preexisting neurological defi cits as well as 
optimizing the patient’s clinical status in terms of 
coexisting diseases. Most postoperative neurological 
defi cits appear to be related to surgical technique. 
Uncontrolled perioperative hyperglycemia can 
increase morbidity by enhancing ischemic cerebral 
injury. 
 With the possible exception of diuretics, 
patients should receive their usual medications 
on schedule until the time of surgery. Blood pres-
sure and the blood glucose concentration should be 
controlled. Angina should be stable and controlled, 
and signs of overt congestive heart failure should be 
absent. Because most patients are elderly, enhanced 
sensitivity to premedication should be expected. 
 General Anesthesia 
 Th e emphasis of anesthetic management dur-
ing carotid surgery is on maintaining adequate 
perfusion to the brain and heart. Traditionally, this 
is accomplished by close regulation of arterial blood 
pressure and avoidance of tachycardia. Monitoring 
of intraarterial pressure is therefore nearly always 
done. Electrocardiographic monitoring should 
include the V 5 lead to detect ischemia. Continuous 
computerized ST-segment analysis is desirable. 
Carotid endarterectomy is not usually associated 
with signifi cant blood loss or fl uid shift s. 
 Regardless of the anesthetic agents selected, 
mean arterial blood pressure should be maintained 
at—or slightly above—the patient’s usual range. 
Propofol and etomidate are popular choices for 
induction because they reduce cerebral metabolic 
rate proportionately more than cerebral blood fl ow. 
Small doses of an opioid or β-adrenergic blocker 
can be used to blunt the hypertensive response to 
19
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
483 
 Regional Anesthesia 
 Carotid surgery may be performed under regional 
anesthesia. Blockade of the superfi cial cervical plexus 
eff ectively blocks the C2–C4 nerves and allows the 
patient to remain comfortably awake during sur-
gery. Deep cervical plexus block is not required. A 
substantial fraction of patients will require admin-
istration of local anesthetic by the surgeon into the 
carotid sheath (whether or not a deep cervical block 
is performed). Th e principal advantage of regional 
anesthesia (and it is a tremendous advantage) is that 
the patient can be examined intraoperatively; thus, 
the need for a temporary shunt can be assessed and 
any new neurological defi cits diagnosed immedi-
ately during surgery. In fact, intraoperative neuro-
logical examination may be the most reliable method 
for assessing the adequacy of cerebral perfusion dur-
ing carotid cross-clamping. Th e examination mini-
mally consists of level of consciousness, speech, and 
contralateral handgrip. Experienced clinicians use 
minimal sedation and “cocktail conversation” with 
the patient to monitor the neurological status. Some 
studies also suggest that when compared with gen-
eral anesthesia, regional anesthesia results in more 
stable hemodynamics but outcomes appear similar. 
Regional anesthesia for carotid surgery requires the 
cooperation of the surgeon and patient. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
A Patient for Cardioversion 
 A 55-year-old man with new-onset atrial ﬁ brilla-
tion is scheduled for elective cardioversion . 
 What are the indications for an elective 
cardioversion? 
 Direct current (DC) cardioversion may be used 
to terminate supraventricular and ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias caused by reentry. It is not eﬀ ec-
tive for arrhythmias from enhanced automaticity 
(multifocal atrial tachycardia) or triggered activity 
(digitalis toxicity). By simultaneously depolarizing 
the entire myocardium and possibly prolonging 
the refractory period, DC cardioversion can termi-
nate atrial ﬁ brillation and ﬂ utter, atrioventricular 
assessment, but the clinician must be prepared to 
treat hypertension and tachycardia.  Postoperative 
hypertension may be related to surgical dener-
vation of the ipsilateral carotid baroreceptor. 
Denervation of the carotid body blunts the ven-
tilatory response to hypoxemia . Following extu-
bation, patients should be observed closely for 
the development of a wound hematoma. When 
an expanding wound hematoma compromises the 
airway, the initial treatment maneuver may require 
opening the wound to release the hematoma. 
Transient postoperative hoarseness and ipsilateral 
deviation of the tongue may be noted; they are due 
to intraoperative retraction of the recurrent laryn-
geal or hypoglossal nerves, respectively. 
 Monitoring Cerebral Function 
 Unless regional anesthesia is used (see below), 
indirect methods must be relied upon to assess the 
adequacy of cerebral perfusion during carotid cross-
clamping. Some surgeons routinely use a shunt, but 
this practice may increase the incidence of postop-
erative neurological defi cits; shunt insertion can dis-
lodge emboli. Carotid stump pressure distal to the 
cross-clamp, EEG, somatosensory evoked poten-
tials (SSEPs), and cerebral oximetry have been used 
in some centers to determine whether a shunt is 
needed. A distal stump pressure of less than 50 mm 
Hg has traditionally been used as an indication for 
a shunt. Electrophysiological signs of ischemia (or a 
marked decline in cerebral oxygen saturation) aft er 
cross-clamping dictate the use of a shunt; changes 
lasting more than 10 min may be associated with 
a new postoperative neurological defi cit. Although 
multichannel recordings and computer processing 
can enhance the sensitivity of the EEG, neither EEG 
nor SSEP monitoring is suffi  ciently sensitive or spe-
cifi c to reliably predict the need for shunting or the 
occurrence of postoperative defi cits (see Case Dis-
cussion in Chapter 26). Other techniques, including 
measurements of regional cerebral blood fl ow with 
radioactive xenon-133, transcranial Doppler mea-
surement of middle cerebral artery fl ow velocity, 
cerebral oximetry, jugular venous oxygen satura-
tion, and transconjunctival oxygen tension, are also 
not suffi  ciently reliable. 
484 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
ﬁ brillation. Synchronization times the delivery so 
that it is given during the QRS complex. If the shock 
occurs in the ST segment or the T wave (unsynchro-
nized), it can precipitate a more serious arrhythmia, 
including ventricular ﬁ brillation. All medical per-
sonnel should stand clear of the patient and the 
bed during the shock . 
 Atrial ﬁ brillation usually requires a minimum of 
50–100 J and larger energy levels are often used. 
Hemodynamically stable ventricular tachycardia 
can often be terminated with 25–50 J, but ventricu-
lar ﬁ brillation and unstable ventricular tachycardia 
require 200–360 J. Regardless of the arrhythmia, 
a higher energy level is necessary when the ﬁ rst 
shock is ineﬀ ective . 
 The cardiologist wants to do the cardioversion 
in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU). Is this an 
appropriate place for cardioversion? 
 Elective cardioversion can be performed in 
any setting in which full provisions for cardiopul-
monary resuscitation, including cardiac pacing 
capabilities, are immediately available. A physician 
skilled in airway management should be in atten-
dance. Cardioversions are commonly performed in 
an ICU, emergency department, PACU, procedure 
room, or cardiac catheterization suite . 
 How would you evaluate this patient? 
 The patient should be fasted, evaluated, and 
treated as though he were receiving a general 
anesthetic in the operating room. An ECG is per-
formed immediately before the procedure to con-
ﬁ rm that the arrhythmia is still present; another 
is performed immediately afterward to conﬁ rm 
the new rhythm. Preoperative laboratory values 
should be within normal limits because metabolic 
disorders, particularly electrolyte and acid–base 
abnormalities, may contribute to the arrhythmia. 
If not corrected preoperatively, they can reinitiate 
the tachycardia following cardioversion. An anti-
arrhythmic agent is often started in patients with 
atrial ﬁ brillation 1–2 days prior to the procedure to 
help maintain normal sinus rhythm. Patients may 
also be anticoagulated with warfarin for 1–2 weeks 
prior to cardioversion . 
nodal reentry, reciprocating tachycardias from pre-
excitation syndromes, and ventricular tachycardia 
or ﬁ brillation . 
 Speciﬁ c indications for cardioversion of 
patients with atrial ﬁ brillation include symptomatic 
ﬁ brillation, recent onset, and no response to medi-
cations. Patients with long-standing ﬁ brillation, a 
large atrium, chronic obstructive lung disease, con-
gestive heart failure, or mitral regurgitation have 
a high recurrence rate. A TEE is usually performed 
shortly before cardioversion to rule out a left atrial 
blood clot. Such clots are typically located in the 
left atrial appendage and can be embolized by car-
dioversion or sinus rhythm . 
 Emergency cardioversion is indicated for any 
tachyarrhythmia associated with hypotension, 
congestive heart failure, or angina . 
 How is cardioversion performed? 
 Although the procedure is usually per-
formed by cardiologists, the need for immediate 
cardioversion may arise in the operating room, 
ICU, or during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
Anesthesiologists must therefore be familiar with 
the technique. Following heavy sedation or light 
general anesthesia, DC shock is applied by either 
self-adhesive pads or 8- to 13-cm paddles. Larger 
paddles help reduce any shock-induced myocar-
dial necrosis by distributing the current over a 
wider area. The energy output should be kept at 
the minimally eﬀ ective level to prevent myocar-
dial damage. Placement of the electrodes can be 
anterolateral or anteroposterior. In the ﬁ rst posi-
tion, one electrode is placed on the right second 
intercostal space next to the sternum and the 
other is placed on the left ﬁ fth intercostal space 
in the midclavicular line. When pads are used for 
the anteroposterior technique, one is placed ante-
riorly over the ventricular apex in the ﬁ fth intercos-
tal space and the other underneath the patient in 
the left infrascapular region . 
 For supraventricular tachycardias, with the 
notable exception of atrial ﬁ brillation, energy lev-
els of 25–50 J can successfully reestablish normal 
sinus rhythm. Synchronized shocks should be 
used for all tachyarrhythmias except ventricular 
 
CHAPTER 22 Anesthesia for Cardiovascular Surgery  
485 
 What are the complications of cardioversion? 
 Complications include transient myocardial 
depression, postshock arrhythmias, and arterial 
embolism. Arrhythmias are usually due to inad-
equate synchronization, but even a properly timed 
cardioversion can occasionally result in ventricu-
lar ﬁ brillation. Most arrhythmias are transient and 
resolve spontaneously. Although patients may 
develop ST-segment elevation, serum creatine 
phosphokinase levels (MB fraction) are usually 
normal. Embolism may be responsible for delayed 
awakening . 
 How should the patient be cared for following 
cardioversion? 
 Although recovery of consciousness is usually 
very rapid, patients should be treated like oth-
ers receiving general anesthesia (see Chapter 56). 
Recovery also speciﬁ cally includes monitoring for 
both recurrence of the arrhythmia and signs of 
cerebral embolism . 
 What are the minimum monitors and anesthetic 
equipment required? 
 Minimum monitoring consists of the ECG, 
blood pressure, and pulse oximetry. A precor-
dial stethoscope is useful for monitoring breath 
sounds. Maintaining continuous verbal contact 
with the patient may the best method for assess-
ing whether a suﬃ  cient amnestic dose of (usually) 
propofol has been given . 
 In addition to a DC deﬁ brillator capable of 
delivering up to 400 J (synchronized or unsynchro-
nized) and transcutaneous pacing, the minimum 
equipment should include the following: 
•  Reliable intravenous access . 
•  A functional bag-mask device capable of deliver-
ing 100% oxygen (see Chapter 3) . 
•  An oxygen source from a wall outlet or a full 
tank . 
•  An airway kit with oral and nasal airways and 
appropriate laryngoscopes and endotracheal 
tubes . 
•  A functional suction apparatus . 
•  An anesthetic drug kit that includes at least one 
sedative-hypnotic as well as succinylcholine . 
•  A cart that includes all necessary drugs and 
equipment for cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(see Chapter 55) . 
 What anesthetic techniques would 
be appropriate? 
 Premedication is not necessary. Only very 
brief (1–2 min) amnesia or light general anes-
thesia is required. A short-acting agent such as 
propofol or a benzodiazepine (eg, midazolam, 
diazepam) can be used. Etomidate may be used 
but may be associated with phonation. Following 
preoxygenation with 60–100% oxygen for 3–5 
min, the sedative-hypnotic is given in small incre-
ments) every 30–60 sec while maintaining verbal 
contact with the patient. The shock is delivered 
when the patient is no longer able to respond 
verbally; some clinicians use loss of the eyelid 
reﬂ ex as an end point. The shock usually arouses 
the patient. Transient airway obstruction or apnea 
may be observed, particularly if more than one 
shock is necessary . 
 GUIDELINES
 Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al: 2010 ACCF/
AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
patients with thoracic aortic disease: Executive 
summary: A report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines, American 
Association for Th oracic Surgery, American College 
of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society 
of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, 
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of 
Th oracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine. 
Anesth Analg 2010;111:279. 
 See www.guidelines.gov for additional guidelines from 
multiple organizations related to these topics. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Augoustides JG, Andritsos M: Innovations in aortic 
disease: Th e ascending aorta and aortic arch. 
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2010;24:198. 
486 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Augoustides JG, Riha H: Recent progress in heart failure 
treatment and heart transplantation. J Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth 2009;23:738. 
 Chassot P-G, van der Linden P, Zaugg M, et al: Off -pump 
coronary artery bypass surgery: Physiology and 
anaesthetic management. Br J Anaesth 2004;92:400. 
 Grigore AM, Murray CF, Ramakrishna H, Djaiani 
G: A core review of temperature regimens and 
neuroprotection during cardiopulmonary bypass: 
Does rewarming rate matter? Anesth Analg 
2009;109:1741. 
 Hogue CW Jr, Palin CA, Arrowsmith JE: 
Cardiopulmonary bypass management and 
neurologic outcomes: An evidence-based appraisal of 
current practices. Anesth Analg 2006;103:21. 
 Kam PCA, Egan MK: Platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa 
antagonists. Pharmacology and clinical developments. 
Anesthesiology 2002;96:1237. 
 Levy JH, Winkler AM: Heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia and cardiac surgery. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2010;23:74. 
 Ling E, Arellano R: Systematic overview of the evidence 
supporting the use of cerebrospinal fl uid drainage 
in the thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery 
for prevention of paraplegia. Anesthesiology 
2000;93:1115. 
 Murphy GS, Hessel EA 2nd, Groom RC: Optimal 
perfusion during cardiopulmonary bypass: 
An evidence-based approach. Anesth Analg 
2009;108:1394. 
 Myles PS, Daly DJ, Djaiani G, et al: A systematic review 
of the safety and eff ectiveness of fast-track cardiac 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2003;99:982. 
 Priebe HJ: Triggers of perioperative myocardial 
ischaemia and infarction. Br J Anaesth 
2004;93:9. 
 Royse AG, Royse CF: Epiaortic ultrasound assessment 
of the aorta in cardiac surgery. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;23:335. 
 Sellke FW, Chu LM, Cohn WE: Current state of 
surgical myocardial revascularization. Circ J 
2010;74:1031. 
 Selnes OA, McKhann GM, Borowicz LM Jr, Grega MA: 
Cognitive and neurobehavioral dysfunction aft er 
cardiac bypass procedures. Neurol Clin 
2006;24:133. 
 Shanewise JS, Ramsay JG: Off -pump coronary surgery: 
How do the anesthetic considerations diff er? Anesth 
Clin North Am 2003;21:613. 
 Zaugg M, Schaub MC, Foëx P: Myocardial injury and its 
prevention in the perioperative setting. Br J Anaesth 
2004;93:21. 
 487
 Respiratory Physiology 
& Anesthesia 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
23
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 The trachea serves as a conduit for 
ventilation and the clearance of tracheal 
and bronchial secretions and has an average 
length of 10–13 cm . The trachea bifurcates 
at the carina into the right and left main 
stem bronchi. The right main stem bronchus 
lies in a more vertical orientation relative 
to the trachea, whereas the left main 
stem bronchus lies in a more horizontal 
orientation . 
 The periodic exchange of alveolar gas 
with the fresh gas from the upper airway 
reoxygenates desaturated blood and 
eliminates CO  2  .  This exchange is brought 
about by small cyclic pressure gradients 
established within the airways. During 
spontaneous ventilation, these gradients 
are secondary to variations in intrathoracic 
pressure; during mechanical ventilation, 
they are produced by intermittent positive 
pressure in the upper airway . 
 The lung volume at the end of a normal 
exhalation is called functional residual 
capacity (FRC). At this volume, the inward 
elastic recoil of the lung approximates the 
outward elastic recoil of the chest (including 
resting diaphragmatic tone) . 
 Closing capacity is normally well below FRC, 
but it rises steadily with age. This increase 
is probably responsible for the normal age-
related decline in arterial O  2   tension . 
1
2
3
4
 Whereas both forced expiratory volume in 
1 sec (FEV  1  )  and forced vital capacity (FVC) 
are eﬀ ort dependent, forced midexpiratory 
ﬂ ow (FEF  25–75%  )  is more eﬀ ort independent 
and may be a more reliable measure of 
obstruction . 
 Changes in lung mechanics due to general 
anesthesia occur shortly after induction. The 
supine position reduces the FRC by 0.8–1.0 L, 
and induction of general anesthesia further 
reduces the FRC by 0.4–0.5 L. FRC reduction 
is a consequence of alveolar collapse and 
compression atelectasis due to loss of 
inspiratory muscle tone, change in chest wall 
rigidity, and upward shift of the diaphragm . 
 Local factors are more important than the 
autonomic system in inﬂ uencing pulmonary 
vascular tone. Hypoxia is a powerful 
stimulus for pulmonary vasoconstriction 
(the opposite of its systemic eﬀ ect) . 
 Because alveolar ventilation ( 
•VA) is normally 
about 4 L/min and pulmonary capillary 
perfusion ( 
•Q ) is 5 L/min, the overall   
•V/ 
•Q ratio 
is about 0.8 . 
 Shunting denotes the process whereby 
desaturated, mixed venous blood from the 
right heart returns to the left heart without 
being resaturated with O  2   in the lungs. The 
overall eﬀ ect of shunting is to decrease 
(dilute) arterial O  2   content; this type of shunt 
is referred to as right-to-left . 
5
6
7
8
9
—Continued next page
488 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Continued—
and makes more O  2   available to tissues; 
a leftward shift increases hemoglobin’s 
aﬃ  nity for O  2  ,  reducing its availability to 
tissues . 
 Bicarbonate represents the largest fraction 
of CO  2   in blood . 
 Central chemoreceptors are thought 
to lie on the anterolateral surface of 
the medulla and respond primarily to 
changes in cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) [H + ]. 
This mechanism is eﬀ ective in regulating 
Pa CO 2 , because the blood–brain barrier 
is permeable to dissolved CO 2 but not to 
bicarbonate ions . 
 With increasing depth of anesthesia, the 
slope of the Pa CO 2 /minute ventilation 
curve decreases, and the apneic threshold 
increases . 
15
16
17
 General anesthesia commonly increases 
venous admixture to 5% to 10%, probably as 
a result of atelectasis and airway collapse in 
dependent areas of the lung . 
 Note that large increases in Pa CO 2 
(>75 mm Hg) readily produce hypoxia 
(Pa O 2 <60 mm Hg) at room air, but not at 
high inspired O 2 concentrations . 
 The binding of O  2   to hemoglobin seems to 
be the principal rate-limiting factor in the 
transfer of O  2   from alveolar gas to blood . 
 The greater the shunt, the less likely the 
possibility that an increase in the fraction 
of inspired oxygen (F IO 2 ) will prevent 
hypoxemia . 
 A rightward shift in the oxygen–
hemoglobin dissociation curve lowers O  2  
 aﬃ  nity, displaces O  2   from hemoglobin, 
10
11
12
13
14
 Th e importance of pulmonary physiology to anes-
thetic practice is obvious. Th e most commonly 
used anesthetics—the inhalation agents—depend 
on the lungs for uptake and elimination. Th e most 
important side eff ects of both inhalation and 
intravenously administered anesthetics are pri-
marily respiratory. Moreover, muscle paralysis, 
unusual positioning during surgery, and techniques 
such as one-lung anesthesia and cardiopulmo-
nary bypass profoundly alter normal pulmonary 
physiology. 
 Much of modern anesthetic practice is based on 
a thorough understanding of pulmonary physiology 
and may be considered applied pulmonary physi-
ology. Th is chapter reviews the basic pulmonary 
concepts necessary for understanding and apply-
ing anesthetic techniques. Although the pulmonary 
eff ects of each of the various anesthetic agents are 
discussed elsewhere in the book, this chapter also 
reviews the overall eff ects of general anesthesia on 
lung function. 
 FUNCTIONAL RESPIRATORY 
ANATOMY 
 1. Rib Cage & Muscles of Respiration 
 Th e rib cage contains the two lungs, each sur-
rounded by its own pleura. Th e apex of the chest is 
small, allowing only for entry of the trachea, esoph-
agus, and blood vessels, whereas the base is formed 
by the diaphragm. Contraction of the diaphragm—
the principal pulmonary muscle—causes the base 
of the thoracic cavity to descend 1.5–7 cm and its 
contents (the lungs) to expand. Diaphragmatic 
movement normally accounts for 75% of the change 
in chest volume. Accessory respiratory muscles also 
increase chest volume (and lung expansion) by their 
action on the ribs. Each rib (except for the last two) 
articulates posteriorly with a vertebra and is angu-
lated downward as it attaches anteriorly to the ster-
num. Upward and outward rib movement expands 
the chest. 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
489
 During normal breathing, the diaphragm, and, 
to a lesser extent, the external intercostal muscles 
are responsible for inspiration; expiration is gener-
ally passive. With increasing eff ort, the sternoclei-
domastoid, scalene, and pectoralis muscles can be 
recruited during inspiration. Th e sternocleidomas-
toid muscles assist in elevating the rib cage, whereas 
the scalene muscles prevent inward displacement 
of the upper ribs during inspiration. Th e pectoralis 
muscles can assist chest expansion when the arms 
are placed on a fi xed support. Expiration is normally 
passive in the supine position, but becomes active 
in the upright position and with increased eff ort. 
Exhalation may be facilitated by the abdominal 
muscles (rectus abdominis, external and internal 
oblique, and transversus) and perhaps the internal 
intercostal muscles—aiding the downward move-
ment of the ribs. 
 Although not usually considered respiratory 
muscles, some pharyngeal muscles are important 
in maintaining the patency of the airway. Tonic and 
refl ex inspiratory activity in the genioglossus keeps 
the tongue away from the posterior pharyngeal wall. 
Tonic activity in the levator palati, tensor palati, pal-
atopharyngeus, and palatoglossus prevents the soft  
palate from falling back against the posterior phar-
ynx, particularly in the supine position. 
 2. Tracheobronchial Tree 
 Th e trachea serves as a conduit for ventilation 
and the clearance of tracheal and bronchial 
secretions. Th e trachea begins at the lower border of 
the cricoid cartilage and extends to the level of the 
carina and has an average length of 10–13 cm. It is 
composed of C-shaped cartilaginous rings, which 
form the anterior and lateral walls of the trachea and 
are connected posteriorly by the membranous wall 
of the trachea. Th e external diameters of the trachea 
measure approximately 2.3 cm coronally and 1.8 cm 
sagitally in men, with corresponding values of 2.0 cm 
and 1.4 cm, respectively, in women. Th e cricoid carti-
lage is the narrowest part of the trachea, with an aver-
age diameter of 17 mm in men and 13 mm in women. 
 Th e trachea bifurcates at the carina into the 
right and left  main stem bronchi. Th e tracheal lumen 
narrows slightly as it progresses toward the carina, 
1
with the tracheal bifurcation located at the level of 
the sternal angle. Th e right main stem bronchus lies 
in a more vertical orientation relative to the trachea, 
whereas the left  main stem bronchus lies in a more 
horizontal orientation. Th e right main stem bron-
chus continues as the bronchus intermedius aft er 
the take-off  of the right upper lobe bronchus. Th e 
distance from the tracheal carina to the take-off  of 
the right upper lobe bronchus is an average of 2.0 cm 
in men and approximately 1.5 cm in women. One in 
every 250 individuals in the general population may 
have an abnormal take-off  of the right upper lobe 
bronchus emerging from above the tracheal carina 
on the right side. Th e left  main stem bronchus is 
longer than the right main stem bronchus and mea-
sures an average of 5.0 cm in men and 4.5 cm in 
women. Th e left  main stem bronchus divides into 
the left  upper lobe bronchus and the left  lower lobe 
bronchus. 
 Humidifi cation and fi ltering of inspired air are 
functions of the upper airway (nose, mouth, and 
pharynx). Th e function of the tracheobronchial 
tree is to conduct gas fl ow to and from the alveoli. 
Dichotomous division (each branch dividing into 
two smaller branches), starting with the trachea and 
ending in alveolar sacs, is estimated to involve 23 
divisions, or generations ( Figure 23–1 ). With each 
generation, the number of airways is approximately 
doubled. Each alveolar sac contains, on average, 17 
alveoli. An estimated 300 million alveoli provide an 
enormous membrane (50–100 m 2 ) for gas exchange 
in the average adult. 
 With each successive division, the mucosal epi-
thelium and supporting structures of the airways 
gradually change. Th e mucosa makes a gradual 
transition from ciliated columnar to cuboidal and 
fi nally to fl at alveolar epithelium. Gas exchange 
can occur only across the fl at epithelium, which 
begins to appear on respiratory bronchioles (gen-
erations 17–19). Th e wall of the airway gradually 
loses its cartilaginous support (at the bronchioles) 
and then its smooth muscle. Loss of cartilaginous 
support causes the patency of smaller airways to 
become dependent on radial traction by the elas-
tic recoil of the surrounding tissue; as a corollary, 
airway diameter becomes dependent on total lung 
volume. 
490 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
separates alveolar epithelium from capillary endo-
thelium. Th e pulmonary interstitial space contains 
mainly elastin, collagen, and perhaps nerve fi bers. 
Gas exchange occurs primarily on the thin side of 
the alveolocapillary membrane, which is less than 
0.4 µm thick. Th e thick side (1–2 µm) provides 
structural support for the alveolus. 
 Th e pulmonary epithelium contains at least two 
cell types. Type I pneumocytes are fl at and form 
tight (1-nm) junctions with one another. Th ese tight 
junctions are important in preventing the passage 
of large oncotically active molecules such as albu-
min into the alveolus. Type II pneumocytes, which 
are more numerous than type I pneumocytes (but 
because of their shape occupy less than 10% of the 
alveolar space), are round cells that contain promi-
nent cytoplasmic inclusions (lamellar bodies). Th ese 
inclusions contain surfactant, an important sub-
stance necessary for normal pulmonary mechanics 
(see below). Unlike type I cells, type II pneumocytes 
are capable of cell division and can produce type I 
 Cilia on the columnar and cuboidal epithelium 
normally beat in a synchronized fashion, such that 
the mucus produced by the secretory glands lining 
the airway (and any associated bacteria or debris) 
moves up toward the mouth. 
 Alveoli 
 Alveolar size is a function of both gravity and lung 
volume. Th e average diameter of an alveolus is 
thought to be 0.05–0.33 mm. In the upright posi-
tion, the largest alveoli are at the pulmonary apex, 
whereas the smallest tend to be at the base. With 
inspiration, discrepancies in alveolar size diminish. 
 Each alveolus is in close contact with a network 
of pulmonary capillaries. Th e walls of each alveolus 
are asymmetrically arranged ( Figure 23–2 ). On the 
thin side, where gas exchange occurs, the alveolar 
epithelium and capillary endothelium are separated 
only by their respective cellular and basement mem-
branes; on the thick side, where fl uid and solute 
exchange occurs, the pulmonary interstitial space 
 FIGURE 231  A: Dichotomous division of the airways. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Guyton AC:  Textbook of Medical 
Physiology , 7th ed. W.B. Saunders, 1986.)  B: The segmental 
bronchi.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Minnich DJ, 
Mathisen DJ: Anatomy of the trachea, carina, and bronchi. Thorac Surg 
Clin 2007 Nov;17(4):571-585.) 
Generation
0
1
2
3
4
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Respiratory
bronchiole
Terminal
bronchiole
Bronchiole
Conducting zone
Bronchus
Trachea
Alveolar
duct
Alveolar sac
Right
Upper lobe
   Apical
   Anterior
   Posterior
Upper lobe
   Apico-posterior
   Anterior
   Superior-lingular
   Inferior-lingular
Middle lobe
   Medial
   Lateral
Lower lobe
   Superior
   Anterior basal
   Medial basal
   Lateral basal
   Posterior basal
Lower lobe
   Superior
   Antero-medial
   basal
   Lateral basal
   Posterior basal
Left
Transitional & respiratory
zone
B
A
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
491 
Epithelium
1 µm
Basement membrane
Endothelial nucleus
Endothelium
Epithelium
Interstitial space
Alveolus
Alveolus
Erythrocytes
Endothelium
 FIGURE 232  The pulmonary interstitial space, with 
a capillary passing between the two alveoli. The capillary 
is incorporated into the thin (gas-exchanging) side of the 
alveolus on the right. The interstitial space is incorporated 
into the thick side of the alveolus on the left. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. 
Butterworth, 2000.) 
pneumocytes if the latter are destroyed. Th ey are 
also resistant to O 2 toxicity. 
 Other cell types present in the lower airways 
include pulmonary alveolar macrophages, mast 
cells, lymphocytes, and amino precursor uptake and 
decarboxylation (APUD) cells. Neutrophils are also 
typically present in smokers and patients with acute 
lung injury. 
 3. Pulmonary Circulation & Lymphatics 
 Th e lungs are supplied by two circulations, pul-
monary and bronchial. Th e bronchial circula-
tion arises from the left  heart and sustains the 
metabolic needs of the tracheobronchial tree. Th e 
bronchial circulation provides a small amount of 
blood fl ow (ie, less than 4% of the cardiac out-
put). Branches of the bronchial artery supply the 
wall of the bronchi and follow the airways as far 
as the terminal bronchioles. Along their courses, 
the bronchial vessels anastomose with the pulmo-
nary arterial circulation and continue as far as the 
alveolar duct. Below that level, lung tissue is sup-
ported by a combination of the alveolar gas and 
pulmonary circulation. Except for the main bron-
chi within the mediastinum, almost all the blood 
carried by the bronchial arteries enters the pulmo-
nary circulation. 
 Th e pulmonary circulation normally receives 
the total output of the right heart via the pulmonary 
artery, which divides into right and left  branches 
to supply each lung. Deoxygenated blood passes 
492 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Pulmonary Lymphatics 
 Lymphatic channels in the lung originate in the 
interstitial spaces of large septa and are close to the 
bronchial arteries. Bronchial lymphatics return fl u-
ids, lost proteins, and various cells that have escaped 
in the peribronchovascular interstitium into the 
blood circulation, thus ensuring homeostasis and 
permitting lung function. Because of the large endo-
thelial junctions, pulmonary lymph has a relatively 
high protein content, and total pulmonary lymph 
fl ow may be as much as 20 mL/hr. Large lymphatic 
vessels travel upward alongside the airways, form-
ing the tracheobronchial chain of lymph nodes. 
Lymphatic drainage channels from both lungs com-
municate along the trachea. 
 4. Innervation 
 Th e diaphragm is innervated by the phrenic nerves, 
which arise from the C3–C5 nerve roots. Unilateral 
phrenic nerve block or palsy only modestly reduces 
most indices of pulmonary function (about 25%) in 
normal subjects. Although bilateral phrenic nerve 
palsies produce more severe impairment, accessory 
muscle activity may maintain adequate ventilation 
in some patients. Intercostal muscles are innervated 
by their respective thoracic nerve roots. Cervical 
cord injuries above C5 are incompatible with spon-
taneous ventilation because both phrenic and inter-
costal nerves are aff ected. 
 Th e vagus nerves provide sensory innervation 
to the tracheobronchial tree. Both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic autonomic innervation of bron-
chial smooth muscle and secretory glands is pres-
ent. Vagal activity mediates bronchoconstriction 
and increases bronchial secretions via muscarinic 
receptors. Sympathetic activity (T1–T4) medi-
ates bronchodilation and also decreases secretions 
via β 2 -receptors. Th e nerve supply of the larynx is 
reviewed in  Chapter 19 . 
 Both α- and β-adrenergic receptors are present 
in the pulmonary vasculature, but the sympathetic 
system normally has little eff ect on pulmonary 
vascular tone. α 1 -Activity causes vasoconstriction; 
β 2 -activity mediates vasodilation. Parasympathetic 
vasodilatory activity seems to be mediated via the 
release of nitric oxide. 
through the pulmonary capillaries, where O 2 is 
taken up and CO 2 is eliminated. Th e oxygenated 
blood is then returned to the left  heart by four main 
pulmonary veins (two from each lung). Although 
fl ows through the systemic and pulmonary circula-
tions are equal, the lower pulmonary vascular resis-
tance results in pulmonary vascular pressures that 
are one-sixth of those in the systemic circulation; 
as a result, both pulmonary arteries and veins nor-
mally have thinner walls than systemic vessels with 
less smooth muscle. 
 Th ere are connections between the bronchial 
and the pulmonary circulations. Direct pulmo-
nary arteriovenous communications, bypassing the 
pulmonary capillaries, are normally insignifi cant 
but may become important in certain pathological 
states. Th e importance of the bronchial circulation 
in contributing to the normal venous admixture is 
discussed below. 
 Pulmonary Capillaries 
 Pulmonary capillaries are incorporated into the 
walls of alveoli. Th e average diameter of these cap-
illaries (about 10 µm) is barely enough to allow 
passage of a single red cell. Because each capillary 
network supplies more than one alveolus, blood 
may pass through several alveoli before reaching 
the pulmonary veins. Because of the relatively low 
pressure in the pulmonary circulation, the amount 
of blood fl owing through a given capillary network 
is aff ected by both gravity and alveolar size. Large 
alveoli have a smaller capillary cross-sectional area 
and consequently increased resistance to blood fl ow. 
In the upright position, apical capillaries tend to 
have reduced fl ows, whereas basal capillaries have 
higher fl ows. 
 Th e pulmonary capillary endothelium has rela-
tively large junctions (5 nm wide), allowing the pas-
sage of large molecules such as albumin. As a result, 
pulmonary interstitial fl uid is relatively rich in albu-
min. Circulating macrophages and neutrophils are 
able to pass through the endothelium, as well as the 
smaller alveolar epithelial junctions, with relative 
ease. Pulmonary macrophages are commonly seen 
in the interstitial space and inside alveoli; they serve 
to prevent bacterial infection and to scavenge for-
eign particles. 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
493
a reversal of the previous alveolar–upper airway 
gradient; gas fl ows out of alveoli, and original lung 
volume is restored. 
 Mechanical Ventilation 
 Most forms of mechanical ventilation intermittently 
apply positive airway pressure at the upper airway. 
During inspiration, gas fl ows into alveoli until alveo-
lar pressure reaches that in the upper airway. During 
the expiratory phase of the ventilator, the positive 
airway pressure is removed or decreased; the gradi-
ent reverses, allowing gas fl ow out of alveoli. 
 LUNG MECHANICS 
 Th e movement of the lungs is passive and deter-
mined by the impedance of the respiratory system, 
which can be divided into the elastic resistance of 
tissues and the gas–liquid interface and the nonelas-
tic resistance to gas fl ow. Elastic resistance governs 
lung volume and the associated pressures under 
static conditions (no gas fl ow). Resistance to gas fl ow 
relates to frictional resistance to airfl ow and tissue 
deformation. Th e work necessary to overcome elas-
tic resistance is stored as potential energy, but the 
work necessary to overcome nonelastic resistance is 
lost as heat. 
 1. Elastic Resistance 
 Both the lungs and the chest have elastic proper-
ties. Th e chest has a tendency to expand outward, 
whereas the lungs have a tendency to collapse. 
When the chest is exposed to atmospheric pressure 
(open pneumothorax), it usually expands about 1 L 
in adults. In contrast, when the lung is exposed to 
atmospheric pressure, it collapses completely and 
all the gas within it is expelled. Th e recoil properties 
of the chest are due to structural components that 
resist deformation and chest wall muscle tone. Th e 
elastic recoil of the lungs is due to their high content 
of elastin fi bers, and, even more important, the sur-
face tension forces acting at the air–fl uid interface 
in alveoli. 
 Surface Tension Forces 
 Th e gas–fl uid interface lining the alveoli causes them 
to behave as bubbles. Surface tension forces tend to 
 MECHANISMS OF BREATHING 
 Th e periodic exchange of alveolar gas with 
the fresh gas from the upper airway reoxy-
genates desaturated blood and eliminates CO 2 . Th is 
exchange is brought about by small cyclic pressure 
gradients established within the airways. During 
spontaneous ventilation, these gradients are second-
ary to variations in intrathoracic pressure; during 
mechanical ventilation, they are produced by inter-
mittent positive pressure in the upper airway. 
 Spontaneous Ventilation 
 Normal pressure variations during spontaneous 
breathing are shown in  Figure 23–3 . Th e pressure 
within alveoli is always greater than the surrounding 
(intrathoracic) pressure unless the alveoli are col-
lapsed. Alveolar pressure is normally atmospheric 
(zero for reference) at end-inspiration and end-
expiration. By convention in pulmonary physiology, 
pleural pressure is used as a measure of intrathoracic 
pressure. Although it may not be entirely correct to 
refer to the pressure in a potential space, the concept 
allows the calculation of transpulmonary pressure. 
Transpulmonary pressure, or P transpulmonary , is then 
defi ned as follows: 
 Ptranspulmonary = Palveolar − Pintrapleural 
 At end-expiration, intrapleural pressure nor-
mally averages about –5 cm H 2 O, and because alveo-
lar pressure is 0 (no fl ow), transpulmonary pressure 
is +5 cm H 2 O. 
 Diaphragmatic and intercostal muscle acti-
vation during inspiration expands the chest and 
decreases intrapleural pressure from –5 cm H 2 O 
to –8 or –9 cm H 2 O. As a result, alveolar pressure 
also decreases (between –3 and –4 cm H 2 O), and an 
alveolar–upper airway gradient is established; gas 
fl ows from the upper airway into alveoli. At end-
inspiration (when gas infl ow has ceased), alveolar 
pressure returns to zero, but intrapleural pressure 
remains decreased; the new transpulmonary pres-
sure (5 cm H 2 O) sustains lung expansion. 
 During expiration, diaphragmatic relaxation 
returns intrapleural pressure to –5 cm H 2 O. Now the 
transpulmonary pressure does not support the new 
lung volume, and the elastic recoil of the lung causes 
2
494 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Th e pressure derived from the equation is that 
within the alveolus. Alveolar collapse is therefore 
directly proportional to surface tension.  Fortunately, 
in contrast to a bubble, pulmonary surfactant 
decreases alveolar surface tension . Moreover, the 
reduce the area of the interface and favor alveolar 
collapse. Laplace’s law can be used to quantify these 
forces: 
 
Pressure = 2 × Surface tension
Radius
 
 FIGURE 233  Changes in intrapleural and alveolar 
pressures during normal breathing. Note that at end 
inspiration, volume is maximal; ﬂ ow is zero; and alveolar 
pressure is atmospheric.  (Adapted from West JB:  Respiratory 
Physiology—The Essentials , 6th ed. Williams & Wilkins, 2000.) 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
–5
–6
–7
–8
+0.5
0
0
–0.5
+1
–1
Flow
(L/s)
Alveolar
pressure
(cm H2O)
Intrapleural
pressure
(cm H2O)
Volume (L)
Inspiration
Expiration
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
495 
In the supine position, chest wall compliance (Cw) 
is reduced because of the weight of the abdominal 
contents against the diaphragm. Measurements 
are usually obtained under static conditions, (ie, at 
equilibrium). (Dynamic lung compliance [Cdyn, l ], 
which is measured during rhythmic breathing, is 
also dependent on airway resistance.)  Lung compli-
ance (C l ) is defi ned as 
 
Cl =
Change in lung volume
Change in transpulmonary pressure 
 C l is normally 150–200 mL/cm H 2 O. A variety of 
factors, including lung volume, pulmonary blood 
volume, extravascular lung water, and pathological 
processes (eg, infl ammation and fi brosis) aff ect C l 
 
Chest wall 
compliance 
(Cw)
Change in chest volume
Change in transthoracic pressure
=
 
ability of the surfactant to lower surface tension is 
directly proportional to its concentration within the 
alveolus, resulting in lower intraalveolar pressure in 
smaller alveoli. As alveoli become smaller, the sur-
factant within becomes more concentrated, and sur-
face tension is more eff ectively reduced. Conversely, 
when alveoli are overdistended, surfactant becomes 
less concentrated, and surface tension increases. Th e 
net eff ect is to stabilize alveoli; small alveoli are pre-
vented from getting smaller, whereas large alveoli 
are prevented from getting larger. 
 Compliance 
 Elastic recoil is usually measured in terms of com-
pliance (C), which is defi ned as the change in vol-
ume divided by the change in distending pressure. 
Compliance measurements can be obtained for either 
the chest, the lung, or both together ( Figure 23–4 ). 
 
UPRIGHT
A
Lung
Chest wall
Volume (L)
Lung and
chest wall
Lung
Chest wall
Lung and
chest wall
Pressure (cm H2O)
+30
+20
+10
0
–10
–20
–30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Volume (L)
Pressure (cm H2O)
+30
+20
+10
0
–10
–20
–30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
SUPINE
B
Functional residual
capacity
Functional residual
capacity
 
 FIGURE 234  The pressure–volume relationship for the chest wall, lung, and both together in the upright ( A ) and 
supine ( B ) positions.  (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from Scurr C, Feldman S:  Scientiﬁ c Foundations of Anesthesia . Heinemann, 1982.) 
496 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
the chest (including resting diaphragmatic tone). 
Th us, the elastic properties of both chest and lung 
defi ne the point from which normal breathing takes 
place. Functional residual capacity can be measured 
by nitrogen washout or helium washin technique or 
 where transthoracic pressure equals atmospheric 
pressure minus intrapleural pressure. 
 Normal chest wall compliance is 200 mL/
cm H 2 O. Total compliance (lung and chest wall 
together) is 100 mL/cm H 2 O and is expressed by the 
following equation: 
 
=
+
1 
Ctotal
1 
Cw
1 
Cl 
 2. Lung Volumes 
 Lung volumes are important parameters in respira-
tory physiology and clinical practice ( Table 23–1 
and  Figure 23–5 ). Th e sum of all of the named lung 
volumes equals the maximum to which the lung 
can be infl ated. Lung capacities are clinically useful 
measurements that represent a combination of two 
or more volumes. 
 Functional Residual Capacity 
 Th e lung volume at the end of a normal exha-
lation is called functional residual capacity 
(FRC). At this volume, the inward elastic recoil of 
the lung approximates the outward elastic recoil of 
3
 TABLE 231 Lung volumes and capacities. 
Measurement
Deﬁ nition
Average Adult 
Values (mL)
Tidal volume (V T )
Each normal breath
500
Inspiratory reserve 
volume (IRV)
Maximal additional 
volume that can be 
inspired above V T 
3000
Expiratory reserve 
volume (ERV)
Maximal volume 
that can be expired 
below V T 
1100
Residual volume 
(RV)
Volume remaining 
after maximal 
exhalation
1200
Total lung capacity 
(TLC)
RV + ERV + V T + IRV
5800
Functional residual 
capacity (FRC)
RV + ERV
2300
Zero lung volume
Total lung
capacity
Vital
capacity
Inspiratory
capacity
Expiratory reserve
volume
Residual volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Tidal
volume
Inspiratory
reserve
volume
 FIGURE 235  Spirogram showing static lung volumes.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 
4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
497
 Closing Capacity 
 As described above (see the section on Functional 
Respiratory Anatomy), small airways lacking carti-
laginous support depend on radial traction caused 
by the elastic recoil of surrounding tissue to keep 
them open; patency of these airways, particularly in 
basal areas of the lung, is highly dependent on lung 
volume. Th e volume at which these airways begin 
to close in dependent areas of the lung is called the 
closing capacity . At lower lung volumes, alveoli in 
dependent areas continue to be perfused but are 
no longer ventilated;  intrapulmonary shunting
of deoxygenated blood promotes hypoxemia (see 
below). 
 Closing capacity is usually measured using a 
tracer gas (xenon-133), which is inhaled near resid-
ual volume and then exhaled from total lung 
capacity. 
 Closing capacity is normally well below FRC 
( Figure 23–6 ), but rises steadily with age 
( Figure 23–7 ). Th is increase is probably responsible 
for the normal age-related decline in arterial O 2 ten-
sion. At an average age of 44 years, closing capacity 
4
by body plethysmography. Factors known to alter 
the FRC include the following: 
 •  Body habitus: FRC is directly proportional 
to height. Obesity, however, can markedly 
decrease FRC (primarily as a result of reduced 
chest compliance). 
•  Sex: FRC is reduced by about 10% in females 
compared with males. 
•  Posture: FRC decreases as a patient is moved 
from an upright to a supine or prone position. 
Th is is the result of reduced chest compliance 
as the abdominal contents push up against 
the diaphragm. Th e greatest change occurs 
between 0° and 60° of inclination. No further 
decrease is observed with a head-down 
position of up to 30°. 
•  Lung disease: Decreased compliance of 
the lung, chest, or both is characteristic of 
restrictive pulmonary disorders all of which are 
associated with a low FRC. 
•  Diaphragmatic tone: Th is normally 
contributes to FRC. 
Zero lung volume
Closing capacity
Closing
volume
Airway closure begins
Residual volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Total lung
capacity
 FIGURE 236  The relationship between functional residual capacity, closing volume, and closing capacity.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.)
498 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 FIGURE 237  The eﬀ ect of 
age on closing capacity and its 
relationship to functional residual 
capacity (FRC). Note that FRC 
does not change.  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied 
Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
Functional residual
capacity, upright
Functional residual
capacity, supine
Closing capacity
30
0
1
2
3
40
50
60
70
Lung volume (L)
equals FRC in the supine position; by age 66, closing 
capacity equals or exceeds FRC in the upright posi-
tion in most individuals. Unlike FRC, closing capac-
ity is unaff ected by posture. 
 Vital Capacity 
 Vital capacity (VC) is the maximum volume of gas 
that can be exhaled following maximal inspiration. 
In addition to body habitus, VC is also dependent on 
respiratory muscle strength and chest–lung compli-
ance. Normal VC is about 60–70 mL/kg. 
 3. Nonelastic Resistances 
 Airway Resistance to Gas Flow 
 Gas fl ow in the lung is a mixture of laminar and 
turbulent fl ow. Laminar fl ow can be thought of as 
consisting of concentric cylinders of gas fl owing at dif-
ferent velocities; velocity is highest in the center and 
decreases toward the periphery. During laminar fl ow, 
 
Flow = Pressure gradient
Raw
 
 where Raw is airway resistance. 
 
Raw = 8 × Length × Gas viscosity
π × (Radius)4
 
 Turbulent fl ow is characterized by random 
movement of the gas molecules down the air pas-
sages. Mathematical description of turbulent fl ow is 
considerably more complex: 
 Pressure gradient ≈ Flow2 × Gas density
Radius5
 
 Resistance is not constant but increases in pro-
portion to gas fl ow. Moreover, resistance is directly 
proportional to gas density and inversely proportional 
to the fi ft h power of the radius. As a result, turbulent 
gas fl ow is extremely sensitive to airway caliber. 
 Turbulence generally occurs at high gas fl ows, at 
sharp angles or branching points, and in response to 
abrupt changes in airway diameter. Whether turbu-
lent or laminar fl ow occurs can be predicted by the 
Reynolds number, which results from the following 
equation: 
 
Reynolds number =
Linear velocity × Diameter × Gas density
Gas viscosity
 
 A low Reynolds number (<1000) is associated 
with laminar fl ow, whereas a high value (>1500) 
produces turbulent fl ow. Laminar fl ow normally 
occurs only distal to small bronchioles (<1 mm). 
Flow in larger airways is probably turbulent. Of the 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
499 
 Normal total airway resistance is about 
0.5–2 cm H 2 O/L/sec, with the largest contribution 
coming from medium-sized bronchi (before the 
seventh generation). Resistance in large bronchi 
is low because of their large diameters, whereas 
resistance in small bronchi is low because of their 
large total cross-sectional area. Th e most impor-
tant causes of increased airway resistance include 
bronchospasm, secretions, and mucosal edema 
as well as volume-related and fl ow-related airway 
collapse. 
 A. Volume-Related Airway Collapse 
 At low lung volumes, loss of radial traction 
increases the contribution of small airways to total 
resistance; airway resistance becomes inversely 
proportional to lung volume ( Figure 23–8 ). 
Increasing lung volume up to normal with positive 
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) can reduce airway 
resistance. 
gases used clinically, only helium has a signifi cantly 
lower density-to-viscosity ratio, making it useful 
clinically during severe turbulent fl ow (as caused by 
upper airway obstruction). A helium–O 2 mixture 
not only is less likely to cause turbulent fl ow but also 
reduces airway resistance when turbulent fl ow is 
present ( Table 23–2 ). 
 TABLE 232 Physical properties of several 
gas mixtures.  1  
Mixture
Viscosity  2  Density  2  Density/Viscosity  2  
Oxygen (100%)
1.11
1.11
1.00
N 2 O/O 2 
0.89
1.41
1.49
Helium/O 2 
(80:20)
1.08
0.33
0.31
  1  Data from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 
2000.
  2  Viscosities and densities are expressed relative to air.
 
A. Upright and awake
B. Supine and awake
C. Supine and anesthetized 
without bronchodilation
D. Supine, anesthetized, 
and with the degree of 
bronchodilation that 
normally occurs during 
anesthesia
Normal bronchomotor tone
Bronchodilated
Total lung
capacity
Functional residual
capacity
Residual
volume
Airway resistance
A
B
C
D
 
 FIGURE 238  The relationship between airway resistance and lung volume.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nunn JF: 
Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
500 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
(turbulent) gas fl ow and the reduced lung volume. 
Th e terminal portion of the fl ow/volume curve 
is therefore considered to be eff ort independent 
( Figure 23–9 ). 
 Th e point along the airways where dynamic 
compression occurs is called the equal pressure point. 
It is normally beyond the eleventh to thirteenth gen-
eration of bronchioles where cartilaginous support is 
 B. Flow-Related Airway Collapse 
 During forced exhalation, reversal of the normal 
transmural airway pressure can cause collapse of 
these airways (dynamic airway compression). Two 
contributing factors are responsible: generation of a 
positive pleural pressure and a large pressure drop 
across intrathoracic airways as a result of increased 
airway resistance. Th e latter is in turn due to high 
 FIGURE 239  Gas ﬂ ow 
( A ) during forced exhalation 
from total lung capacity with 
varying eﬀ ort and ( B ) with 
maximal eﬀ ort from diﬀ erent 
lung volumes. Note that 
regardless of initial lung volume 
or eﬀ ort, terminal expiratory 
ﬂ ows are eﬀ ort independent. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 
4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
A
B
Tidal
volume
Vital capacity
Residual
volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Total lung
volume
Residual
volume
Functional
residual
capacity
Peak expiratory flow rate
Total lung
volume
Zero
Inspiratory
Expiratory
Airway rate
Zero
Inspiratory
Expiratory
Airway rate
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
501
absent (see above). Th e equal pressure point moves 
toward smaller airways as lung volume decreases. 
Emphysema or asthma predisposes patients to 
dynamic airway compression. Emphysema destroys 
the elastic tissues that normally support smaller air-
ways. In patients with asthma, bronchoconstriction 
and mucosal edema intensify airway collapse and 
promote reversal of transmural pressure gradients 
across airways. Patients may terminate exhalation 
prematurely or purse their lips to increase expiratory 
resistance at the mouth. Premature termination of 
exhalation may increase FRC above normal, result-
ing in air trapping and auto-PEEP. 
 C. Forced Vital Capacity 
 Measuring vital capacity as an exhalation that is as 
forceful and rapid as possible ( Figure 23–10 ) 
provides important information about airway resis-
tance. Th e ratio of the forced expiratory volume in 
the fi rst second of exhalation (FEV 1 ) to the total 
forced vital capacity (FVC) is proportional to the 
degree of airway obstruction. Normally, FEV 1 /FVC 
is ≥80%.  Whereas both FEV 1 and FVC are 
eff ort dependent, forced midexpiratory fl ow 
(FEF 25–75% ) is more eff ort independent and may be a 
more reliable measurement of obstruction. 
 Tissue Resistance 
 Th is component of nonelastic resistance is gener-
ally underestimated and oft en overlooked, but may 
account for up to half of total airway resistance. It 
seems to be primarily due to viscoelastic (frictional) 
resistance of tissues to gas fl ow. 
5
 FIGURE 2310  The normal forced exhalation curve. 
FEF 25–75% is also called the maximum midexpiratory 
ﬂ ow rate (MMF 25–75% ). FRC, functional residual capacity; 
FEV 1 , forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital 
capacity; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity. 
Lung volume
8
6
4
2
0
0
FRC
Time (s)
MMF25–75%
FEV1
1 s
FVC
TLC
RV
1
2
3
4
Tidal
volume
(VT)
502 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
energy stored at a higher lung volume overcomes the 
added expiratory resistance. Excessive amounts of 
expiratory resistance also activate expiratory mus-
cles (see above). 
 Respiratory muscles normally account for only 
2% to 3% of O 2 consumption but operate at about 
10% effi  ciency. Ninety percent of the work is dissi-
pated as heat (due to elastic and airfl ow resistance). In 
pathological conditions that increase the load on the 
diaphragm, muscle effi  ciency usually progressively 
decreases, and contraction may become uncoordi-
nated with increasing ventilatory eff ort; moreover, 
a point may be reached whereby any increase in O 2
uptake (because of augmented ventilation) is con-
sumed by the respiratory muscles themselves. 
 Th e work required to overcome elastic resis-
tance increases as Vt increases, whereas the work 
required to overcome airfl ow resistance increases as 
respiratory rate (and, necessarily, expiratory fl ow) 
increases. Faced with either condition, patients 
minimize the work of breathing by altering the 
respiratory rate and Vt ( Figure 23–12 ).  Patients 
with reduced compliance tend to have rapid, shal-
low breaths, whereas those with increased airfl ow 
resistance have a slow, deep breathing pattern . 
 5. Eﬀ ects of Anesthesia 
on Pulmonary Mechanics 
 Th e eff ects of anesthesia on breathing are complex 
and relate to changes both in position and anesthetic 
agent. 
 Eﬀ ects on Lung 
Volumes & Compliance 
 Changes in lung mechanics due to general anes-
thesia occur shortly aft er induction. Th e supine 
position reduces the FRC by 0.8–1.0 L, and induc-
tion of general anesthesia further reduces the FRC by 
0.4–0.5 L. FRC reduction is a consequence of alveolar 
collapse and compression atelectasis due to loss of 
inspiratory muscle tone, change in chest wall rigidity, 
and upward shift  of the diaphragm. Th e mechanisms 
may be more complex; for example, only the depen-
dent (dorsal) part of the diaphragm in the supine 
position moves cephalad. Other factors are likely due 
to a change in intrathoracic volume secondary to 
increased blood volume in the lung and changes in 
6
 4. Work of Breathing 
 Because expiration is normally entirely passive, both 
the inspiratory and the expiratory work of breathing 
is performed by the inspiratory muscles (primarily 
the diaphragm). Th ree factors must be overcome 
during ventilation: the elastic recoil of the chest and 
lung, frictional resistance to gas fl ow in the airways, 
and tissue frictional resistance. 
 Respiratory work can be expressed as the prod-
uct of volume and pressure ( Figure 23–11 ). During 
inhalation, both inspiratory airway resistance and 
pulmonary elastic recoil must be overcome; nearly 
50% of the energy expended is stored pulmonary 
elastic recoil. During exhalation, the stored potential 
energy is released and overcomes expiratory airway 
resistance. Increases in either inspiratory or expira-
tory resistance are compensated by increased inspi-
ratory muscle eff ort. When expiratory resistance 
increases, the normal compensatory response is to 
increase lung volume such that Vt breathing occurs 
at an abnormally high FRC. Th e greater elastic recoil 
 FIGURE 2311  The work of breathing and its 
components during inspiration. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Guyton AC:  Textbook of Medical Physiology , 7th ed. 
W.B. Saunders, 1986.) 
Inspiration
Compliance work
Tissue resistance work
Airway resistance work
Change in lung volume (L)
Change in pleural pressure (mm Hg)
0
0
.25
.5
–1
–2
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
503 
chest wall shape ( Figure 23–13 ). Th e higher position 
of the dorsal diaphragm and changes in the thoracic 
cavity itself decrease lung volumes. Th is decrease in 
FRC is not related to anesthetic depth and may per-
sist for several hours or days aft er anesthesia. Steep 
head-down (Trendelenburg) position (>30°) may 
reduce FRC even further as intrathoracic blood vol-
ume increases. In contrast, induction of anesthesia in 
the sitting position seems to have little eff ect on FRC. 
Muscle paralysis does not seem to change FRC sig-
nifi cantly when the patient is already anesthetized. 
 Th e eff ects of anesthesia on closing capacity 
are more variable. Both FRC and closing capacity, 
however, are generally reduced to the same extent 
under anesthesia. Th us, the risk of increased intra-
pulmonary shunting under anesthesia is similar to 
that in the conscious state; it is greatest in the elderly, 
in obese patients, and in those with underlying pul-
monary disease. 
 Eﬀ ects on Airway Resistance 
 Th e reduction in FRC associated with general anes-
thesia would be expected to increase airway resis-
tance. Increases in airway resistance are not usually 
observed, however, because of the bronchodilating 
properties of the volatile inhalation anesthetics. 
 FIGURE 2312  The work of breathing in relation 
to respiratory rate for normal individuals, patients with 
increased elastic resistance, and patients with increased 
airway resistance.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nunn JF: 
Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
Normal
Total
Total
Total
Elastic
Elastic
Elastic
Airflow
Airflow
Airflow
Respiratory frequency (breaths per minute)
5
10
15
20
5
10
15
20
5
10
15
20
Work of breathing (arbitrary units)
Increased elastic resistance
Increased airway resistance
 FIGURE 2313  With induction of anesthesia in the 
supine position, the abdominal contents exert cephalad 
pressure on the diaphragm. At end-expiration, the dorsal 
portion of the diaphragm is more cephalad and the 
ventral portion is more caudal than when awake, the 
thoracic spine is more lordotic, and the rib cage moves 
inward, all secondary to loss of motor tone. 
Anesthetized
Awake
504 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
alveoli that are not perfused  (alveolar dead space) . 
Th e sum of the two components is referred to as 
 physiological dead space . In the upright position, 
dead space is normally about 150 mL for most adults 
(approximately 2 mL/kg) and is nearly all anatomic. 
Th e weight of an individual in pounds is roughly 
equivalent to dead space in milliliters. Dead space 
can be aff ected by a variety of factors ( Table 23–3 ). 
 Because V t in the average adult is approxi-
mately 450 mL (6 mL/kg), V d /V t is normally 33%. 
Th is ratio can be derived by the Bohr equation: 
 
Paco2 − Peco2
Paco2
Vd
Vt =
 
 where P aco 2 is the alveolar CO 2 tension and P eco 2 
is the mixed expired CO 2 tension. Th is equation is 
useful clinically if arterial CO 2 tension (Pa co 2 ) is 
used to approximate the alveolar concentration and 
the CO 2 tension in expired air gases is the average 
measured over several minutes. 
 Distribution of Ventilation 
 Regardless of body position, alveolar ventila-
tion is unevenly distributed in the lungs. Th e right 
lung receives more ventilation than the left  lung 
Increased airway resistance is more commonly due 
to pathological factors (posterior displacement of 
the tongue; laryngospasm; bronchoconstriction; or 
secretions, blood, or tumor in the airway) or equip-
ment problems (small tracheal tubes or connectors, 
malfunction of valves, or obstruction of the breath-
ing circuit). 
 Eﬀ ects on the Work of Breathing 
 Increases in the work of breathing under anesthesia 
are most oft en secondary to reduced lung and chest 
wall compliance, and, less commonly, increases 
in airway resistance (see above). Th e problems of 
increased work of breathing are usually circum-
vented by controlled mechanical ventilation. 
 Eﬀ ects on the Respiratory Pattern 
 Regardless of the agent used, light anesthesia oft en 
results in irregular breathing patterns; breath hold-
ing is common. Breaths become regular with deeper 
levels of anesthesia. Inhalation agents generally pro-
duce rapid, shallow breaths, whereas nitrous–opioid 
techniques result in slow, deep breaths. 
 VENTILATION/PERFUSION 
RELATIONSHIPS 
 1. Ventilation 
 Ventilation is usually measured as the sum of all 
exhaled gas volumes in 1 min (minute ventilation, 
or 
•V ). 
 Minute ventilation = Respiratory rate × Tidal volume 
 For the average adult at rest, minute ventilation 
is about 5 L/min. 
 Not all of the inspired gas mixture reaches alve-
oli; some of it remains in the airways and is exhaled 
without being exchanged with alveolar gases. Th e 
part of the V t not participating in alveolar gas 
exchange is known as dead space (V d ). Alveolar 
ventilation ( 
•Va) is the volume of inspired gases actu-
ally taking part in gas exchange in 1 min. 
 
•Va = Respiratory rate × Vt − Vd 
 Dead space is actually composed of gases in 
nonrespiratory airways  (anatomic dead space) and 
 TABLE 233 Factors aﬀ ecting dead space. 
Factor
Eﬀ ect
Posture
Upright
Supine
↑
↓
Position of airway
Neck extension
Neck ﬂ exion
↑
↓
Age
↑
Artiﬁ cial airway
↓
Positive-pressure ventilation
↑
Drugs—anticholinergic
↑
Pulmonary perfusion
Pulmonary emboli
Hypotension
↑
↑
Pulmonary vascular disease
Emphysema
↑
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
505 
an excessively short inspiratory time will prevent 
alveoli from reaching the expected change in volume. 
Moreover, alveolar fi lling follows an exponential func-
tion that is dependent on both compliance and airway 
resistance. Th erefore, even with a normal inspiratory 
time, abnormalities in either compliance or resistance 
can prevent complete alveolar fi lling. 
 Time Constants 
 Lung infl ation can be described mathematically by 
the time constant, τ. 
 τ = Total compliance × Airway resistance 
 Regional variations in resistance or compliance 
not only interfere with alveolar fi lling but can cause 
asynchrony in alveolar fi lling during inspiration; 
some alveolar units may continue to fi ll as others 
empty. 
 Variations in time constants within the normal 
lung can be demonstrated in normal individuals 
breathing spontaneously during abnormally high 
respiratory rates. Rapid shallow breathing reverses 
(53% vs 47%), and the lower (dependent) areas of 
both lungs tend to be better ventilated than do the 
upper areas because of a gravitationally induced gra-
dient in intrapleural pressure (transpulmonary pres-
sure). Pleural pressure decreases about 1 cm H 2 O 
(becomes less negative) per 3-cm decrease in lung 
height. Th is diff erence places alveoli from diff erent 
areas at diff erent points on the pulmonary com-
pliance curve ( Figure 23–14 ). Because of a higher 
transpulmonary pressure, alveoli in upper lung areas 
are near-maximally infl ated and relatively noncom-
pliant, and they undergo little expansion during 
inspiration. In contrast, the smaller alveoli in depen-
dent areas have a lower transpulmonary pressure, 
are more compliant, and undergo greater expansion 
during inspiration. 
 Airway resistance can also contribute to regional 
diff erences in pulmonary ventilation. Final alveolar 
inspiratory volume is solely dependent on compliance 
only if inspiratory time is unlimited. In reality, inspira-
tory time is necessarily limited by the respiratory rate 
and the time necessary for expiration; consequently, 
 
–5
0
Alveoli
Alveolar
volume
Transpulmonary pressure
 
 FIGURE 2314  The eﬀ ect of gravity on alveolar compliance in the upright position. 
506 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
in reducing intrapulmonary shunting and prevent-
ing hypoxemia (see below). Hyperoxia has little 
eff ect on the pulmonary circulation in normal indi-
viduals. Hypercapnia and acidosis have a constrictor 
eff ect, whereas hypocapnia causes pulmonary vaso-
dilation, the opposite of what occurs in the systemic 
circulation. 
 Distribution of Pulmonary 
Perfusion 
 Pulmonary blood fl ow is also not uniform. 
Regardless of body position, lower (dependent) areas 
of the lung receive greater blood fl ow than upper 
(nondependent) areas. Th is pattern is the result of a 
gravitational gradient of 1 cm H 2 O/cm lung height. 
Th e normally low pressures in the pulmonary circu-
lation allow gravity to exert a signifi cant infl uence 
on blood fl ow. Also, in vivo perfusion scanning in 
normal individuals has shown an “onion-like” layer-
ing distribution of perfusion, with reduced fl ow at 
the periphery of the lung and increased perfusion 
toward the hilum. 
 Although the pulmonary perfusion pressure is 
not uniform across the lung, the alveolar distending 
pressure is relatively constant. Th e interplay of these 
pressures results in the dividing of the lung into four 
distinct zones (ie, the West Zones) ( Figure 23–15 ). 
In zone 1 (P a > Pa > Pv), alveolar pressure (P a ) is 
greater than both the arterial pulmonary pressure 
(Pa) and venous pulmonary pressure (Pv), resulting 
in obstruction of blood fl ow and creation of alveolar 
dead space. Zone 1 is fairly small in a spontaneously 
breathing individual, but can enlarge during positive 
pressure ventilation. In lower areas of the lungs, Pa 
progressively increases due to lower elevation above 
the heart. In zone 2 (Pa > P a > Pv), Pa is higher 
than P a , but Pv remains lower than both, resulting 
in blood fl ow that is dependent on the diff erential 
between Pa and P a . Th e bulk of the lung is described 
by zone 3 (Pa > Pv > P a ), where both Pa and Pv are 
higher than P a , resulting in blood fl ow independent 
of the alveolar pressure. Zone 4, the most dependent 
part of the lung, is where atelectasis and/or intersti-
tial pulmonary edema occur, resulting in blood fl ow 
that is dependent on the diff erential between Pa and 
pulmonary interstitial pressure. 
the normal distribution of ventilation, preferentially 
favoring upper (nondependent) areas of the lung 
over the lower areas. 
 2. Pulmonary Perfusion 
 Of the approximately 5 L/min of blood fl owing 
through the lungs, only about 70–100 mL at any one 
time are within the pulmonary capillaries undergo-
ing gas exchange. At the alveolar–capillary mem-
brane, this small volume forms a 50–100 m 2 -sheet of 
blood approximately one red cell thick. Moreover, to 
ensure optimal gas exchange, each capillary perfuses 
more than one alveolus. 
 Although capillary volume remains relatively 
constant, total pulmonary blood volume can vary 
between 500 mL and 1000 mL. Large increases in 
either cardiac output or blood volume are tolerated 
with little change in pressure as a result of passive 
dilation of open vessels and perhaps some recruit-
ment of collapsed pulmonary vessels. Small 
increases in pulmonary blood volume normally 
occur during cardiac systole and with each normal 
(spontaneous) inspiration. A shift  in posture from 
supine to erect decreases pulmonary blood volume 
(up to 27%); Trendelenburg positioning has the 
opposite eff ect. Changes in systemic capacitance 
also infl uence pulmonary blood volume: systemic 
venoconstriction shift s blood from the systemic to 
the pulmonary circulation, whereas vasodilation 
causes a pulmonary-to-systemic redistribution. In 
this way, the lung acts as a reservoir for the systemic 
circulation. 
 Local factors are more important than the 
autonomic system in infl uencing pulmonary 
vascular tone (above). Hypoxia is a powerful stimu-
lus for pulmonary vasoconstriction (the opposite of 
its systemic eff ect). Both pulmonary arterial (mixed 
venous) and alveolar hypoxia induce vasoconstric-
tion, but the latter is a more powerful stimulus. Th is 
response seems to be due to either the direct eff ect of 
hypoxia on the pulmonary vasculature or increased 
production of leukotrienes relative to vasodilatory 
prostaglandins. Inhibition of nitric oxide production 
may also play a role. Hypoxic pulmonary vasocon-
striction is an important physiological mechanism 
7
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
507
Blood from these units tends to depress arterial O 2
tension and elevate arterial CO 2 tension. Th eir eff ect 
on arterial O 2 tension is much more profound than 
that on CO 2 tension; in fact, arterial CO 2 tension 
oft en decreases from a hypoxemia-induced refl ex 
increase in alveolar ventilation. An appreciable com-
pensatory increase in O 2 uptake cannot take place 
in remaining areas where  
•
•
V/Q is normal, because 
pulmonary end-capillary blood is usually already 
maximally saturated with O 2 (see below). 
 3. Shunts 
 Shunting denotes the process whereby desat-
urated, mixed venous blood from the right 
heart returns to the left  heart without being resat-
urated with O 2 in the lungs ( Figure 23–17 ). Th e 
overall eff ect of shunting is to decrease (dilute) arte-
rial O 2 content; this type of shunt is referred to as 
right-to-left . Left -to-right shunts (in the absence of 
9
 Ventilation/Perfusion Ratios 
 Because alveolar ventilation  (
•Va ) is normally 
about 4 L/min, and pulmonary capillary per-
fusion  (
•Q ) is 5 L/min, the overall  
•
•
V/Q  ratio is about 
0.8.  
•
•
V/Q for individual lung units (each alveolus and 
its capillary) can range from 0 (no ventilation) to 
infi nity (no perfusion); the former is referred to as 
intrapulmonary shunt, whereas the latter constitutes 
alveolar dead space.  
•
•
V/Q normally ranges between 
0.3 and 3.0; the majority of lung areas, however, are 
close to 1.0 ( Figure 23–16A ). Because perfusion 
increases at a greater rate than ventilation, nonde-
pendent (apical) areas tend to have higher  
•
•
V/Q ratios 
than do dependent (basal) areas ( Figure 23–16B ). 
 Th e importance of  
•
•
V/Q ratios relates to the 
effi  ciency with which lung units resaturate venous 
blood with O 2 and eliminate CO 2 .  Pulmonary 
venous blood (the effl  uent) from areas with low 
•
•
V/Q ratios has a low O 2 tension and high CO 2 ten-
sion—similar to systemic mixed venous blood . 
8
B
A
Alveolar
Venous
Arterial
1. Collapse
2. Waterfall
3. Distention
4. Interstitial pressure
Zone 3
Pa > Pv > PA
Zone 4
Pa > Pis > Pv > PA
Zone 1
PA > Pa > Pv
Pa = PA
Pv = PA
Zone 2
Pa > PA > Pv
Distance
Blood flow
Pa
PA
Pv
 FIGURE 2315  Pulmonary blood ﬂ ow distribution 
relative to the alveolar pressure (P A ), the pulmonary arterial 
pressure (P a ), the pulmonary venous pressure (P V ), and 
the interstitial pressure (P iS ) at various gravitation levels. 
 A: Classic West Zones of blood ﬂ ow distribution in the 
upright position. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from 
West JB:  Respiratory Physiology: The Essentials , 6th edition. Williams and 
Wilkins, 2000. p. 37.).  B: In vivo perfusion scanning illustrating 
central-to-peripheral, in addition to gravitational blood 
ﬂ ow distribution, in the upright position.  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Lohser J: Evidence based management of one lung 
ventilation. Anesthesiol Clin 2008;26:241.) 
508 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
concentrations as alveolar gas. Venous admixture is 
usually expressed as a fraction of total cardiac output 
(
•Q s /
•Q t ). Th e equation for  
•Qs/
•Qt may be derived 
with the law for the conservation of mass for O 2 
across the pulmonary bed: 
 Qt × Cao2 = (Qs × Cvo2) + (Qc´ × Cc´o2)
•
•
•
 
 where 
Qs =  blood fl ow through the physiologic 
shunt compartment
Qt =  total cardiac output
 
&Qc´
blood flow across normally ventilated 
pulmonary capillaries
=
Qs
&
+
=
= oxygen content of ideal pulmonary 
end-capillary blood
arterial oxygen content
mixed venous content
&Qc´
Qt
Cc´o2
&
Cao2
Cvo2
=
=
  
pulmonary congestion), however, do not produce 
hypoxemia. 
 Intrapulmonary shunts are oft en classifi ed as 
absolute or relative. Absolute shunt refers to ana-
tomic shunts and lung units where  
•
•
V/Q is zero. A 
relative shunt is an area of the lung with a low  
•
•
V/Q 
ratio. Clinically, hypoxemia from a relative shunt 
can usually be partially corrected by increasing the 
inspired O 2 concentration; hypoxemia caused by an 
absolute shunt cannot. 
 Venous Admixture 
 Venous admixture refers to a concept rather than 
an actual physiological entity.  Venous admixture is 
the amount of mixed venous blood that would have 
to be mixed with pulmonary end-capillary blood to 
account for the diff erence in O 2 tension between arte-
rial and pulmonary end-capillary blood. Pulmonary 
end-capillary blood is considered to have the same 
 FIGURE 2316  The distribution of  
•
•
V/Q ratios for the 
whole lung ( A ) and according to height ( B ) in the upright 
position. Note that blood ﬂ ow increases more rapidly than 
ventilation in dependent areas.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from West JB:  Ventilation/Blood Flow and Gas Exchange , 3rd ed. 
Blackwell, 1977.) 
V⋅/Q⋅ 
B
A
Blood flow
Blood flow
Ventilation
Ventilation
Ventilation/perfusion ratio
0
0.1
0.3
1.0
3.0
10.0
Blood flow and Ventilation
Rib number
Bottom
Top
1
2
3
5
4
3
2
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
509 
nonetheless, the concept is useful clinically. Normal 
 Qs/Qt
•
• is primarily due to communication between 
deep bronchial veins and pulmonary veins, the the-
besian circulation in the heart, and areas of low  
•
•
V/Q 
in the lungs ( Figure 23–18 ). Th e venous admixture 
in normal individuals (physiological shunt) is typi-
cally less than 5%. 
 4. Eﬀ ects of Anesthesia 
on Gas Exchange 
 Abnormalities in gas exchange during anesthesia are 
common. Th ey include increased dead space, 
hypoventilation, and increased intrapulmonary 
shunting. Th ere is increased scatter of  
•
•
V/Q ratios. 
Increases in alveolar dead space are most commonly 
seen during controlled ventilation, but may also 
 Th e simplifi ed equation is 
 
Qs/Qt =
•
•
Cc´o2  − Cao2
Cc´o2  − Cvo2  
 Th e formula for calculating the O 2 content of 
blood is given below. 
 Qs/Qt
•
• can be calculated clinically by obtaining 
mixed venous and arterial blood gas measurements; 
the former requires a pulmonary artery catheter. 
Th e alveolar gas equation is used to derive pulmo-
nary end-capillary O 2 tension. Pulmonary capillary 
blood is usually assumed to be 100% saturated for 
an F io 2 ≥ 0.21. 
 Th e calculated venous admixture assumes that 
all shunting is intrapulmonary and due to absolute 
shunts  (
•
•
V/Q = 0) . In reality, neither is ever the case; 
 FIGURE 2317  A three-compartment model of gas 
exchange in the lungs, showing dead space ventilation, 
normal alveolar–capillary exchange, and shunting (venous 
admixture).  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s 
Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
Alveolar gas
Alveolar-capillary
membrane
Dead space
ventilation
End-pulmonary capillary blood
Arterial
blood
Expired
gas
Inspired
gas
Venous
blood
Venous admixture
shunting
V⋅/Q⋅  = 0
V⋅/Q⋅  = infinity
510 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
admixture and preventing hypoxemia during gen-
eral anesthesia, as long as cardiac output is main-
tained Prolonged administration of high inspired 
O 2 concentrations may be associated with atelecta-
sis formation and increases in absolute shunt. 
Atelectasis in this situation is known as resorption 
atelectasis and appears in areas with a low 
•
•
V/Q
ratio ventilated at an O 2 - inspired concentration 
close to 100%. Perfusion results in O 2 being trans-
ported out of the alveoli at a rate faster than it 
enters the alveoli, leading to an emptying of the 
alveoli and collapse. 
10
occur during spontaneous ventilation.  General 
anesthesia commonly increases venous admix-
ture to 5% to 10%, probably as a result of atelectasis 
and airway collapse in dependent areas of the lung. 
Inhalation agents, including nitrous oxide, also can 
inhibit  hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in 
high doses; for volatile agents, the ED 50 is about 2 
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC). Elderly 
patients seem to have the largest increases in  Qs/Qt
•
• . 
Inspired O 2 tensions of 30% to 40% usually prevent 
hypoxemia, suggesting anesthesia increases relative 
shunt. PEEP is oft en eff ective in reducing venous 
 
Pulmonary
vein
Deep true
bronchial
veins
Pulmonary
artery
Venous
blood
Right
heart
Left
heart
Arterial
blood
Bronchial circulation
Systemic
circulation
Pleurohilar veins
Precapillary
arterial
anastomosis
Intrapulmonary
shunt
Lungs
Thebesian
circulation
O2
O2
O2
O2
CO2
CO2
CO2
CO2
 
 FIGURE 2318  Components of the normal venous admixture.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied 
Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
511
these factors and can be estimated by the following 
equation: 
 
Paco2 
Rq
Pao2 = Pio2 −
 
 where Pa co 2 = arterial CO 2 tension and R q =
respiratory quotient. 
 R q is usually not measured.  Note that large 
increases in Pa co 2 (>75 mm Hg) readily pro-
duce hypoxia (Pa o 2 < 60 mm Hg) at room air, but 
not at high inspired O 2 concentrations. 
 A yet simpler method of approximating P ao 2 in 
millimeters of mercury is to multiply the percentage 
of inspired O 2 concentration by 6. Th us, at 40%, P ao 2
is 6 × 40, or 240 mm Hg. 
 Pulmonary End-Capillary 
Oxygen Tension 
 For all practical purposes, pulmonary end-capillary 
O 2 tension (Pc′ o 2 ) may be considered identical to 
P ao 2 ; the P ao 2 –Pc′ o 2 gradient is normally minute. 
Pc′ o 2 is dependent on the rate of O 2 diff usion across 
the alveolar–capillary membrane, as well as on pul-
monary capillary blood volume and transit time. 
Th e large capillary surface area in alveoli and the 
0.4–0.5 µm thickness of the alveolar–capillary mem-
brane greatly facilitate O 2 diff usion. Enhanced O 2
binding to hemoglobin at saturations above 80% 
also augments O 2 diff usion (see below). Capillary 
transit time can be estimated by dividing pulmonary 
capillary blood volume by cardiac output (pulmo-
nary blood fl ow); thus, normal capillary transit time 
is 70 mL ÷ 5000 mL/min (0.8 s). Maximum Pc′ o 2 is 
usually attained aft er only 0.3 sec, providing a large 
safety margin. 
 Th e binding of O 2 to hemoglobin seems to be 
the principal rate-limiting factor in the transfer 
of O 2 from alveolar gas to blood. Th erefore, pulmo-
nary diff using capacity refl ects not only the capacity 
and permeability of the alveolar–capillary mem-
brane, but also pulmonary blood fl ow. Moreover, 
O 2 uptake is normally limited by pulmonary blood 
fl ow, not O 2 diff usion across the alveolar–capillary 
membrane; the latter may become signifi cant dur-
ing exercise in normal individuals at high altitudes 
and in patients with extensive destruction of the 
alveolar–capillary membrane. 
11
12
 ALVEOLAR, ARTERIAL, & 
VENOUS GAS TENSIONS 
 When dealing with gas mixtures, each gas is 
considered to contribute separately to total gas 
pressure, and its partial pressure is directly pro-
portional to its concentration. Air has an O 2 con-
centration of approximately 21%; therefore, if the 
barometric pressure is 760 mm Hg (sea level), the 
partial pressure of O 2 (P o 2 ) in air is normally 159.6 
mm Hg: 
 760 mm Hg × 0.21 = 159.6 mm Hg 
 In its general form, the equation may be written 
as follows: 
 Pio2 = Pb × Fio2 
 where P b = barometric pressure and F io 2 = the frac-
tion of inspired O 2 . 
 Two general rules can also be used: 
 •  Partial pressure in millimeters of mercury 
approximates the percentage × 7 
•  Partial pressure in kilopascals is approximately 
the same as the percentage. 
 1. Oxygen 
 Alveolar Oxygen Tension 
 With every breath, the inspired gas mixture is 
humidifi ed at 37°C in the upper airway. Th e inspired 
tension of O 2 (P io 2 ) is therefore reduced by the 
added water vapor. Water vapor pressure is depen-
dent only upon temperature and is 47 mm Hg at 
37°C. In humidifi ed air, the normal partial pressure 
of O 2 at sea level is 149.7 mm Hg: 
 (760 − 47) × 0.21 = 149.1 mm Hg 
 Th e general equation is 
 Pio2 = (Pb − Ph2o) × Fio2 
 where P h 2 o = the vapor pressure of water at body 
temperature. 
 In alveoli, the inspired gases are mixed with 
residual alveolar gas from previous breaths, O 2 
is taken up, and CO 2 is added. Th e fi nal alveolar 
O 2 tension (P ao 2 ) is therefore dependent on all of 
512 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
depends on cardiac output, O 2 consumption, and 
hemoglobin concentration. 
 Th e A–a gradient for O 2 is directly proportional 
to shunt, but inversely proportional to mixed venous 
O 2 tension. Th e eff ect of each variable on P ao 2 (and 
consequently the A–a gradient) can be determined 
only when the other variables are held constant. 
Figure 23–19 shows the eff ect of diff erent degrees of 
shunting on Pa o 2 .  It should also be noted that 
the greater the shunt, the less likely the possi-
bility that an increase in F io 2 will prevent hypoxemia. 
Moreover, isoshunt lines seem to be most useful for 
O 2 concentrations between 35% and 100%. Lower O 2 
concentrations require modifi cation of isoshunt lines 
to account for the eff ect of  
•
•
V/Q scatter. 
 Th e eff ect of cardiac output on the A–a gradi-
ent ( Figure 23–20 ) is due not only to its second-
ary eff ects on mixed venous O 2 tension but also to 
a direct relationship between cardiac output and 
intrapulmonary shunting. As can be seen, a low car-
diac output tends to accentuate the eff ect of shunt 
on Pa o 2 . A reduction in venous admixture may be 
observed with low-normal cardiac outputs second-
ary to accentuated pulmonary vasoconstriction from 
a lower mixed venous O 2 tension. On the other hand, 
high cardiac outputs can increase venous admixture 
by elevating mixed venous O 2 tension, which in turn 
inhibits hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. 
 O 2 consumption and hemoglobin concentra-
tion can also aff ect Pa o 2 through their secondary 
eff ects on mixed venous O 2 tension (below). High O 2
13
 O 2 transfer across the alveolar–capillary mem-
brane is expressed as O 2 diff using capacity (D lo 2 ): 
 
Dlo2 = Oxygen uptake
Pao2 − Pc´o2 
 Because Pc′ o 2 cannot be measured accurately, 
measurement of carbon monoxide diff usion capacity 
(D lco ) is used instead to assess gas transfer across 
the alveolar–capillary membrane. Because carbon 
monoxide has a very high affi  nity for hemoglobin, 
there is little or no CO in pulmonary capillary blood, 
so that even when it is administered at low concen-
tration, Pc′ co can be considered zero. Th erefore, 
 
Dlco = Carbon monoxide uptake
Paco
 
 Reductions in D lco imply an impediment in 
gas transfer across the alveolar–capillary membrane. 
Such impediments may be due to abnormal  
•
•
V/Q 
ratios, extensive destruction of the gas alveolar–
capillary membrane, or very short capillary transit 
times. Abnormalities are accentuated by increases in 
O 2 consumption and cardiac output, such as occurs 
during exercise. 
 Arterial Oxygen Tension 
 Pa o 2 cannot be calculated like Pao 2 but must be 
measured at room air. Th e alveolar-to-arterial O 2 
partial pressure gradient (A–a gradient) is normally 
less than 15 mm Hg, but progressively increases 
with age up to 20–30 mm Hg. Arterial O 2 tension 
can be approximated by the following formula (in 
mm Hg): 
 
Pao2 = 120 −Age
3 
 Th e range is 60–100 mm Hg (8–13 kPa). 
Decreases are probably the result of a progressive 
increase in closing capacity relative to FRC (see 
above).  Table 23–4 lists the mechanisms of hypox-
emia (Pa o 2 <60 mm Hg). 
 Th e most common mechanism for hypoxemia 
is an increased alveolar–arterial gradient. Th e A–a 
gradient for O 2 depends on the amount of right-
to-left  shunting, the amount of  
•
•
V/Q scatter, and 
the mixed venous O 2 tension (see below) . Th e last 
 TABLE 234 Mechanisms of hypoxemia. 
 Low alveolar oxygen tension
 Low inspired oxygen tension
 Low fractional inspired concentration 
 High altitude 
 Alveolar hypoventilation 
 Diﬀ usion hypoxia 
 Increased oxygen consumption 
 Increased alveolar–arterial gradient
 Right-to-left shunting 
 Increased areas of low  
•
•
V/Q  1  ratios 
 Low mixed venous oxygen tension
 Decreased cardiac output 
 Increased oxygen consumption 
 Decreased hemoglobin concentration 
 1
•
•
V/Q  , ventilation/perfusion.
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
513 
contains venous drainage from the superior vena 
cava, the inferior vena cava, and the heart; it must 
therefore be obtained from a pulmonary artery 
catheter. 
 2. Carbon Dioxide 
 Carbon dioxide is a by-product of aerobic metabo-
lism in mitochondria. Th ere are therefore small con-
tinuous gradients for CO 2 tension from mitochondria 
to cell cytoplasm, extracellular fl uid, venous blood, 
and alveoli, where the CO 2 is fi nally eliminated. 
 Mixed Venous Carbon 
Dioxide Tension 
 Normal mixed venous CO 2 tension (Pvco2  ) is about 
46 mm Hg and is the end result of mixing of blood 
from tissues of varying metabolic activity. Venous 
CO 2 tension is lower in tissues with low metabolic 
activity (eg, skin), but higher in blood from those 
with relatively high activity (eg, heart). 
 Alveolar Carbon Dioxide Tension 
 Alveolar CO 2 tension (P aco 2 ) is generally considered 
to represent the balance between total CO 2 produc-
tion  (
•Vco2 ) and alveolar ventilation (elimination): 
 
Paco2 =
•Vco2
Va
•
  
 where  
•Va is alveolar ventilation ( Figure 23–21 ). In 
reality, P aco 2 is related to CO 2 elimination rather 
than production. Although the two are equal in a 
steady state, an imbalance occurs during periods 
consumption rates and low hemoglobin concentra-
tions can increase the A–a gradient and depress Pa o 2 . 
 Mixed Venous Oxygen Tension 
 Normal mixed venous O 2 tension ( Pvo2  ) is about 
40 mm Hg and represents the overall balance 
between O 2 consumption and O 2 delivery 
( Table 23–5 ). A true mixed venous blood sample 
 
Virtual
shunt
lines
Inspired oxygen concentration (%)
20
0
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0
100
200
300
400
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
Arterial PO2 mm Hg
 
 FIGURE 2319  Isoshunt curves showing the eﬀ ect of 
varying amounts of shunt on Pa O 2 . Note that there is little 
beneﬁ t in increasing inspired oxygen concentration in 
patients with very large shunts.  (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with 
permission, from Benatar SR, Hewlett AM, Nunn JF: The use of isoshunt 
lines for control of oxygen therapy. Br J Anaesth 1973;45:711.) 
 FIGURE 2320  The eﬀ ect of 
cardiac output on the alveolar–
arterial P O 2 diﬀ erence with 
varying degrees of shunting. 
 
•VO2 = 200 mL/min and PaO2 = 
180 mm Hg.) (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied 
Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
1
0
50
100
150
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Cardiac output (L/min)
20%
10%
5%
Alveolar–arterial PO2
difference (mm Hg)
514 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
not vary appreciably under most circumstances. 
Moreover, the body’s large capacity to store CO 2 (see 
below) buff ers acute changes in  
•Vco2 . 
 Pulmonary End-Capillary 
Carbon Dioxide Tension 
 Pulmonary end-capillary CO 2 tension (Pc′ co 2 ) is 
virtually identical to P aco 2 for the same reasons as 
those discussed in the section about O 2 . In addition, 
the diff usion rate for CO 2 across the alveolar–capil-
lary membrane is 20 times that of O 2 . 
 Arterial Carbon Dioxide Tension 
 Arterial CO 2 tension (Pa co 2 ), which is readily mea-
surable, is identical to Pc′ co 2, and, necessarily, P aco 2 . 
Normal Pa co 2 is 38 ± 4 mm Hg (5.1 ± 0.5 kPa); in 
practice, 40 mm Hg is usually considered normal. 
 Although low  
•
•
V/Q ratios tend to increase 
Pa co 2, whereas high  
•
•
V/Q ratios tend to decrease it (in 
contrast to the case for O 2 [see above]), signifi cant 
arterial-to-alveolar gradients for CO 2 develop only 
in the presence of marked  
•
•
V/Q abnormalities (>30% 
venous admixture); even then the gradient is rela-
tively small (2–3 mm Hg). Moreover, small increases 
in the gradient appreciably increase CO 2 output into 
alveoli with relatively normal  
•
•
V/Q . Even moderate 
to severe disturbances usually fail to appreciably 
alter arterial CO 2 because of a refl ex increase in ven-
tilation from concomitant hypoxemia. 
 End-Tidal Carbon Dioxide Tension 
 Because end-tidal gas is primarily alveolar gas and 
P aco 2 is virtually identical to Pa co 2 , end-tidal CO 2 
tension (P etco 2 ) is used clinically as an estimate of 
Pa co 2 . Th e P aco 2 –P etco 2 gradient is normally less 
than 5 mm Hg and represents dilution of alveolar 
gas with CO 2 -free gas from nonperfused alveoli 
(alveolar dead space). 
 TRANSPORT OF RESPIRATORY 
GASES IN BLOOD 
 1. Oxygen 
 O 2 is carried in blood in two forms: dissolved in solu-
tion and in reversible association with hemoglobin. 
of acute hypoventilation or hypoperfusion, and 
the excess CO 2 increases total body CO 2 content. 
Clinically, P aco 2 is more dependent on alveolar 
ventilation than is  
•Vco2 , because CO 2 output does 
 
Alveolar ventilation (L/min) (BTPS)
Barometric
pressure
760 mm Hg
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
Alveolar PCO2 (mm Hg)
V⋅ 
CO2 = 200 mL/min
V⋅ 
CO2 = 100 mL/min
 
 FIGURE 2321  The eﬀ ect of alveolar ventilation on 
alveolar PCO 2 at two rates of CO 2 production.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. 
Butterworth, 2000.) 
 TABLE 235 Alterations in mixed venous 
oxygen tension (and saturation). 
 Decreased  PvO2  
 Increased O 2 consumption
 Fever 
 Shivering 
 Exercise 
 Malignant hyperthermia 
 Thyroid storm 
 Decreased O 2 delivery
 Hypoxia 
 Decreased cardiac output 
 Decreased hemoglobin concentration 
 Abnormal hemoglobin 
 Increased  PvO2  
 Left-to-right shunting 
 High cardiac output 
 Impaired tissue uptake
 Cyanide poisoning 
 Decreased oxygen consumption
 Hypothermia 
 Combined mechanisms
 Sepsis 
 Sampling error
 Wedged pulmonary artery catheter 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
515 
hemoglobin molecule (hemoglobin A 1 ) consists of 
two α and two β chains (subunits); the four subunits 
are held together by weak bonds between the amino 
acid residues. Each gram of hemoglobin can theo-
retically carry up to 1.39 mL of O 2 . 
 Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve 
 Each hemoglobin molecule binds up to four O 2 
molecules. Th e complex interaction between the 
hemoglobin subunits results in nonlinear (an elon-
gated S shape) binding with O 2 ( Figure 23–22 ). 
Hemoglobin saturation is the amount of O 2 bound 
as a percentage of its total O 2 -binding capacity. Four 
separate chemical reactions are involved in bind-
ing each of the four O 2 molecules. Th e change in 
molecular conformation induced by the binding of 
the fi rst three molecules greatly accelerates bind-
ing of the fourth O 2 molecule. Th e last reaction is 
responsible for the accelerated binding between 25% 
and 100% saturation. At about 90% saturation, the 
decrease in available O 2 receptors fl attens the curve 
until full saturation is reached. 
 Dissolved Oxygen 
 Th e amount of O 2 dissolved in blood can be derived 
from  Henry’s law , which states that the concen-
tration of any gas in solution is proportional to its 
partial pressure. Th e mathematical expression is as 
follows: 
 Gas concentration = α × Partial pressure 
 where α = the gas solubility coeffi  cient for a given 
solution at a given temperature. 
 Th e solubility coeffi  cient for O 2 at normal body 
temperature is 0.003 mL/dL/mm Hg. Even with a 
Pa o 2 of 100 mm Hg, the maximum amount of O 2 
dissolved in blood is very small (0.3 mL/dL) com-
pared with that bound to hemoglobin. 
 Hemoglobin 
 Hemoglobin is a complex molecule consisting 
of four heme and four protein subunits. Heme is 
an iron–porphyrin compound that is an essen-
tial part of the O 2 -binding sites; only the divalent 
form (+2 charge) of iron can bind O 2 . Th e normal 
 FIGURE 2322  The normal adult 
hemoglobin–oxygen dissociation 
curve.  (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with 
permission, from West JB:  Respiratory 
Physiology—The Essentials , 6th ed. Williams 
& Wilkins, 2000.) 
Dissolved O2
PO2 (mm Hg)
Hemoglobin saturation (%)
Total O2
O2 concentration (mL/100 mL)
O2 combined with Hb
2
20
40
60
80
100
600
6
10
14
18
32
100
20
0
40
60
80
516 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
venous blood than arterial blood ( Figure 23–23 ); 
the net result is facilitation of O 2 release to tissue 
with little impairment in O 2 uptake (unless severe 
hypoxia is present). 
 Th e infl uence of CO 2 tension on hemoglobin’s 
affi  nity for O 2 is important physiologically and is 
secondary to the associated rise in hydrogen ion 
concentration when CO 2 tension increases. Th e high 
CO 2 content of venous capillary blood, by decreasing 
hemoglobin’s affi  nity for O 2 , facilitates the release of 
O 2 to tissues; conversely, the lower CO 2 content in 
pulmonary capillaries increases hemoglobin’s affi  n-
ity for O 2 again, facilitating O 2 uptake from alveoli. 
 2,3-DPG is a by-product of glycolysis (the 
Rapoport–Luebering shunt) and accumulates dur-
ing anaerobic metabolism. Although its eff ects on 
hemoglobin under these conditions are theoreti-
cally benefi cial, its physiological importance nor-
mally seems minor. 2,3-DPG levels may, however, 
play an important compensatory role in patients 
 Factors Inﬂ uencing the 
Hemoglobin Dissociation Curve 
 Clinically important factors altering O 2 binding 
include hydrogen ion concentration, CO 2 tension, 
temperature, and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) 
concentration. Th eir eff ect on hemoglobin–O 2 inter-
action can be expressed by P 50 , the O 2 tension at 
which hemoglobin is 50% saturated ( Figure 23–23 ). 
Each factor shift s the dissociation curve either to the 
right (increasing P 50 ) or to the left  (decreasing P 50 ). 
 A rightward shift  in the oxygen–hemoglobin 
dissociation curve lowers O 2 affi  nity, displaces 
O 2 from hemoglobin, and makes more O 2 available 
to tissues; a left ward shift  increases hemoglobin’s 
affi  nity for O 2 , reducing its availability to tissues. Th e 
normal P 50 in adults is 26.6 mm Hg (3.4 kPa). 
 An increase in blood hydrogen ion concen-
tration reduces O 2 binding to hemoglobin (Bohr 
eff ect). Because of the shape of the  hemoglobin 
dissociation curve , the eff ect is more important in 
14
 
Alkalosis
Hypothermia
↓ 2,3,-DPG
Acidosis
Hyperthermia
↑ 2,3,-DPG
Normal
50% saturation
for each curve
Hemoglobin saturation (%)
0
0
20
20
40
60
80
100
40
60
80
100
120
 
 FIGURE 2323  The eﬀ ects of changes in acid–base status, body temperature, and 2,3-DPG concentration on the 
hemoglobin–oxygen dissociation curve. 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
517 
mixed venous blood and the arteriovenous diff er-
ence can be calculated as follows: 
 
(0.003 × 100) + (0.975 × 15 × 1.39)
(0.003 × 40) + (0.75 × 15 × 1.31)
Cao2
Cvo2
=
Cao2 − Cvo2 = 4.7 mL/dL blood
19.5 mL/dL blood
=
=
14.8 mL/dL blood
=
 
 Oxygen Transport 
 O 2 transport is dependent on both respiratory and 
circulatory function. Total O 2 delivery  (
•Do2) to tis-
sues is the product of arterial O 2 content and cardiac 
output: 
 
•Do2 = Cao2 × Qt
•
 
 Note that arterial O 2 content is dependent on 
Pao 2 as well as hemoglobin concentration.  As a 
result, defi ciencies in O  2   delivery may be due to a 
low Pao  2  ,  a low hemoglobin concentration, or an 
inadequate cardiac output . Normal O 2 delivery can 
be calculated as follows: 
 O2 delivery = 20 mL O2/dL blood 
              × 50 dL per blood/min
       = 1000 mL O2/min 
 Th e Fick equation expresses the relationship 
between O 2 consumption, O 2 content, and cardiac 
output: 
 O2 consumption = Vo2 = Qt × (Cao2 − Cvo2)
•
•
 
 Rearranging the equation: 
 
•
•Vo2
Qt
Cao2 =
+ Cvo2 
 Consequently, the arteriovenous diff erence is a 
good measure of the overall adequacy of O 2 delivery. 
 As calculated above, the arteriovenous diff erence 
(Cao 2 − Cvo2 ) is about 5 mL O 2 /dL blood (20 mL O 2 /
dL – 15 mL O 2 /dL). Note that the normal extraction 
fraction for  O2[(Cao 2 − Cvo2)/Cao 2 ] is 5 mL ÷ 20 mL, 
or 25%; thus, the body normally consumes only 25% 
of the O 2 carried on hemoglobin. When O 2 demand 
exceeds supply, the extraction fraction exceeds 25%. 
Conversely, if O 2 supply exceeds demand, the extrac-
tion fraction falls below 25%. 
with chronic anemia and may signifi cantly aff ect the 
O 2 -carrying capacity of blood transfusions. 
 Abnormal Ligands & Abnormal 
Forms of Hemoglobins 
 Carbon monoxide, cyanide, nitric acid, and ammo-
nia can combine with hemoglobin at O 2 -binding 
sites. Th ey can displace O 2 and shift  the saturation 
curve to the left . Carbon monoxide is particularly 
potent, having 200–300 times the affi  nity of O 2 for 
hemoglobin, combining with it to form carboxyhe-
moglobin. Carbon monoxide decreases hemoglo-
bin’s O 2 -carrying capacity and impairs the release of 
O 2 to tissues. 
 Methemoglobin results when the iron in heme is 
oxidized to its trivalent (+3) form. Nitrates, nitrites, 
sulfonamides, and other drugs can rarely result in 
signifi cant methemoglobinemia. Methemoglobin 
cannot combine with O 2 unless reconverted by the 
enzyme methemoglobin reductase; methemoglo-
bin also shift s the normal hemoglobin saturation 
curve to the left . Methemoglobinemia, like car-
bon monoxide poisoning, therefore decreases the 
O 2 -carrying capacity and impairs the release of O 2 . 
Reduction of methemoglobin to normal hemoglo-
bin is facilitated by such agents as methylene blue 
or ascorbic acid. 
 Abnormal hemoglobins can also result from 
variations in the protein subunit composition. Each 
variant has its own O 2 -saturation characteristics. 
Th ese include fetal hemoglobin, hemoglobin A 2 , and 
sickle hemoglobin. 
 Oxygen Content 
 Th e total O  2   content of blood is the sum of that 
in solution plus that carried by hemoglobin . In 
reality, O 2 binding to hemoglobin never achieves the 
theoretical maximum (see above), but is closer to 
1.31 mL O 2 /dL blood per mm Hg. Total O 2 content 
is expressed by the following equation: 
 O2 content = ([0.003 mL O2/dL blood per mm Hg]
         × Po2) + (So2 × Hb × 1.31 mL/dL blood) 
 where Hb is hemoglobin concentration in g/dL blood, 
and S o 2 is hemoglobin saturation at the given P o 2 . 
 Using the above formula and a hemoglobin of 
15 g/dL, the normal O 2 content for both arterial and 
518 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Apnea in a patient previously breathing room 
air leaves approximately 480 mL of O 2 in the lungs. 
(If F io 2 = 0.21 and FRC = 2300 mL, O 2 content = 
F io 2 × FRC.) Th e metabolic activity of tissues rapidly 
depletes this reservoir (presumably at a rate equiva-
lent to  
•Vo2 ); severe hypoxemia usually occurs within 
90 sec. Th e onset of hypoxemia can be delayed by 
increasing the F io 2 prior to the apnea. Following ven-
tilation with 100% O 2 , FRC contains about 2300 mL 
of O 2 ; this delays hypoxemia following apnea for 
4–5 min. Th is concept is the basis for preoxygenation 
prior to induction of anesthesia. 
 2. Carbon Dioxide 
 Carbon dioxide is transported in blood in three 
forms: dissolved in solution, as bicarbonate, and 
with proteins in the form of carbamino compounds 
( Table 23–6 ). Th e sum of all three forms is the total 
CO 2 content of blood (routinely reported with elec-
trolyte measurements). 
 Dissolved Carbon Dioxide 
 Carbon dioxide is more soluble in blood than O 2 , 
with a solubility coeffi  cient of 0.031 mmol/L/mm Hg 
(0.067 mL/dL/mm Hg) at 37°C. 
 When  
•Do2 is even moderately reduced,  
•Vo2 
usually remains normal because of increased O 2 
extraction (mixed venous O 2 saturation decreases); 
 
•Vo2 remains independent of delivery. With fur-
ther reductions in  
•Do2 , however, a critical point is 
reached beyond which  
•Vo2 becomes directly pro-
portional to  
•Do2 .  Th is state of supply-dependent 
O  2   is typically associated with progressive lactic 
acidosis caused by cellular hypoxia . 
 Oxygen Stores 
 Th e concept of O 2 stores is important in anesthesia. 
When the normal fl ux of O 2 is interrupted by apnea, 
existing O 2 stores are consumed by cellular metabo-
lism; if stores are depleted, hypoxia and eventual 
cell death follow. Th eoretically, normal O 2 stores in 
adults are about 1500 mL. Th is amount includes the 
O 2 remaining in the lungs, that bound to hemoglobin 
(and myoglobin), and that dissolved in body fl uids. 
Unfortunately, the high affi  nity of hemoglobin for 
O 2 (the affi  nity of myoglobin is even higher), and the 
very limited quantity of O 2 in solution, restrict the 
availability of these stores. Th e O 2 contained within 
the lungs at FRC (initial lung volume during apnea), 
therefore, becomes the most important source of O 2 . 
Of that volume, however, probably only 80% is usable. 
 TABLE 236 Contributions to carbon dioxide transport in 1 L of whole blood.  1 , 2  
Form
Plasma
Erythrocytes
Combined
Contribution (%)
 Mixed venous whole blood 
Dissolved CO 2 
0.76
0.51
1.27
5.5
Bicarbonate
14.41
5.92
20.33
87.2
Carbamino CO 2 
Negligible
1.70
1.70
7.3
Total CO 2 
15.17
8.13
23.30
 Arterial whole blood 
Dissolved CO 2 
0.66
0.44
1.10
5.1
Bicarbonate
13.42
5.88
19.30
89.9
Carbamino CO 2 
Negligible
1.10
1.10
5.1
Total CO 2 
14.08
7.42
21.50
  1  Data from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.
  2  Values are expressed in millimoles, except where indicated otherwise.
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
519
high content of histidine. Moreover, the acid–base 
behavior of hemoglobin is infl uenced by its oxy-
genation state: 
 H+ + HbO2 → HbH+ + O2 
 Removal of O 2 from hemoglobin in tissue cap-
illaries causes the hemoglobin molecule to behave 
more like a base; by taking up hydrogen ions, hemo-
globin shift s the CO 2 –bicarbonate equilibrium in 
favor of greater bicarbonate formation: 
 CO2 + H2O + HbO2 → HbH+ + HCO3
− + O2  
 As a direct result, deoxyhemoglobin also 
increases the amount of CO 2 that is carried in venous 
blood as bicarbonate. As CO 2 is taken up from tissue 
and converted to bicarbonate, the total CO 2 content 
of blood increases (see  Table 23–6 ). 
 In the lungs, the reverse is true. Oxygenation 
of hemoglobin favors its action as an acid, and the 
release of hydrogen ions shift s the equilibrium in 
favor of greater CO 2 formation: 
 O2 + HCO3
− + HbH+ → H2O + CO2 + HbO2 
 Bicarbonate concentration decreases as CO 2 is 
formed and eliminated, so that the total CO 2 content 
of blood decreases in the lungs. Note that there is a 
diff erence between CO 2 content (concentration per 
liter) of whole blood (see  Table 23–6 ) and plasma 
( Table 23–7 ). 
 Carbon Dioxide Dissociation Curve 
 A CO 2 dissociation curve can be constructed by 
plotting the total CO 2 content of blood against P co 2 . 
 Bicarbonate 
 In aqueous solutions, CO 2 slowly combines with 
water to form carbonic acid and bicarbonate, 
according to the following reaction: 
 H2O + CO2 ↔ H2CO3 ↔ H+ + HCO3
− 
 In plasma, although less than 1% of the dis-
solved CO 2 undergoes this reaction, the presence of 
the enzyme  carbonic anhydrase within erythro-
cytes and endothelium greatly accelerates the reac-
tion.  As a result, bicarbonate represents the 
largest fraction of the CO 2 in blood (see 
 Table 23–6 ). Administration of acetazolamide, a car-
bonic anhydrase inhibitor, can impair CO 2 transport 
between tissues and alveoli. 
 On the venous side of systemic capillaries, CO 2 
enters red blood cells and is converted to bicar-
bonate, which diff uses out of red cells into plasma; 
chloride ions move from plasma into red cells to 
maintain electrical balance. In the pulmonary capil-
laries, the reverse occurs: chloride ions move out of 
red cells as bicarbonate ions reenter them for con-
version back to CO 2 , which diff uses out into alve-
oli. Th is sequence is referred to as the chloride or 
Hamburger shift . 
 Carbamino Compounds 
 Carbon dioxide can react with amino groups on 
proteins, as shown by the following equation: 
 R-NH2 + CO2 → RNH − CO2
− + H+ 
 At physiological pH, only a small amount of 
CO 2 is carried in this form, mainly as carbamino-
hemoglobin. Deoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxy-
hemoglobin) has a greater affi  nity (3.5 times) for 
CO 2 than does oxyhemoglobin. As a result, venous 
blood carries more CO 2 than does arterial blood 
(Haldane eff ect; see  Table 23–6 ). P co 2 normally 
has little eff ect on the fraction of CO 2 carried as 
carbaminohemoglobin. 
 Eﬀ ects of Hemoglobin Buﬀ ering 
on Carbon Dioxide Transport 
 Th e buff ering action of hemoglobin also accounts 
for part of the Haldane eff ect. Hemoglobin can 
act as a buff er at physiological pH because of its 
15
 TABLE 237 Carbon dioxide content of 
plasma (mmol/L).  1 , 2  
Arterial
Venous
Dissolved CO 2 
1.2
1.4
Bicarbonate
24.4
26.2
Carbamino CO 2 
Negligible
Negligible
Total CO 2 
25.6
27.6
 1  Data from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 
2000.
 2  Values are expressed in millimoles, except where indicated otherwise.
520 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
capacity of the intermediate and slow compart-
ments, the rate of rise in arterial CO 2 tension is 
generally slower than its fall following acute 
changes in ventilation. 
 CONTROL OF BREATHING 
 Spontaneous ventilation is the result of rhythmic 
neural activity in respiratory centers within the 
brainstem. Th is activity regulates respiratory mus-
cles to maintain normal tensions of O 2 and CO 2 in 
the body. Th e basic neuronal activity is modifi ed by 
inputs from other areas in the brain, volitional and 
Th e contribution of each form of CO 2 can also be 
quantifi ed in this manner ( Figure 23–24 ). 
 Carbon Dioxide Stores 
 Carbon dioxide stores in the body are large 
(approximately 120 L in adults) and primarily 
in the form of dissolved CO 2 and bicarbonate. 
When an imbalance occurs between production 
and elimination, establishing a new CO 2 equi-
librium requires 20–30 min (compared with less 
than 4–5 min for O 2 ; see above). Carbon dioxide 
is stored in the rapid-, intermediate-, and slow-
equilibrating compartments. Because of the larger 
 FIGURE 2324  The CO 2 
dissociation curve for whole 
blood.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Nunn JF: Nunn’s Applied 
Physiology, 4th ed. Butterworth, 2000.) 
Carbamino CO2
in arterial blood
As dissolved CO2
PCO2 (mm Hg)
CO2 content (100 mL)
Normal arterial point
Normal mixed venous point
Carbamino CO2
in venous blood
Blood carbon dioxide content (mmo/L)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
20
40
60
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
As bicarbonate ion in
plasma and erythrocytes
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia
521
respirations are typically absent under anesthesia 
when Pa co 2 falls below the apneic threshold. (In the 
awake state, cortical infl uences prevent apnea, so 
apneic thresholds are not ordinarily seen.) In contrast 
to peripheral chemoreceptors (see below), central 
chemoreceptor activity is depressed by hypoxia. 
 3. Peripheral Sensors 
 Peripheral Chemoreceptors 
 Peripheral chemoreceptors include the carotid bod-
ies (at the bifurcation of the common carotid arter-
ies) and the aortic bodies (surrounding the aortic 
arch). Th e carotid bodies are the principal periph-
eral chemoreceptors in humans and are sensitive 
to changes in Pa o 2 , Pa co 2 , pH, and arterial perfu-
sion pressure. Th ey interact with central respiratory 
centers via the glossopharyngeal nerves, producing 
refl ex increases in alveolar ventilation in response 
to reductions in Pa o 2 , arterial perfusion, or eleva-
tions in [H + ] and Pa co 2 . Peripheral chemoreceptors 
autonomic, as well as various central and peripheral 
receptors (sensors). 
 1. Central Respiratory Centers 
 Th e basic breathing rhythm originates in the 
medulla. Two medullary groups of neurons are gen-
erally recognized: a dorsal respiratory group, which 
is primarily active during inspiration, and a ventral 
respiratory group, which is active during expiration. 
Th e close association of the dorsal respiratory group 
of neurons with the tractus solitarius may explain 
refl ex changes in breathing from vagal or glossopha-
ryngeal nerve stimulation. 
 Two pontine areas infl uence the dorsal (inspi-
ratory) medullary center. A lower pontine (apneus-
tic) center is excitatory, whereas an upper pontine 
(pneumotaxic) center is inhibitory. Th e pontine cen-
ters appear to fi ne-tune respiratory rate and rhythm. 
 2. Central Sensors 
 Th e most important of these sensors are chemore-
ceptors that respond to changes in hydrogen ion 
concentration.  Central chemoreceptors are 
thought to lie on the anterolateral surface of 
the medulla and respond primarily to changes in 
cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) [H + ]. Th is mechanism is 
eff ective in regulating Pa co 2 , because the blood–
brain barrier is permeable to dissolved CO 2 , but not 
to bicarbonate ions. Acute changes in Pa co 2 , but not 
in arterial [HCO 3 – ], are refl ected in CSF; thus, a 
change in CO 2 must result in a change in [H + ]: 
 CO2 + H2O ↔ H+ + HCO3
− 
 Over the course of a few days, CSF [HCO 3 – ] can 
compensate to match any change in arterial [HCO 3 – ]. 
 Increases in Pa co 2 elevate CSF hydrogen ion 
concentration and activate the chemoreceptors. 
Secondary stimulation of the adjacent respiratory 
medullary centers increases alveolar ventilation 
( Figure 23–25 ) and reduces Pa co 2 back to normal. 
Conversely, decreases in CSF hydrogen ion con-
centration secondary to reductions in Pa co 2 reduce 
alveolar ventilation and elevate Pa co 2 . Note that the 
relationship between Pa co 2 and minute volume is 
nearly linear. Also note that very high arterial Pa co 2
tensions depress the ventilatory response (CO 2 nar-
cosis). Th e Pa co 2 at which ventilation is zero ( x -inter-
cept) is known as the apneic threshold. Spontaneous 
16
 
Normal
Alveolar ventilation (basal rate = 1)
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
PaCO2 (mm Hg)
 
 FIGURE 2325  The normal relationship between Pa CO 2 
and minute ventilation.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Guyton 
AC:  Textbook of Medical Physiology , 7th ed. W.B. Saunders, 1986.) 
522 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
normally play a minor role in humans. In fact, bilat-
eral vagal nerve blocks have a minimal eff ect on the 
normal respiratory pattern. 
 Irritant receptors in the tracheobronchial 
mucosa react to noxious gases, smoke, dust, and 
cold gases; activation produces refl ex increases in 
respiratory rate, bronchoconstriction, and coughing. 
J (juxta-capillary) receptors are located in the inter-
stitial space within alveolar walls; these receptors 
induce dyspnea in response to expansion of inter-
stitial space volume and various chemical mediators 
following tissue damage. 
 Other Receptors 
 Th ese include various muscle and joint receptors on 
pulmonary muscles and the chest wall. Input from 
these sources is probably important during exer-
cise and in pathological conditions associated with 
decreased lung or chest compliance. 
 4. Eﬀ ects of Anesthesia 
on the Control of Breathing 
 Th e most important eff ect of most general anesthet-
ics on breathing is a tendency to promote hypoven-
tilation. Th e mechanism is probably dual: central 
depression of the chemoreceptor and depression of 
external intercostal muscle activity. Th e magnitude 
of the hypoventilation is generally proportional to 
anesthetic depth.  With increasing depth of 
anesthesia, the slope of the Pa co 2 /minute ven-
tilation curve decreases, and the apneic threshold 
increases ( Figure 23–27 ). Th is eff ect is at least par-
tially reversed by surgical stimulation. 
 Th e peripheral response to hypoxemia is even 
more sensitive to anesthetics than the central CO 2 
response and is nearly abolished by even subanes-
thetic doses of most inhalation agents (including 
nitrous oxide) and many intravenous agents. 
 NONRESPIRATORY 
FUNCTIONS OF THE LUNG 
 Filtration & Reservoir Function 
 A. Filtration 
 Th e unique in-series position of the pulmonary 
capillaries within the circulation allows them to act 
17
are also stimulated by cyanide, doxapram, and large 
doses of nicotine. In contrast to central chemore-
ceptors, which respond primarily to Pa co 2 (really 
[H + ]), the carotid bodies are most sensitive to Pa o 2 
( Figure 23–26 ). Note that receptor activity does 
not appreciably increase until Pao 2 decreases below 
50 mm Hg. Cells of the carotid body (glomus cells) 
are thought to be primarily dopaminergic neurons. 
Anti-dopaminergic drugs (such as phenothiazines), 
most commonly used anesthetics, and bilateral 
carotid surgery abolish the peripheral ventilatory 
response to hypoxemia. 
 Lung Receptors 
 Impulses from these receptors are carried centrally 
by the vagus nerve. Stretch receptors are distributed 
in the smooth muscle of airways; they are respon-
sible for inhibition of inspiration when the lung is 
infl ated to excessive volumes (Hering–Breuer infl a-
tion refl ex) and shortening of exhalation when the 
lung is defl ated (defl ation refl ex). Stretch receptors 
 
Pulmonary ventilation (L/min)
0
0
30
60
90
120
600
10
20
30
40
Arterial PO2(mm Hg)
Horizontal asymptote (ventilation at high PO2)
Vertical asymptote (PO2 for infinite ventilation)
 
 FIGURE 2326  The relationship between PaO 2 and 
minute ventilation at rest and with a normal Pa CO 2 .  (Data 
from Weil JV, Byrne-Quinn E, Sodal IE, et al: Hypoxic ventilatory drive 
in normal man. J Clin Invest 1970;49:1061-1072; Dripps RD, Comroe 
JH: The eﬀ ect of the inhalation of high and low oxygen concentration 
on respiration, pulse rate, ballistocardiogram and arterial oxygen 
saturation (oximeter) of normal individuals. Am J Physiol 1947;149:
277-291; Cormac RS, Cunningham DJC, Gee JBL: The eﬀ ect of carbon 
dioxide on the respiratory response to want of oxygen in man. Q J Exp 
Physiol 1957;42:303-316.) 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
523 
 Th e lungs are also responsible for convert-
ing angiotensin I to its physiologically active form, 
angiotensin II. Th e enzyme responsible, angioten-
sin-converting enzyme, is bound on the surface of 
the pulmonary endothelium. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Unilaterally Diminished Breath Sounds 
During General Anesthesia 
 A 67-year-old man with carcinoma is undergo-
ing colon resection under general anesthesia. 
His history includes an old anterior myocardial 
infarction and compensated congestive heart 
failure. Arterial and central venous catheters 
are placed preoperatively for monitoring during 
surgery. Following a smooth induction and an 
atraumatic intubation, anesthesia is maintained 
with 60% nitrous oxide in O  2  ,  sevoﬂ urane, and 
vecuronium. One-half hour into the operation, 
the surgeon asks for the Trendelenburg posi-
tion to facilitate surgical exposure. The pulse 
as a fi lter for debris in the bloodstream. Th e lungs’ 
high content of heparin and plasminogen activator 
facilitates the breakdown of entrapped fi brin debris. 
Although pulmonary capillaries have an average 
diameter of 7 µm, larger particles have been shown 
to pass through to the left  heart. 
 B. Reservoir Function 
 Th e role of the pulmonary circulation as a reservoir 
for the systemic circulation was discussed above. 
 Metabolism 
 Th e lungs are metabolically very active organs. 
In addition to surfactant synthesis, pneumocytes 
account for a major portion of extrahepatic mixed-
function oxidation. Neutrophils and macrophages in 
the lung produce O 2 -derived free radicals in response 
to infection. Th e pulmonary endothelium metabo-
lizes a variety of vasoactive compounds, including 
norepinephrine, serotonin, bradykinin, and a variety 
of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Histamine and 
epinephrine are generally not metabolized in the 
lungs; in fact the lungs can be a major site of hista-
mine synthesis and release during allergic reactions. 
 
Conscious
control
Halothane
(end-expiratory)
0.81%
1.11%
1.48%
1.88%
End-expiratory PCO2 (mm Hg)
20
0
10
20
30
40
60
80
100
Pulmonary minute volume (L/min)
  
 FIGURE 2327  The eﬀ ect of volatile agents (halothane) on the P ETCO 2 –ventilation response curve (see text).  Data 
from Munson ES, Larson CP, Babad AA, et al: The eﬀ ects of halothane, ﬂ uroxene and cyclopropane on ventilation: a comparative study in man. 
Anesthesiology 1966;27:716-728. 
524 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Venous admixture increases and tends to depress 
Pa O  2   and hemoglobin saturation . 
 Does a saturation of 93% exclude bronchial 
intubation? 
 No; if both lungs continued to have equal blood 
ﬂ ow, venous admixture should have theoretically 
increased to 50%, resulting in severe hypoxemia 
and very low hemoglobin saturation. Fortunately, 
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is a powerful 
compensatory response that tends to reduce ﬂ ow to 
the hypoxic lung and reduces the expected venous 
admixture. In fact, if the patient has been receiving 
a higher inspired O  2   concentration (50% to 100%), 
the drop in arterial tension may not be detectable 
by the pulse oximeter due to the characteristics 
of the normal hemoglobin saturation curve. For 
example, bronchial intubation in a patient inspiring 
50% O  2   might drop P AO  2   from 250 mm Hg to 95 mm 
Hg; the resulting change in pulse oximeter readings 
(100–99 to 98–97) would hardly be noticeable . 
 Arterial and mixed venous blood gas ten-
sions are obtained with the following results: 
 PaO2 = 69 mm Hg; PaCO2 = 42 mm Hg; SaO2 = 93%; 
PvO2 = 40 mm Hg; and SvO2 = 75%. Hemoglobin 
concentration is 15 g/dL. 
 What is the calculated venous admixture? 
 In this case, Pc′ O 2 = P AO 2 = ([760 – 47] × 0.4) – 
42 = 243 mm Hg. Therefore, Cc′ O 2 = (15 × 1.31 × 1.0) + 
(243 × 0.003) = 20.4 mL/dL . 
 Ca O 2 = (15 × 1.31 × 0.93) + (69 × 0.003) = 
18.5 mL/dL 
CvO2 = (15 × 1.31 × 0.75) + (40 × 0.003) = 14.8 
mL/dL
QS/QT
•
• = (20.4 − 18.5)/(20.4 − 14.8) = 34% 
 How does bronchial intubation aﬀ ect arterial 
and end-tidal CO 2 tensions? 
 Pa CO 2 is typically not appreciably altered as 
long as the same minute ventilation is maintained 
(see One-Lung Anesthesia,  Chapter 25 ). Clinically, 
the Pa CO 2 –P ETCO 2 gradient often widens, possibly 
because of increased alveolar dead space (over-
distension of the ventilated lung). Thus, P ETCO 2 may 
decrease or remain unchanged. 
oximeter, which had been reading 99% satura-
tion, suddenly drops and remains at 93%. The 
pulse oximeter’s signal strength and waveform 
are unchanged. Auscultation of the lungs reveals 
diminished breath sounds over the left lung . 
 What is the most likely explanation? 
 Unilaterally diminished breath sounds under 
anesthesia are most commonly caused by acci-
dental placement or migration of the tracheal tube 
into one of the two main bronchi. As a result, only 
one lung is ventilated. Other causes of unilaterally 
diminished breath sounds (such as pneumotho-
rax, a large mucus plug, lobar atelectasis, or undi-
agnosed bullae) are less easily diagnosed, but are 
 fortunately less common during anesthesia . 
 The Trendelenburg (head-down) position typi-
cally causes the tip of the tracheal tube to advance 
1–2 cm relative to the carina. In this case, the tube 
was apparently placed just above the carina with 
the patient in the supine position, but migrated 
into the right bronchus when the Trendelenburg 
position was imposed. The diagnosis is conﬁ rmed 
by drawing the tube back 1–2 cm at a time as the 
chest is auscultated. Breath sounds will become 
equal again when the tip of the tube reenters the 
trachea. Following initial placement, tracheal tubes 
should be routinely checked for correct position-
ing by auscultating the chest, ascertaining depth 
of tube insertion by the markings on the tube 
(normally 20–24 cm at the teeth for an adult), and 
feeling for the cuﬀ  in the suprasternal notch. Tube 
position relative to the carina can also be quickly 
conﬁ rmed with a ﬂ exible ﬁ beroptic bronchoscope . 
 Are tracheal tubes just as likely to enter either 
main bronchus? 
 In most cases of unintentional bronchial intu-
bation, the tracheal tube enters the right bron-
chus because the latter diverges away from the 
trachea at a less acute angle than does the left 
bronchus . 
 Why did hemoglobin saturation decrease? 
 Failure to ventilate one lung as it continues to 
be perfused creates a large intrapulmonary shunt. 
 
CHAPTER 23 Respiratory Physiology & Anesthesia 
525 
 Lohser J: Evidence based management of one lung 
ventilation. Anesthesiol Clin 2008;26:241. 
 Minnich D, Mathisen D: Anatomy of the trachea, carina, 
and bronchi. Th orac Surg Clin 2007;17:571. 
 Warner DO: Diaphragm function during anesthesia: 
Still crazy aft er all these years. Anesthesiology 
2002;97:295. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Bruells C, Rossaint R: Physiology of gas exchange 
during anesthesia. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2011;29:570. 
 Campos J: Update on tracheobronchial anatomy 
and fl exible fi beroptic bronchoscopy in 
thoracic anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 
2009;22:4. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 527
24
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Respiratory Disease 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 In a patient with an acute asthma attack, 
a normal or high Pa CO 2  indicates that the 
patient can no longer maintain the work of 
breathing and is often a sign of impending 
respiratory failure. A pulsus paradoxus 
and electrocardiographic signs of right 
ventricular strain (ST-segment changes, 
right axis deviation, and right bundle branch 
block) are also indicative of severe airway 
obstruction . 
 Asthmatic patients with active bronchospasm 
presenting for emergency surgery should be 
treated aggressively. Supplemental oxygen, 
aerosolized β 2 -agonists, and intravenous 
glucocorticoids can dramatically improve 
lung function in a few hours . 
 Intraoperative bronchospasm is usually 
manifested as wheezing, increasing peak 
airway pressures (plateau pressure may 
remain unchanged), decreasing exhaled tidal 
volumes, or a slowly rising waveform on the 
capnograph . 
 Other causes, such as obstruction of the 
tracheal tube from kinking, secretions, or an 
overinﬂ ated balloon; bronchial intubation; 
active expiratory eﬀ orts (straining); 
pulmonary edema or embolism; and 
pneumothorax, can simulate bronchospasm . 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) is currently deﬁ ned as a disease 
state characterized by airﬂ ow limitation that 
is not fully reversible .  The chronic airﬂ ow 
1
2
3
4
5
limitation of this disease is due to a mixture 
of small and large airway disease (chronic 
bronchitis/bronchiolitis) and parenchymal 
destruction (emphysema), with the 
representation of these two components 
varying from patient to patient . 
 Cessation of smoking is the long-term 
intervention that has been shown to reduce 
the rate of decline in lung function . 
 Preoperative interventions in patients with 
COPD aimed at correcting hypoxemia, 
relieving bronchospasm, mobilizing 
and reducing secretions, and treating 
infections may decrease the incidence of 
postoperative pulmonary complications. 
Patients at greatest risk of complications are 
those with preoperative pulmonary function 
measurements less than 50% of predicted . 
 Restrictive pulmonary diseases are 
characterized by decreased lung 
compliance. Lung volumes are typically 
reduced, with preservation of normal 
expiratory ﬂ ow rates. Thus, both forced 
expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV 1 ) and forced 
vital capacity (FVC) are reduced, but the 
FEV 1 /FVC ratio is normal . 
 Intraoperative pulmonary embolism usually 
presents as unexplained cardiovascular 
collapse, hypoxemia, or bronchospasm. 
A decrease in end-tidal CO 2  concentration 
is also suggestive of pulmonary embolism, 
but is not speciﬁ c . 
6
7
8
9
528 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
ventilatory defect (see below). Upper abdominal 
procedures consistently decrease FRC (60% to 70%); 
the eff ect is maximal on the fi rst postoperative day 
and usually lasts 7–10 days. Rapid shallow breathing 
with an ineff ective cough caused by pain (splinting), 
a decrease in the number of sighs, and impaired 
mucociliary clearance lead to microatelectasis and 
loss of lung volume. Intrapulmonary shunting pro-
motes hypoxemia. Residual anesthetic eff ects, the 
recumbent position, sedation from opioids, abdomi-
nal distention, and restrictive dressings may also be 
contributory. Complete relief of pain with regional 
 Th e impact of preexisting pulmonary disease on 
respiratory function during anesthesia and in the 
postoperative period is predictable: Greater degrees 
of preoperative pulmonary impairment are associ-
ated with more marked intraoperative alterations 
in respiratory function and higher rates of postop-
erative pulmonary complications. Failure to recog-
nize patients who are at increased risk is a frequent 
contributory factor leading to complications, as pa-
tients may not receive appropriate preoperative and 
intraoperative care. Th is chapter examines pulmo-
nary risk in general and then reviews the anesthetic 
 approach in patients with the most common types of 
respiratory disease. 
 PULMONARY RISK FACTORS 
 Certain risk factors ( Table 24–1 ) may predispose 
patients to postoperative pulmonary complica-
tions . Th e incidence of atelectasis, pneumonia, 
pulmonary embolism, and respiratory failure fol-
lowing surgery is quite high, but varies widely (from 
6% to 60%), depending on the patient population 
studied and the surgical procedures performed. Th e 
two strongest predictors of complications seem to 
be operative site and a history of dyspnea, which 
correlate with the degree of preexisting pulmonary 
disease. 
 Th e association between smoking and respi-
ratory disease is well established; abnormalities 
in maximal midexpiratory fl ow (MMEF) rates are 
oft en demonstrable well before symptoms of COPD 
appear. Although abnormalities can be demon-
strated on pulmonary function tests (PFTs), because 
most patients who smoke do not have PFTs per-
formed preoperatively, it is best to assume that such 
patients have some degree of pulmonary compro-
mise. Even in normal individuals, advancing age 
is associated with an increasing prevalence of pul-
monary disease and an increase in closing capac-
ity. Obesity decreases functional residual capacity 
(FRC), increases the work of breathing, and predis-
poses patients to deep venous thrombosis. 
 Th oracic and upper abdominal surgical proce-
dures can have marked eff ects on pulmonary func-
tion. Operations near the diaphragm oft en result 
in diaphragmatic dysfunction and a restrictive 
 TABLE 241 Risk factors for postoperative 
pulmonary complications. 
Patient-related Factors  1  
Procedure-related Factors  1  
Supported by good evidence
 Advanced age
 ASA class ≥2 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Functional dependency 
 Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease 
 Aortic aneurysm repair 
 Thoracic surgery 
 Abdominal surgery 
 Upper abdominal surgery 
 Neurosurgery 
 Prolonged surgery 
 Head and neck surgery 
 Emergency surgery 
 Vascular surgery 
 Use of general anesthesia 
Supported by fair evidence
 Weight loss 
 Impaired sensorium 
 Cigarette use 
 Alcohol use 
 Abnormal chest exam 
 Perioperative transfusion 
Good evidence against being a risk factor
 Well-controlled asthma 
 Obesity 
 Hip surgery 
 Genitourinary/gynecologic 
surgery 
Insufficient data
 Obstructive sleep apnea  2  
 Poor exercise capacity 
 Esophageal surgery 
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.
  1  Within each evidence category, risk factors are listed according to 
strength of evidence, with the ﬁ rst factor listed having the strongest 
evidence.
  2  Subsequent evidence indicates that this is a probable risk factor.
Data from Smetana GW, Lawrence VA, Cornell JE, et al: Preoperative 
pulmonary risk stratiﬁ cation for noncardiothoracic surgery: systematic 
review for the American College of Physicians, Ann Intern Med 
2006;144(8):581-595.
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
529 
has no risk factors. Patients with known disease 
should have their pulmonary function optimized 
preoperatively, with careful consideration given to 
the choice of general versus regional anesthesia. 
 Th e American College of Physicians has estab-
lished guidelines to assist in the preoperative assess-
ment of patients with pulmonary disease (see 
 Table 24–2 ). 
 When patients with a history of dyspnea present 
without the benefi t of a previous workup, the diff er-
ential diagnosis can be quite broad and may include 
both primary pulmonary and cardiac pathologies. 
Diagnostic approaches to evaluating such patients 
are summarized in  Figure 24–1 . 
 TABLE 242 Recommendations of the American College of Physicians to reduce perioperative 
pulmonary complications in patients undergoing noncardiothoracic surgery. 
 Recommendation 1: 
•  All patients undergoing noncardiothoracic surgery should be evaluated for the presence of the following significant risk 
factors for postoperative pulmonary complications in order to receive pre- and postoperative interventions to reduce 
pulmonary risk: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, age older than 60 years, American Society of Anesthesiologists class 
of II or greater, functionally dependent, and congestive heart failure. 
•  The following are not significant risk factors for postoperative pulmonary complications: obesity and mild or moderate asthma. 
 Recommendation 2: 
•  Patients undergoing the following procedures are at higher risk for postoperative pulmonary complications and should be 
evaluated for other concomitant risk factors and receive pre- and postoperative interventions to reduce pulmonary 
complications: prolonged surgery (>3 hours), abdominal surgery, thoracic surgery, neurosurgery, head and neck surgery, 
vascular surgery, aortic aneurysm repair, emergency surgery, and general anesthesia. 
 Recommendation 3: 
•  A low serum albumin level (<35 g/L) is a powerful marker of increased risk for postoperative pulmonary complications and 
should be measured in all patients who are clinically suspected of having hypoalbuminemia; measurement should be 
considered in patients with one or more risk factors for perioperative pulmonary complications. 
 Recommendation 4: 
•  All patients who after preoperative evaluation are found to be at higher risk for postoperative pulmonary complications 
should receive the following postoperative procedures in order to reduce postoperative pulmonary complications: deep 
breathing exercises or incentive spirometry and the selective use of a nasogastric tube (as needed for postoperative nausea 
or vomiting, inability to tolerate oral intake, or symptomatic abdominal distention). 
 Recommendation 5: 
•  Preoperative spirometry and chest radiography should not be used routinely for predicting risk for postoperative pulmonary 
complications. 
•  Preoperative pulmonary function testing or chest radiography may be appropriate in patients with a previous diagnosis of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma. 
 Recommendation 6: 
•  The following procedures should not be used solely for reducing postoperative pulmonary complication risk: right heart 
catheterization and total parenteral nutrition or total enteral nutrition (for patients who are malnourished or have low serum 
albumin levels). 
Data from Qaseem A, Snow V, Fitterman N, et al: Risk assessment for and strategies to reduce perioperative pulmonary complication for patients 
undergoing noncardiothoracic surgery: a guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:576.
anesthesia can decrease, but does not completely 
reverse these abnormalities. Persistent microatelec-
tasis and retention of secretions favor the develop-
ment of postoperative pneumonia. 
 Although many adverse eff ects of general anes-
thesia on pulmonary function have been described, 
the superiority of regional over general anesthesia in 
patients with pulmonary impairment is not fi rmly 
established. 
 Because of the prevalence of smoking and obe-
sity, many patients may be at increased risk of devel-
oping postoperative pulmonary dysfunction. Th e 
risk of complications increases if the patient is hav-
ing a thoracotomy or laparotomy, even if the patient 
530 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
of expiratory airfl ow resistance results in air trap-
ping; residual volume and total lung capacity (TLC) 
increase. Wheezing is a common fi nding and repre-
sents turbulent airfl ow. It is oft en absent with mild 
obstruction that may be manifested initially only by 
prolonged exhalation. Progressive obstruction typi-
cally results fi rst in expiratory wheezing only, and 
then in both inspiratory and expiratory wheezing. 
With marked obstruction, wheezing may be absent 
when airfl ow has nearly ceased. 
 ASTHMA 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Asthma is a common disorder, aff ecting 5% to 7% of 
the population. Its primary characteristic is airway 
(bronchiolar) infl ammation and hyperreactivity in 
response to a variety of stimuli. Clinically, asthma 
is manifested by episodic attacks of dyspnea, cough, 
and wheezing. Airway obstruction, which is gener-
ally reversible, is the result of bronchial smooth mus-
cle constriction, edema, and increased secretions. 
 Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease 
 Obstructive and restrictive breathing are the two 
most common abnormal patterns, as determined by 
PFTs. Obstructive lung diseases are the most com-
mon form of pulmonary dysfunction. Th ey include 
asthma, emphysema, chronic bronchitis, cystic 
fi brosis, bronchiectasis, and bronchiolitis. Th e pri-
mary characteristic of these disorders is resistance 
to airfl ow. An MMEF of <70% (forced expiratory 
fl ow [FEF 25–75% ]) is oft en the only abnormality early 
in the course of these disorders. Values for FEF 25–75% 
in adult males and females are normally >2.0 and 
>1.6 L/sec, respectively. As the disease progresses, 
both forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV 1 ) and 
the FEV 1 /FVC (forced vital capacity) ratio are less 
than 70% of the predicted values. 
 Elevated airway resistance and air trap-
ping increase the work of breathing; respiratory 
gas exchange is impaired because of ventilation/ 
perfusion  (V/Q)
·
· imbalance. Th e predominance 
 FIGURE 241  Evaluation of 
dyspnea. ABGs, arterial blood gases; 
BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; BUN, 
blood urea nitrogen; COPD, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease; 
CT, computed tomography; PFTs, 
pulmonary function tests.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Sweitzer BJ, Smetana 
GW: Identiﬁ cation and evaluation of the 
patient with lung disease. Anesthesiol 
Clin 2009;27:673.) 
1. Myocardial 
ischemia 
(anginal 
equivalent)
2. Heart failure
3. Valvular disease
4. Pericardial 
disease 
(tamponade, 
constrictive 
pericarditis)
1. Anemia 
2. Deconditioning
3. Renal failure 
4. Neuromuscular 
disease 
5. Hypothyroidism
1. Complete blood 
count
2. BUN, creatinine
3. Electrolytes
4. Thyroid function 
tests
1. Electrocardiogram
2. Chest radiograph
3. Stress testing
4. Echocardiography
5. BNP
Cardiac
Other
1. COPD
2. Asthma
3. Pneumonia
4. Pulmonary 
fibrosis
5. Lung injury
6. Pulmonary 
embolism
7. Pulmonary 
hypertension
8. Restrictive lung 
disease
9. Pleural disease
1. Chest radiograph
2. ABGs
3. PFTs
4. Chest CT
Pulmonary
History and physical
examination
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
531
to gas fl ow at all levels of the lower airways. As an 
attack resolves, airway resistance normalizes fi rst in 
the larger airways (main-stem, lobar, segmental, 
and subsegmental bronchi), and then in more 
peripheral airways. Consequently, expiratory fl ow 
rates are initially decreased throughout an entire 
forced exhalation, but during resolution of the 
attack, the expiratory fl ow rate is reduced only at 
low lung volumes. TLC, residual volume (RV), and 
FRC are all increased. In acutely ill patients, RV and 
FRC are oft en increased by more than 400% and 
100%, respectively. Prolonged or severe attacks 
markedly increase the work of breathing and can 
fatigue respiratory muscles. Th e number of alveolar 
units with low  (V/Q)
·
· ratios increases, resulting in 
hypoxemia. Tachypnea is likely due to stimulation 
of bronchial receptors and typically produces hypo-
capnia.  A normal or high Pa co 2 indicates that 
the patient can no longer maintain the work of 
breathing and is oft en a sign of impending respira-
tory failure. A pulsus paradoxus and electrocardio-
graphic signs of right ventricular strain (ST-segment 
changes, right axis deviation, and right bundle 
branch block) are also indicative of severe airway 
obstruction. 
 B. Treatment 
 Drugs used to treat asthma include β-adrenergic 
agonists, methylxanthines, glucocorticoids, anti-
cholinergics, leukotriene blockers, and mast cell- 
stabilizing agents; with the exception of the last, 
these drugs may be used for either acute or chronic 
treatment of asthma. Although devoid of any bron-
chodilating properties, cromolyn sodium and nedo-
cromil are eff ective in preventing bronchospasm by 
blocking the degranulation of mast cells. 
 Sympathomimetic agents ( Table 24–3 ) are 
the most commonly used for acute exacerbations. 
Th ey produce bronchodilation via β2 -agonist activ-
ity. Activation of β2 -adrenergic receptors on bron-
chiolar smooth muscle stimulates the activity of 
adenylate cyclase, which results in the formation 
of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP). Th ese agents are usually administered via 
a metered-dose inhaler or by aerosol. Use of more 
selective β2 -agonists, such as terbutaline or alb-
uterol, may decrease the incidence of undesirable β1
1
Classically, the obstruction is precipitated by a vari-
ety of airborne substances, including pollens, animal 
dander, dusts, pollutants, and various chemicals. 
Some patients also develop bronchospasm follow-
ing ingestion of aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinfl am-
matory agents, sulfi tes, or tartrazine and other dyes. 
Exercise, emotional excitement, and viral infections 
also precipitate bronchospasm in many patients. 
Asthma is classifi ed as acute or chronic. Chronic 
asthma is further classifi ed as intermittent (mild) 
and mild, moderate, and severe persistent disease. 
 Th e terms extrinsic (allergic) asthma (attacks 
related to environmental exposures) and intrinsic 
(idiosyncratic) asthma (attacks usually occurring 
without provocation) were used in the past, but 
these classifi cations were imperfect; many patients 
show features of both forms. Moreover, overlap with 
chronic bronchitis (see below) is common. 
 A. Pathophysiology 
 Th e pathophysiology of asthma involves the local 
release of various chemical mediators in the airway, 
and, possibly, overactivity of the parasympathetic 
nervous system. Inhaled substances can initiate 
bronchospasm through both specifi c and nonspecifi c 
immune mechanisms by degranulating bronchial 
mast cells. In classic allergic asthma, antigen binding 
to immunoglobulin E (IgE) on the surface of mast 
cells causes degranulation. Bronchoconstriction is 
the result of the subsequent release of histamine; bra-
dykinin; leukotrienes C, D, and E; platelet- activating 
factor; prostaglandins (PG) PGE 2 , PGF 2 α, and 
PGD 2 ; and neutrophil and eosinophil chemotactic 
factors. Th e parasympathetic nervous system plays 
a major role in maintaining normal bronchial tone; 
a normal diurnal variation in tone is recognized in 
most individuals, with peak airway resistance occur-
ring early in the morning (at about 6:00  am ).  Vagal 
aff erents in the bronchi are sensitive to histamine 
and multiple noxious stimuli, including cold air, 
inhaled irritants, and instrumentation (eg, tra-
cheal intubation) . Refl ex vagal activation results 
in bronchoconstriction, which is mediated by an 
increase in intracellular cyclic guanosine mono-
phosphate (cGMP). 
 During an asthma attack, bronchoconstriction, 
mucosal edema, and secretions increase resistance 
532 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
systemic eff ects, their use does not necessarily pre-
vent adrenal suppression. Intravenous hydrocor-
tisone or methylprednisolone is used acutely for 
severe attacks, followed by tapering doses of oral 
prednisone. Glucocorticoids usually require several 
hours to become eff ective. 
 Anticholinergic agents produce bronchodila-
tion through their antimuscarinic action and may 
block refl ex bronchoconstriction. Ipratropium, a 
congener of atropine that can be given by a metered-
dose inhaler or aerosol, is a moderately eff ective 
bronchodilator without appreciable systemic anti-
cholinergic eff ects. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative Management 
 Th e emphasis in evaluating patients with asthma 
should be on determining the recent course of the 
disease and whether the patient has ever been hospi-
talized for an acute asthma attack, as well as on 
ascertaining that the patient is in optimal condition. 
Patients with poorly controlled asthma or wheezing 
at the time of anesthesia induction have a higher risk 
of perioperative complications. Conversely, well-
controlled asthma has not been shown to be a risk 
factor for intraoperative or postoperative complica-
tions. A thorough history and physical examination 
are of critical importance. Th e patient should have 
no or minimal dyspnea, wheezing, or cough. Com-
plete resolution of recent exacerbations should be 
confi rmed by chest auscultation. Patients with fre-
quent or chronic bronchospasm should be placed on 
an optimal bronchodilating regimen. A chest radio-
graph identifi es air trapping; hyperinfl ation results 
in a fl attened diaphragm, a small-appearing heart, 
and hyperlucent lung fi elds. PFTs—particularly 
expiratory airfl ow measurements such as FEV 1 , 
FEV 1 /FVC, FEF 25-75% , and peak expiratory fl ow 
rate—help in assessing the severity of airway 
obstruction and reversibility aft er bronchodilator 
treatment. Comparisons with previous measure-
ments are invaluable. 
 Asthmatic patients with active bronchospasm 
presenting for emergency surgery should be 
treated aggressively. Supplemental oxygen, aerosol-
ized β 2 -agonists, and intravenous glucocorticoids 
2
cardiac eff ects, but are oft en not particularly selec-
tive in high doses. 
 Traditionally, methylxanthines are thought to 
produce bronchodilation by inhibiting phosphodi-
esterase, the enzyme responsible for the breakdown 
of cAMP. Th eir pulmonary eff ects seem much more 
complex and include catecholamine release, block-
ade of histamine release, and diaphragmatic stimu-
lation. Oral long-acting theophylline preparations 
are used for patients with nocturnal symptoms. 
Unfortunately, theophylline has a narrow therapeu-
tic range; therapeutic blood levels are considered to 
be 10–20 mcg/mL. Lower levels, however, may be 
eff ective. Aminophylline is the only available intra-
venous theophylline preparation. 
 Glucocorticoids are used for both acute treat-
ment and maintenance therapy of patients with 
asthma because of their antiinfl ammatory and 
membrane-stabilizing eff ects. Beclomethasone, tri-
amcinolone, fl uticasone, and budesonide are syn-
thetic steroids commonly used in metered-dose 
inhalers for maintenance therapy. Although they 
are associated with a low incidence of undesirable 
 TABLE 243 A comparison of commonly 
used bronchodilators.  1  
Agent
Adrenergic Activity
β 1 
β 2 
Albuterol (Ventolin)
+
+++
Bitolterol (Tornalate)
+
++++
Epinephrine
++++
++
Fenoterol (Berotec)
+
+++
Formaterol (Foradil)
+
++++
Isoetharine (Bronkosol)
++
+++
Isoproterenol (Isuprel)
++++
—
Metaproterenol (Alupent)
+
+
Pirbuterol (Maxair)
+
++++
Salmeterol (Serevent)
+
++++
Terbutaline (Brethaire)
+
+++
  1  + Indicates level of activity.
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
533 
release (eg, atracurium, morphine, and meperidine) 
should be avoided or given very slowly when used. 
Th e goal of any general anesthetic is a smooth induc-
tion and emergence, with anesthetic depth adjusted 
to stimulation. 
 Th e choice of induction agent is less important, 
if adequate depth of anesthesia is achieved before 
intubation or surgical stimulation. Th iopental may 
occasionally induce bronchospasm as a result of 
exaggerated histamine release. Propofol and etomi-
date are suitable induction agents; propofol may 
also produce bronchodilation. Ketamine has bron-
chodilating properties and is a good choice for 
patients with asthma who are also hemodynamically 
unstable. Ketamine should probably not be used in 
patients with high theophylline levels, as the com-
bined actions of the two drugs can precipitate seizure 
activity. Halothane and sevofl urane usually provide 
the smoothest inhalation induction with bronchodi-
lation in asthmatic children. Isofl urane and desfl u-
rane can provide equal bronchodilation, but are not 
normally used for inhalation induction. Desfl urane 
is the most pungent of the volatile agents and may 
result in cough, laryngospasm, and bronchospasm. 
 Refl ex bronchospasm can be blunted before 
intubation by an additional dose of the induction 
agent, ventilating the patient with a 2–3 minimum 
alveolar concentration (MAC) of a volatile agent 
for 5 min, or administering intravenous or intra-
tracheal lidocaine (1–2 mg/kg). Note that intra-
tracheal lidocaine itself can initiate bronchospasm 
if an inadequate dose of induction agent has been 
used. Administration of an anticholinergic agent 
may block refl ex bronchospasm, but causes exces-
sive tachycardia. Although succinylcholine may on 
occasion induce marked histamine release, it can 
generally be safely used in most asthmatic patients. 
In the absence of capnography, confi rmation of cor-
rect tracheal placement by chest auscultation can be 
diffi  cult in the presence of marked bronchospasm. 
 Volatile anesthetics are most oft en used for 
maintenance of anesthesia to take advantage of 
their potent bronchodilating properties. Ventilation 
should incorporate warmed humidifi ed gases 
whenever possible. Airfl ow obstruction during 
expiration is apparent on capnography as a delayed 
rise of the end-tidal CO 2 value ( Figure 24–2 ); the 
can dramatically improve lung function in a few 
hours. Arterial blood gases may be useful in man-
aging severe cases. Hypoxemia and hypercapnia are 
typical of moderate and severe disease; even slight 
hypercapnia is indicative of severe air trapping and 
may be a sign of impending respiratory failure. 
 Some degree of preoperative sedation may be 
desirable in asthmatic patients presenting for elec-
tive  surgery—particularly in patients whose disease 
has an emotional component. In general, benzodiaz-
epines are the most satisfactory agents for premedi-
cation. Anticholinergic agents are not customarily 
given unless very copious secretions are present or 
if ketamine is to be used for induction of anesthesia. 
In typical intramuscular doses, anticholinergics are 
not eff ective in preventing refl ex bronchospasm fol-
lowing intubation. Th e use of an H 2- blocking agent 
(such as cimetidine, ranitidine, or famotidine) is the-
oretically detrimental, since H 2 -receptor activation 
normally produces bronchodilation; in the event of 
histamine release, unopposed H 1 activation with H 2 
blockade may accentuate bronchoconstriction. 
 Bronchodilators should be continued up to 
the time of surgery; in order of eff ectiveness, they 
are β-agonists, inhaled glucocorticoids, leukotri-
ene blockers, mast-cell stabilizers, theophyllines, 
and anticholinergics. Patients who receive chronic 
glucocorticoid therapy with more than 5 mg/day 
of prednisone (or its equivalent) should receive a 
graduated supplementation schedule based on the 
severity of the illness and complexity of the surgical 
procedure. Supplemental doses should be tapered to 
baseline within 1–2 days. 
 B. Intraoperative Management 
 Th e most critical time for asthmatic patients under-
going anesthesia is during instrumentation of the 
airway. General anesthesia by mask or regional 
anesthesia will circumvent this problem, but nei-
ther eliminates the possibility of bronchospasm. In 
fact, some clinicians believe that high spinal or epi-
dural anesthesia may aggravate bronchoconstriction 
by blocking sympathetic tone to the lower airways 
(T1–T4) and allowing unopposed parasympathetic 
activity. Pain, emotional stress, or stimulation dur-
ing light general anesthesia can precipitate bron-
chospasm. Drugs oft en associated with histamine 
534 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents 
with anticholinesterase agents does not precipitate 
bronchoconstriction, if preceded by the appropri-
ate dose of an anticholinergic agent. Deep extu-
bation (before airway refl exes return) reduces 
bronchospasm on emergence. Lidocaine as a bolus 
(1.5–2 mg/kg) may help obtund airway refl exes dur-
ing emergence. 
 CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASE 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 COPD is the most common pulmonary disorder 
encountered in anesthetic practice, and its preva-
lence increases with age. Th e disorder is strongly 
associated with cigarette smoking and has a male 
predominance.  COPD is currently defi ned as a 
disease state characterized by airfl ow limita-
tion that is not fully reversible. Th e chronic airfl ow 
limitation of this disease is due to a mixture of small 
and large airway disease (chronic bronchitis/bron-
chiolitis) and parenchymal destruction (emphy-
sema), with representation of these two components 
varying from patient to patient. 
 Most patients with COPD are asymptomatic or 
only mildly symptomatic, but show expiratory air-
fl ow obstruction upon PFTs. In many patients, the 
obstruction has an element of reversibility, presum-
ably from bronchospasm (as shown by improvement 
in response to administration of a bronchodilator). 
With advancing disease, maldistribution of both 
ventilation and pulmonary blood fl ow results in 
areas of low  (V/Q)
·
· ratios (intrapulmonary shunt), 
as well as areas of high  (V/Q)
·
· ratios (dead space). 
 A. Chronic Bronchitis 
 Th e clinical diagnosis of chronic bronchitis is 
defi ned by the presence of a productive cough 
on most days of 3 consecutive months for at least 
2 consecutive years. In addition to cigarette smok-
ing, air pollutants, occupational exposure to dusts, 
recurrent pulmonary infections, and familial fac-
tors may be responsible. Secretions from hyper-
trophied bronchial mucous glands and mucosal 
edema from infl ammation of the airways produce 
airfl ow obstruction. Th e term “chronic asthmatic 
5
severity of obstruction is generally inversely related 
to the rate of rise in end-tidal CO 2 . Severe broncho-
spasm is manifested by rising peak inspiratory pres-
sures and incomplete exhalation. Tidal volumes of 
6–8 mL/kg, with prolongation of the expiratory 
time, may allow more uniform distribution of gas 
fl ow to both lungs and may help avoid air trapping. 
Th e Pa co 2 may increase, which is acceptable if there 
is no contraindication from a cardiovascular or 
neurologic perspective. 
 Intraoperative bronchospasm is usually mani-
fested as wheezing, increasing peak airway 
pressures (plateau pressure may remain unchanged), 
decreasing exhaled tidal volumes, or a slowly rising 
waveform on the capnograph.  Other causes 
can simulate bronchospasm: obstruction of 
the tracheal tube from kinking, secretions, or an 
overinfl ated balloon; bronchial intubation; active 
expiratory eff orts (straining); pulmonary edema 
or embolism; and pneumothorax. Bronchospasm 
should be treated by increasing the concentration of 
the volatile agent and administering an aerosolized 
bronchodilator. Infusion of low dose epinephrine 
may be needed if bronchospasm is refractory to 
other interventions. 
 Intravenous hydrocortisone can be given, par-
ticularly in patients with a history of glucocorticoid 
therapy. 
 At the completion of surgery, the patient 
should ideally be free of wheezing. Reversal of 
3
4
 FIGURE 242  Capnograph of a patient with expiratory 
airway obstruction. 
Normal
Expiratory
obstruction
CO2 (mm Hg)
Time
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
535 
smoking. Less commonly, emphysema occurs at 
an early age and is associated with a homozygous 
defi ciency of α 1 -antitrypsin. Th is is a protease 
inhibitor that prevents excessive activity of proteo-
lytic enzymes (mainly elastase) in the lungs; these 
enzymes are produced by pulmonary neutrophils 
and macrophages in response to infection and pol-
lutants. Emphysema associated with smoking may 
similarly be due to a relative imbalance between 
protease and antiprotease activities in susceptible 
individuals. 
 Emphysema may exist in a centrilobular or 
panlobular form. Th e centrilobular (or centriaci-
nar) form results from dilatation or destruction of 
the respiratory bronchioles, is more closely associ-
ated with tobacco smoking, and has predominantly 
an upper lobe distribution. Th e panlobular (or pan-
acinar) form results in a more even dilatation and 
destruction of the entire acinus, is associated with 
α 1 -antitrypsin defi ciency, and has predominantly a 
lower lobe distribution. 
 Loss of the elastic recoil that normally supports 
small airways by radial traction allows premature 
collapse during exhalation, leading to expiratory 
fl ow limitation with air trapping and hyperinfl a-
tion. Patients characteristically have increases in RV, 
FRC, TLC, and the RV/TLC ratio. Th e FRC is shift ed 
rightward along the compliance curve of the lungs, 
toward the fl at portion of the curve, in detriment of 
the pulmonary mechanics. 
 Disruption of the alveolar–capillary structure 
and loss of the acinar structure leads to decreased 
diff usion lung capacity (DLCO), V/·
·Q mismatch, 
and impairment of gas exchange. Also, normal 
parenchyma may become compressed by the hyper-
infl ated portions of the lung, resulting in a further 
increase in the V/·
·Q mismatch. Due to the higher 
diff usibility of CO 2 , its elimination is well preserved 
until V/·
·Q abnormalities become severe. Chronic 
CO 2 retention occurs slowly and generally results 
in a compensated respiratory acidosis on blood gas 
analysis. Arterial oxygen tension is usually normal 
or slightly reduced. Acute CO 2 retention is a sign of 
impending respiratory failure. 
 Destruction of pulmonary capillaries in the 
alveolar septa leads to the development of pul-
monary hypertension. However, the degree of 
bronchitis” may be used when bronchospasm is 
a major feature. Recurrent pulmonary infections 
(viral and bacterial) are common and oft en associ-
ated with bronchospasm. RV is increased, but TLC 
is oft en normal. Intrapulmonary shunting is promi-
nent, and hypoxemia is common. 
 In patients with COPD, chronic hypoxemia 
leads to erythrocytosis, pulmonary hypertension, 
and eventually right ventricular failure (cor pulmo-
nale); this combination of fi ndings is oft en referred 
to as the blue bloater syndrome, but <5% of patients 
with COPD fi t this description ( Table 24–4 ). In the 
course of disease progression, patients gradually 
develop chronic CO 2 retention; the normal venti-
latory drive becomes less sensitive to arterial CO 2 
tension and may be depressed by oxygen adminis-
tration (below). 
 B. Emphysema 
 Emphysema is a pathological disorder character-
ized by irreversible enlargement of the airways distal 
to terminal bronchioles and destruction of alveo-
lar septa. Th e diagnosis can be reliably made with 
computed tomography (CT) of the chest. Mild api-
cal emphysematous changes are a normal, but clini-
cally insignifi cant, consequence of aging. Signifi cant 
emphysema is more frequently related to cigarette 
 TABLE 244 Signs and symptoms of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Feature
Chronic 
Bronchitis
Emphysema
Cough
Frequent
With exertion
Sputum
Copious
Scant
Hematocrit
Elevated
Normal
Pa CO 2 (mm Hg)
Often elevated 
(>40)
Usually normal 
or <40
Chest radiograph
Increased lung 
markings
Hyperinflation
Elastic recoil
Normal
Decreased
Airway resistance
Increased
Normal to slightly 
increased
Cor pulmonale
Early
Late
536 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
to increase oxygen consumption during exercise is 
inversely related to postoperative complications. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative Management 
 Patients with COPD should be prepared prior to 
elective surgical procedures in the same way as 
patients with asthma (above). Th ey should be ques-
tioned about recent changes in dyspnea, sputum, 
and wheezing. Patients with an FEV 1 less than 50% 
of predicted (1.2–1.5 L) usually have dyspnea on 
exertion, whereas those with an FEV 1 less than 25% 
(<1 L in men) typically have dyspnea with minimal 
activity. Th e latter fi nding, in patients with predomi-
nantly chronic bronchitis, is also oft en associated 
with CO 2 retention and pulmonary hypertension. 
PFTs, chest radiographs, and arterial blood gas mea-
surements, if available, should be reviewed carefully. 
Th e presence of bullous changes on the radiograph 
should be noted. Many patients have concomitant 
cardiac disease and should also receive a careful car-
diovascular evaluation. 
 In contrast to asthma, only limited improve-
ment in respiratory function may be seen aft er a 
short period of intensive preoperative preparation. 
 Nonetheless, preoperative interventions in 
patients with COPD aimed at correcting 
hypoxemia, relieving bronchospasm, mobilizing 
and reducing secretions, and treating infections may 
decrease the incidence of postoperative pulmonary 
complications. Patients at greatest risk of complica-
tions are those with preoperative pulmonary func-
tion measurements less than 50% of predicted. Th e 
possibility that postoperative ventilation may be 
necessary in high-risk patients should be discussed 
with both the patient and the surgeon. 
Smoking should be discontinued for at least 
6–8 weeks before the operation to decrease secre-
tions and to reduce pulmonary complications . 
Cigarette smoking increases mucus production and 
decreases clearance. Both gaseous and particulate 
phases of cigarette smoke can deplete glutathione 
and vitamin C and may promote oxidative injury to 
tissues. Cessation of smoking for as little as 24 hr has 
theoretical benefi cial eff ects on the oxygen-carrying 
capacity of hemoglobin; acute inhalation of cigarette 
smoke releases carbon monoxide, which increases 
7
pulmonary hypertension is usually low to moderate, 
rarely exceeding 35-40 mm Hg. 
 When dyspneic, patients with emphysema oft en 
purse their lips to delay closure of the small airways, 
which accounts for the term “pink puff ers” that is 
oft en used ( Table 24–4 ). However, as mentioned 
above, most patients diagnosed with COPD have a 
combination of bronchitis and emphysema. 
 C. Treatment 
 Treatment for COPD is primarily supportive. 
 Cessation of smoking is the long-term inter-
vention that has been shown to reduce the rate 
of decline in lung function. Patients demonstrating a 
reversible element in airway obstruction (>15% 
improvement in FEV 1 following administration of a 
bronchodilator) should be started on long-term 
bronchodilator therapy. Inhaled β 2 -adrenergic ago-
nists, glucocorticoids, and ipratropium are very use-
ful; ipratropium may play a more important role in 
the management of these patients than in patients 
with asthma. Even patients who do not show 
improvement in their PFTs from the use of broncho-
dilators may improve clinically with bronchodilator 
therapy. Treatment with systemic corticosteroids 
may be required in patients with acute exacerbations 
of COPD. However, systemic corticosteroids in 
patients with stable COPD is discouraged due to the 
lack of added benefi t and the potential for systemic 
side eff ects. COPD exacerbations may be related to 
bouts of bronchitis, heralded by a change in sputum; 
frequent treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics 
may be necessary. Hypoxemia should be treated 
carefully with supplemental oxygen. Patients with 
chronic hypoxemia (Pa o 2 <55 mm Hg) and pulmo-
nary hypertension require low-fl ow oxygen therapy 
(1–2 L/min). Oxygen treatment during acute COPD 
exacerbations to a Pao 2 above 60 mm Hg may lead to 
CO2 retention, most likely due to an inhibition of the 
hypoxic vasoconstriction in areas with low V/·
·Q and 
the Haldane eff ect. 
 When cor pulmonale is present, diuretics are 
used to control peripheral edema; benefi cial eff ects 
from vasodilators are inconsistent. Pulmonary reha-
bilitation may improve the functional status of the 
patient by improving physical symptoms and exer-
cise capacity. Some studies suggest that the ability 
6
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
537 
hypercapnia and acidosis. A pneumothorax may 
manifest as hypoxemia, increased peak airway 
pressures, decreasing tidal volumes, and abrupt 
cardiovascular collapse unresponsive to fl uid and 
vasopressor administration. 
 Nitrous oxide should be avoided in patients 
with bullae and pulmonary hypertension. Inhibition 
of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction by inhala-
tion anesthetics is usually not clinically signifi cant 
at the usual doses. However, due to increased dead 
space, patients with severe COPD have unpredict-
able uptake and distribution of inhalational agents, 
and the end-tidal volatile anesthetic concentration 
is inaccurate. 
 Measurement of arterial blood gases is desir-
able for extensive intraabdominal and thoracic 
procedures. Although pulse oximetry accurately 
detects signifi cant arterial desaturation, direct 
measurement of arterial oxygen tensions may be 
necessary to detect more subtle changes in intrapul-
monary shunting. Moreover, arterial CO 2 measure-
ments should be used to guide ventilation because 
increased dead space widens the normal arterial-to-
end-tidal CO 2 gradient. Moderate hypercapnia with 
a Pa co 2 of up to 70 mm Hg may be well tolerated 
in the short term, assuming a reasonable cardiovas-
cular reserve. Hemodynamic support with inotro-
pic agents may be required in more compromised 
patients. Hemodynamic monitoring should be dic-
tated by any underlying cardiac dysfunction, as well 
as the extent of the surgery. In patients with pulmo-
nary hypertension, measurements of central venous 
pressure refl ect right ventricular function rather 
than intravascular volume. 
 At the end of surgery, the timing of extubation 
should balance the risk of bronchospasm with that of 
respiratory failure, but evidence suggests that early 
extubation (in the operating room) is benefi cial. 
Successful extubation at the end of the procedure 
depends on multiple factors: adequate pain control, 
reversal of neuromuscular blockade, absence of sig-
nifi cant bronchospasm and secretions, absence of 
signifi cant hypercapnia and acidosis, and absence 
of respiratory depression due to residual anesthetic 
agents. Patients with an FEV 1 below 50% may require 
a period of postoperative ventilation, particularly 
following upper abdominal and thoracic operations. 
carboxyhemoglobin levels, as well as nitric oxide, 
and nitrogen dioxide, which can lead to formation 
of methemoglobin. 
 Long-acting bronchodilators and mucolytics 
should be continued, including on the day of surgery. 
COPD exacerbations should be treated aggressively. 
 Preoperative chest physiotherapy and lung 
expansion interventions with incentive spirometry, 
deep breathing exercises, cough, chest percussion, 
and postural drainage may be benefi cial in decreas-
ing postoperative pulmonary complications. 
 B. Intraoperative Management 
 Although regional anesthesia is oft en considered 
preferable to general anesthesia, high spinal or epi-
dural anesthesia can decrease lung volumes, restrict 
the use of accessory respiratory muscles, and pro-
duce an ineff ective cough, leading to dyspnea and 
retention of secretions. Loss of proprioception from 
the chest and positions such as lithotomy or lateral 
decubitus may accentuate dyspnea in awake patients. 
Concerns about diaphragmatic paralysis may 
make interscalene blocks a less attractive option in 
the lung disease patient. 
 Preoxygenation prior to induction of general 
anesthesia prevents the rapid oxygen desaturation 
oft en seen in these patients. Th e selection of anes-
thetic agents and general intraoperative manage-
ment must be tailored to the specifi c needs and goals 
of every patient. Unfortunately, the use of broncho-
dilating anesthetics improves only the reversible 
component of airfl ow obstruction; signifi cant expi-
ratory obstruction may still present, even under 
deep anesthesia. Expiratory airfl ow limitation, espe-
cially under positive pressure ventilation, may lead 
to air trapping, dynamic hyperinfl ation, and elevated 
intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure (iPEEP). 
Dynamic hyperinfl ation may result in volutrauma 
to the lungs, hemodynamic instability, hypercap-
nia, and acidosis. Interventions to mitigate air trap-
ping include: (1) allowing more time to exhale by 
decreasing both the respiratory rate and I:E ratio; 
(2)  allowing permissive hypercapnia; (3) applying 
low levels of extrinsic PEEP; and (4) aggressively 
treating bronchospasm. 
 Intraoperative causes of hypotension include 
pneumothorax, and right heart failure due to 
538 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
abdominal distention should be relieved by naso-
gastric compression or drainage of ascites. Persistent 
hypoxemia may require mechanical ventilation. 
 B. Intraoperative Management 
 Selection of anesthetic agents should be tailored to 
each patient. Surgical patients with acute pulmonary 
disorders, such as ARDS, cardiogenic pulmonary 
edema, or pneumonia, are critically ill; anesthetic 
management should be a continuation of their pre-
operative intensive care. Anesthesia is most oft en 
provided with a combination of intravenous and 
inhalation agents, together with a neuromuscular 
blocking agent. High inspired oxygen concentra-
tions and PEEP may be required. Th e decreased 
lung compliance results in high peak inspiratory 
pressures during positive-pressure ventilation and 
increases the risk of barotrauma and volutrauma. 
Tidal volumes for these patients should be reduced to 
4–6 mL/kg, with a compensatory increase in the ven-
tilatory rate (14–18 breaths/min), even if the result is 
an increase in end-tidal CO 2 . Airway pressure should 
generally not exceed 30 cm H 2 O. Airway pressure 
release ventilation may improve oxygenation in 
the ARDS patient. Th e ventilator on the anesthesia 
machine may prove inadequate for patients with 
severe ARDS because of its limited gas fl ow capabili-
ties, low pressure-limiting settings, and the absence 
of certain ventilatory modes. A more sophisticated 
intensive care unit ventilator should be used in such 
instances. Aggressive hemodynamic monitoring is 
recommended. 
 CHRONIC INTRINSIC 
PULMONARY DISORDERS 
 Chronic intrinsic pulmonary disorders are also oft en 
referred to as interstitial lung diseases. Regardless of 
etiology, the disease process is generally character-
ized by an insidious onset, chronic infl ammation of 
alveolar walls and perialveolar tissue, and progres-
sive pulmonary fi brosis. Th e latter can eventually 
interfere with gas exchange and ventilatory func-
tion. Th e infl ammatory process may be primarily 
confi ned to the lungs or may be part of a generalized 
multiorgan process. Causes include hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis from occupational and environmental 
 Restrictive Pulmonary Disease 
 Restrictive pulmonary diseases are charac-
terized by decreased lung compliance. Lung 
volumes are typically reduced, with preservation of 
normal expiratory fl ow rates. Th us, both FEV 1 and 
FVC are reduced, but the FEV 1 /FVC ratio is normal. 
 Restrictive pulmonary diseases include many 
acute and chronic intrinsic pulmonary disorders, as 
well as extrinsic (extrapulmonary) disorders involv-
ing the pleura, chest wall, diaphragm, or neuromus-
cular function. Reduced lung compliance increases 
the work of breathing, resulting in a characteristic 
rapid, but shallow, breathing pattern. Respiratory 
gas exchange is usually maintained until the disease 
process is advanced. 
 ACUTE INTRINSIC 
PULMONARY DISORDERS 
 Acute intrinsic pulmonary disorders include pulmo-
nary edema (including the acute respiratory distress 
syndrome [ARDS]), infectious pneumonia, and 
aspiration pneumonitis. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Reduced lung compliance in these disorders is pri-
marily due to an increase in extravascular lung water, 
from either an increase in pulmonary capillary pres-
sure or pulmonary capillary permeability. Increased 
pressure occurs with left  ventricular failure, whereas 
fl uid overload and increased permeability are pres-
ent with ARDS. Localized or generalized increases 
in permeability also occur following aspiration or 
infectious pneumonitis. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative Management 
 Patients with acute pulmonary disease should be 
spared elective surgery. In preparation for emer-
gency procedures, oxygenation and ventilation 
should be optimized preoperatively to the greatest 
extent possible. Fluid overload should be treated 
with diuretics; heart failure may also require vaso-
dilators and inotropes. Drainage of large pleural 
eff usions should be considered. Similarly, massive 
8
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
539 
anesthetic drug selection is generally not critical. 
Th e reduction in FRC (and oxygen stores) predis-
poses these patients to rapid hypoxemia following 
induction of anesthesia. Because these patients may 
be more susceptible to oxygen-induced toxicity, 
particularly patients who have received bleomy-
cin, the inspired fractional concentration of oxygen 
should be kept to the minimum concentration com-
patible with acceptable oxygenation (Sp o 2 of >88% 
to 92%). High peak inspiratory pressures during 
mechanical ventilation increase the risk of pneumo-
thorax and should prompt adjustment of the venti-
latory parameters. In patients with severe restrictive 
disease, using an I:E ratio of 1:1 (or even an inverse 
ratio ventilation) and dividing the minute ventila-
tion to a higher respiratory rate (10–15 breaths/
minute) may help to maximize the inspiratory time 
per tidal volume and minimize the peak and plateau 
ventilatory pressures. 
 EXTRINSIC RESTRICTIVE 
PULMONARY DISORDERS 
 Extrinsic restrictive pulmonary disorders alter gas 
exchange by interfering with normal lung expan-
sion. Th ey include pleural eff usions, pneumothorax, 
mediastinal masses, kyphoscoliosis, pectus exca-
vatum, neuromuscular disorders, and increased 
intraabdominal pressure from ascites, pregnancy, 
or bleeding. Marked obesity also produces a restric-
tive ventilatory defect. Anesthetic considerations are 
similar to those discussed for intrinsic restrictive 
disorders. 
 Pulmonary Embolism 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Pulmonary embolism results from the entry of 
blood clots, fat, tumor cells, air, amniotic fl uid, or 
foreign material into the venous system. Clots from 
the lower extremities, pelvic veins, or, less com-
monly, the right side of the heart are usually respon-
sible. Venous stasis or hypercoagulability is oft en 
contributory in such cases ( Table 24–5 ). Pulmonary 
embolism can also occur intraoperatively in normal 
individuals undergoing certain procedures. 
pollutants, drug toxicity (bleomycin and nitrofu-
rantoin), radiation pneumonitis, idiopathic pulmo-
nary fi brosis, autoimmune diseases, and sarcoidosis. 
Chronic pulmonary aspiration, oxygen toxicity, and 
severe ARDS can also produce chronic fi brosis. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients typically present with dyspnea on exertion 
and sometimes a nonproductive cough. Symptoms 
of cor pulmonale are present only with advanced 
disease. Physical examination may reveal fi ne (dry) 
crackles over the lung bases, and, in late stages, evi-
dence of right ventricular failure. Th e chest radio-
graph progresses from a “ground-glass” appearance 
to prominent reticulonodular markings, and, fi nally, 
to a “honeycomb” appearance. Arterial blood gases 
usually show mild hypoxemia with normocarbia. 
PFTs are typical of a restrictive ventilatory defect 
(see above), and carbon monoxide diff using capac-
ity is reduced. 
 Treatment is directed at abating the disease 
process and preventing further exposure to the 
causative agent (if known). Glucocorticoid and 
immunosuppressive therapy may be used for idio-
pathic pulmonary fi brosis, autoimmune disorders, 
and sarcoidosis. If the patient has chronic hypox-
emia, oxygen therapy may be started to prevent, or 
attenuate, right ventricular failure. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative Management 
 Preoperative evaluation should focus on determin-
ing the degree of pulmonary impairment as well as 
the underlying disease process. Th e latter is impor-
tant in determining the potential involvement of 
other organs. A history of dyspnea on exertion (or at 
rest) should be evaluated further with PFTs and arte-
rial blood gas analysis. A vital capacity of less than 
15 mL/kg is indicative of severe dysfunction (nor-
mal is >70 mL/kg). A chest radiograph is helpful in 
assessing disease severity. 
 B. Intraoperative Management 
 Th e management of these patients is complicated by 
a predisposition to hypoxemia and the need to con-
trol ventilation to ensure optimum gas exchange; 
540 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
or hemoptysis. Th e latter generally implies lung 
infarction. Symptoms are oft en absent or mild and 
nonspecifi c unless massive embolism has occurred. 
Wheezing may be present on auscultation. Arterial 
blood gas analysis typically shows mild hypox-
emia with respiratory alkalosis (the latter due to 
an increase in ventilation). Th e chest radiograph is 
commonly normal, but may show an area of oli-
gemia (radiolucency), a wedge-shaped density with 
an infarct, atelectasis with an elevated diaphragm, 
or an asymmetrically enlarged proximal pulmo-
nary artery with acute pulmonary hypertension. 
Cardiac signs include tachycardia and wide fi xed 
splitting of the S 2 heart sound; hypotension with 
elevated central venous pressure is usually indica-
tive of right ventricular failure. Th e electrocardio-
gram frequently shows tachycardia and may show 
signs of acute cor pulmonale, such as new right 
axis deviation, right bundle branch block, and tall 
peaked T waves. Ultrasound studies of the lower 
extremities also may be helpful in demonstrating 
deep venous thrombosis. Th e diagnosis of embo-
lism is more diffi  cult to make intraoperatively (see 
below). 
 Pulmonary angiography is still the gold stan-
dard criterion for diagnosing a pulmonary embo-
lism, but it is invasive and diffi  cult to perform. 
Th erefore, the less invasive spiral computed tomog-
raphy angiography (CTA) is the initial imaging of 
choice in stable patients with suspected pulmonary 
embolism. Ventilation-perfusion (V/·
·Q ) scanning 
may also be used when CTA cannot be performed. 
High-, intermediate-, and low-probability criteria 
have been established for the diagnosis of pulmo-
nary embolism byV/·
·Q scan. 
 C. Treatment and Prevention 
 Th e best treatment for pulmonary embolism is pre-
vention. Heparin (unfractionated heparin 5000 U 
subcutaneously every 12 h begun preoperatively or 
immediately postoperatively in high-risk patients), 
enoxaparin or other related compounds, oral anti-
coagulation (warfarin), aspirin, or dextran therapy, 
together with early ambulation, can all be used to 
reduce the incidence of deep vein thrombosis. Th e 
use of high elastic stockings and pneumatic com-
pression of the legs may also decrease the incidence 
 A. Pathophysiology 
 Embolic occlusions in the pulmonary circula-
tion increase dead space, and, if minute ventilation 
does not change, this increase in dead space should 
theoretically increase Pa co 2 . However, in practice, 
hypoxemia is more oft en seen. Pulmonary emboli 
acutely increase pulmonary vascular resistance by 
reducing the cross-sectional area of the pulmonary 
vasculature, causing refl ex and humoral vasocon-
striction. Localized or generalized refl ex broncho-
constriction further increases areas with low  (V/Q)
·
· 
ratios. Th e net eff ect is an increase in V/·
·Q mismatch 
and hypoxemia. Th e aff ected area loses its surfactant 
within hours and may become atelectatic within 
24–48 hr. Pulmonary infarction occurs if the embolus 
involves a large vessel and collateral blood fl ow from 
the bronchial circulation is insuffi  cient for that part 
of the lung (incidence <10%). In previously healthy 
persons, occlusion of more than 50% of the pulmo-
nary circulation (massive pulmonary embolism) is 
necessary before sustained pulmonary hypertension 
is seen. Patients with preexisting cardiac or pulmo-
nary disease can develop acute pulmonary hyperten-
sion with occlusions of lesser magnitude. A sustained 
increase in right ventricular aft erload can precipitate 
acute right ventricular failure. If the patient survives 
acute pulmonary thromboembolism, the thrombus 
usually begins to resolve within 1–2 weeks. 
 B. Diagnosis 
 Clinical manifestations of pulmonary embolism 
include sudden tachypnea, dyspnea, chest pain, 
 TABLE 245 Factors associated with deep 
venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. 
 Prolonged bed rest 
 Postpartum state 
 Fracture of the lower extremities 
 Surgery on the lower extremities 
 Carcinoma 
 Heart failure 
 Obesity 
 Surgery lasting more than 30 min 
 Hypercoagulability 
 Antithrombin III deficiency 
 Protein C deficiency 
 Protein S deficiency 
 Plasminogen-activator deficiency 
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
541
these patients should be in preventing new episodes 
of embolism (see above). 
 B. Intraoperative Management 
 Vena cava fi lters are usually placed percutaneously 
under local anesthesia with sedation. 
 Patients presenting for pulmonary embo-
lectomy are critically ill. Th ey are usually already 
intubated, but tolerate positive-pressure ventila-
tion poorly. Inotropic support is necessary until 
the clot is removed. Th ey also tolerate all anesthetic 
agents very poorly. Small doses of an opioid, etomi-
date, or ketamine may be used, but the latter can 
theoretically increase pulmonary artery pressures. 
Cardiopulmonary bypass is required. 
 C. Intraoperative Pulmonary Embolism 
 Signifi cant pulmonary embolism is a rare occurrence 
during anesthesia. Diagnosis requires a high index of 
suspicion. Air emboli are common, but are oft en 
overlooked unless large amounts are entrained. Fat 
embolism can occur during orthopedic procedures; 
amniotic fl uid embolism is a rare, unpredictable, and 
oft en fatal, complication of obstetrical delivery. 
Th romboembolism may occur intraoperatively dur-
ing prolonged procedures. Th e clot may have been 
present prior to surgery or may form intraoperatively; 
surgical manipulations or a change in the patient’s 
position may then dislodge the venous thrombus. 
Manipulation of tumors with intravascular extension 
can similarly produce pulmonary embolism. 
 Intraoperative pulmonary embolism usu-
ally presents as sudden cardiovascular col-
lapse, hypoxemia, or bronchospasm. A decrease in 
end-tidal CO 2 concentration is also suggestive of 
pulmonary embolism, but is not specifi c. Invasive 
monitoring may reveal elevated central venous and 
pulmonary arterial pressures. Depending on the 
type and location of an embolism, a transesopha-
geal echocardiogram may be helpful. TEE may not 
reveal the embolus but will oft en demonstrate right 
heart distention and dysfunction.  If air is identifi ed 
in the right atrium, or if it is suspected, emergent 
central vein cannulation and aspiration of the air 
may be lifesaving . For all other emboli, treatment 
is supportive, with intravenous fl uids and inotropes. 
Placement of a vena cava fi lter should be considered 
postoperatively. 
9
of venous thrombosis in the legs, but not in the pel-
vis or the heart. 
 Aft er a pulmonary embolism, systemic anti-
coagulation prevents the formation of new blood 
clots or the extension of existing clots. Heparin 
therapy is begun with the goal of achieving an acti-
vated partial thromboplastin time of 1.5–2.4 times 
normal. Low molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) 
is as eff ective and is given subcutaneously at a 
fi xed dose (based on body weight) without labo-
ratory monitoring. In high-risk patients, LMWH 
is started either 12 hr before surgery, 12–24 hr 
aft er surgery, or at 50% the usual dose 4–6 hr aft er 
surgery. All patients should start warfarin therapy 
concurrent with starting heparin therapy, and the 
two should overlap for 4–5 days. Th e international 
normalized ratio should be within the therapeu-
tic range on two consecutive measurements, at 
least 24 hr apart, before the heparin is stopped. 
Warfarin should be continued for 3–12 months. 
Th rombolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen 
activator or streptokinase is indicated in patients 
with massive pulmonary embolism or circula-
tory collapse. Recent surgery and active bleed-
ing are contraindications to anticoagulation and 
thrombolytic therapy. In these cases, an inferior 
vena cava umbrella fi lter may be placed to prevent 
recurrent pulmonary emboli. Pulmonary embo-
lectomy may be indicated for patients with mas-
sive embolism in whom thrombolytic therapy is 
contraindicated. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative Management 
 Patients with acute pulmonary embolism may pres-
ent in the operating room for placement of an IVC 
fi lter, or, rarely, for pulmonary embolectomy. In 
most instances, the patient will have a history of 
pulmonary embolism and presents for unrelated 
surgery; in this group of patients, the risk of inter-
rupting anticoagulant therapy perioperatively is 
unknown. If the acute episode is more than 1 year 
old, the risk of temporarily stopping anticoagulant 
therapy is probably small. Moreover, except in the 
case of chronic recurrent pulmonary emboli, pul-
monary function has usually returned to normal. 
Th e emphasis in the perioperative management of 
542 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
will be decreased. Although these changes are 
usually well tolerated by healthy patients, this 
patient’s obesity and presumed preexisting lung 
disease increase the likelihood for hypoxemia. A 
head-down position also tends to shift the trachea 
upward, so that a tracheal tube anchored at the 
mouth may migrate into the right mainstem bron-
chus. This tracheobronchial shift may be exacer-
bated during insuﬄ  ation of the abdomen . 
 After insuﬄ  ation, the patient’s position is usu-
ally changed to a steep head-up position (reverse 
Trendelenburg) to facilitate surgical dissection. 
The respiratory eﬀ ects of the head-up position are 
the opposite of the head-down position . 
 Does laparoscopic surgery aﬀ ect cardiac function? 
 Moderate insuﬄ  ation pressures usually leave 
heart rate, central venous pressure, and cardiac 
output unchanged or slightly elevated. This seems 
to result from increased eﬀ ective cardiac ﬁ ll-
ing because blood tends to be forced out of the 
abdomen and into the chest.  Higher insuﬄ  ation 
pressures (>25 cm H 2 O or 18 mm Hg), however, 
tend to collapse the major abdominal veins (par-
ticularly the inferior vena cava), which decreases 
venous return and leads to a drop in preload and 
cardiac output in some patients . 
 Hypercarbia, if allowed to develop, will stimu-
late the sympathetic nervous system and thus 
increase blood pressure, heart rate, and the risk 
of arrhythmias. Attempting to compensate by 
increasing the tidal volume or respiratory rate will 
increase the mean intrathoracic pressure, further 
hindering venous return and increasing mean pul-
monary artery pressures. These eﬀ ects can prove 
particularly challenging in patients with restrictive 
lung disease, impaired cardiac function, or intra-
vascular volume depletion . 
 Although the Trendelenburg position increases 
preload, mean arterial pressure and cardiac out-
put usually either remain unchanged or decrease. 
These seemingly paradoxical responses may be 
explained by carotid and aortic baroreceptor-
mediated reﬂ exes. The reverse Trendelenburg posi-
tion decreases preload, cardiac output, and mean 
arterial pressure . 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Laparoscopic Surgery 
 A 45-year-old woman is scheduled for a laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy. Known medical prob-
lems include obesity and a history of smoking . 
 What are the advantages of laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy compared with open 
cholecystectomy? 
 Laparoscopic 
techniques 
have 
rapidly 
increased in popularity because of the multiple 
beneﬁ ts associated with much smaller incisions 
than with traditional open techniques. These ben-
eﬁ ts include decreased postoperative pain, less 
postoperative pulmonary impairment, a reduction 
in postoperative ileus, shorter hospital stays, earlier 
ambulation, and smaller surgical scars. Thus, lapa-
roscopic surgery can provide substantial medical 
and economic advantages . 
 How does laparoscopic surgery aﬀ ect 
intraoperative pulmonary function? 
 The hallmark of laparoscopy is the creation 
of a pneumoperitoneum with pressurized CO 2 . 
The resulting increase in intraabdominal pres-
sure displaces the diaphragm cephalad, causing 
a decrease in lung compliance and an increase 
in peak inspiratory pressure.  Atelectasis, dimin-
ished FRC, ventilation/perfusion mismatch, and 
pulmonary shunting contribute to a decrease in 
arterial oxygenation.  These changes should be 
exaggerated in this obese patient with a long his-
tory of tobacco use . 
 The high solubility of CO 2  increases systemic 
absorption by the vasculature of the peritoneum. 
This, combined with smaller tidal volumes because 
of poor lung compliance, leads to increased arterial 
CO 2  levels and decreased pH . 
 Why does patient position aﬀ ect oxygenation? 
 A head-down (Trendelenburg) position is com-
monly requested during insertion of the Veress 
needle and cannula. This position causes a cepha-
lad shift in abdominal viscera and the diaphragm. 
FRC, total lung volume, and pulmonary compliance 
 
CHAPTER 24 Anesthesia for Patients with Respiratory Disease  
543 
decrease the likelihood of hypoxemia, hypercarbia, 
and aspiration . 
 What special monitoring should be considered 
for this patient? 
 Monitoring end-tidal CO 2  normally provides 
an adequate guide for determining the minute 
ventilation required to maintain normocarbia. 
This assumes a constant gradient between arte-
rial CO 2  and end-tidal CO 2 , which is generally 
valid in healthy patients undergoing laparoscopy. 
This assumption would not apply if alveolar dead 
space changes during surgery. For example, any 
signiﬁ cant reduction in lung perfusion increases 
alveolar dead space and therefore increases the 
gradient between arterial and end-tidal CO2. This 
may occur during laparoscopy if cardiac output 
drops because of high inﬂ ation pressures, the 
reverse Trendelenburg position, or gas embolism. 
Furthermore, abdominal distention lowers pulmo-
nary compliance. Large tidal volumes are usually 
avoided because they are associated with high 
peak inspiratory pressures and can cause consider-
able movement of the surgical ﬁ eld. The resulting 
choice of lower tidal volumes and higher respira-
tory rates may lead to poor alveolar gas sampling 
and erroneous end-tidal CO 2   measurements. In 
fact, end-tidal CO 2  values have been found to be 
particularly unreliable in patients with signiﬁ cant 
cardiac or pulmonary disease undergoing lapa-
roscopy. Thus, placement of an arterial catheter 
should be considered in patients with cardiopul-
monary disease . 
 What are some possible complications 
of laparoscopic surgery? 
 Surgical complications include hemorrhage, 
if a major abdominal vessel is lacerated, or perito-
nitis, if a viscus is perforated during trocar intro-
duction. Signiﬁ cant intraoperative hemorrhage 
may go unrecognized because of the limitations 
of laparoscopic visualization. Fulguration has 
been associated with bowel burns and bowel gas 
explosions. The use of pressurized gas introduces 
the possibility of extravasation of CO 2  along tissue 
planes, resulting in subcutaneous emphysema, 
 Describe the advantages and disadvantages 
of alternative anesthetic techniques for this 
patient. 
 Anesthetic approaches to laparoscopic surgery 
include inﬁ ltration of local anesthetic with an intra-
venous sedative, epidural or spinal anesthesia, or 
general anesthesia. Experience with local anesthesia 
has been largely limited to brief gynecologic proce-
dures (laparoscopic tubal sterilization, intrafallopian 
transfers) in young, healthy, and motivated patients. 
Although postoperative recovery is rapid, patient 
discomfort and suboptimal visualization of intraab-
dominal organs preclude the use of this local anes-
thesia technique for laparoscopic cholecystectomy . 
 Epidural or spinal anesthesia represents 
another alternative for laparoscopic surgery. A high 
level is required for complete muscle relaxation 
and to prevent diaphragmatic irritation caused 
by gas insuﬄ  ation and surgical manipulations. An 
obese patient with lung disease may not be able 
to increase spontaneous ventilation to maintain 
normocarbia in the face of a T2 level regional block 
during insuﬄ  ation and a 20° Trendelenburg posi-
tion. Another disadvantage of a regional technique 
is the occasional occurrence of referred shoulder 
pain from diaphragmatic irritation. General anes-
thesia would therefore be the preferred technique 
in this patient . 
 Does a general anesthetic technique require 
tracheal intubation? 
 Tracheal intubation with positive-pressure 
ventilation is usually favored for many reasons: 
the risk of regurgitation from increased intraab-
dominal pressure during insuﬄ  ation; the necessity 
for controlled ventilation to prevent hypercap-
nia; the relatively high peak inspiratory pressures 
required because of the pneumoperitoneum; the 
need for neuromuscular blockade during surgery 
to allow lower insuﬄ  ation pressures, provide bet-
ter visualization, and prevent unexpected patient 
movement; and the placement of a nasogastric 
tube and gastric decompression to minimize the 
risk of visceral perforation during trocar introduc-
tion and optimize visualization. The obese patient 
presented here would beneﬁ t from intubation to 
544 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
capacity, and forced expiratory ﬂ ow are reduced 
by approximately 25% following laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy, compared with a 50% reduction 
following open cholecystectomy. The cause of this 
dysfunction may be related to diaphragmatic ten-
sion during the pneumoperitoneum . 
 Nausea and vomiting are common following 
laparoscopic procedures, despite routine emp-
tying of the stomach with a nasogastric tube. 
Pharmacological prophylaxis is recommended . 
 GUIDELINES
 Qaseem A, Snow V, Fitterman N, et al: Risk assessment 
for and strategies to reduce perioperative 
pulmonary complication for patients undergoing 
noncardiothoracic surgery: a guideline from the 
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 
2006;144:576. 
See www.guidelines.gov for additional guidelines from 
multiple organizations on deep vein thrombosis 
prophylaxis and pulmonary embolism.
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Hurford WE: Th e bronchospastic patient. Int Anesthesiol 
Clin 2000;38:77. 
 Reilly JJ Jr: Evidence-based preoperative evaluation 
candidates for thoracotomy. Chest 1999;116:474.
Smetana G. Postoperative pulmonary complications: an 
update on risk assessment and reduction. Cleveland 
Clin J Med 2009;76(S4):S60-S65. 
 Sweitzer B, Smetana G: Identifi cation and evaluation 
of the patient with lung disease. Anesthesiol Clin 
2009;27:673. 
pneumomediastinum, or pneumothorax. Nitrous 
oxide should be discontinued and insuﬄ  ating 
pressures decreased as much as possible. Patients 
with this complication may beneﬁ t from the con-
tinuation of mechanical ventilation into the imme-
diate postoperative period . 
 Venous CO 2  embolism resulting from uninten-
tional insuﬄ  ation of gas into an open vein may lead 
to hypoxemia, pulmonary hypertension, pulmo-
nary edema, and cardiovascular collapse. Unlike air 
embolism, end-tidal CO 2  may transiently increase 
during CO 2  gas embolism. Treatment includes 
immediate release of the pneumoperitoneum, dis-
continuation of nitrous oxide, insertion of a central 
venous catheter for gas aspiration, and placement 
of the patient in a head-down left lateral decubitus 
position . 
 Vagal stimulation during trocar insertion, 
peritoneal insuﬄ  ation, or manipulation of viscera 
can result in bradycardia and even sinus arrest. 
Although this usually resolves spontaneously, 
elimination of the stimulus (eg, deﬂ ation of the 
peritoneum) and administration of a vagolytic 
drug (eg, atropine sulfate) should be considered. 
Intraoperative hypotension may be more common 
during laparoscopic cholecystectomy than dur-
ing cholecystectomy by laparotomy. Preoperative 
ﬂ uid loading has been recommended to avoid this 
complication . 
 Even though laparoscopic procedures are 
associated with less muscle trauma and incisional 
pain than open surgery, pulmonary dysfunction 
can persist for at least 24 hr postoperatively. For 
example, forced expiratory volume, forced vital 
 545
25
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for 
Thoracic Surgery 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 During one-lung ventilation, the mixing of 
unoxygenated blood from the collapsed 
upper lung with oxygenated blood from 
the still-ventilated dependent lung widens 
the alveolar-to-arterial (A-a) O 2 gradient and 
often results in hypoxemia. 
 There are certain clinical situations in which 
the use of a right-sided double-lumen tube 
is recommended: (1) distorted anatomy of 
the left main bronchus by an intrabronchial 
or extrabronchial mass; (2) compression of 
the left main bronchus due to a descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysm; (3) left-sided 
pneumonectomy; (4) left-sided single lung 
transplantation; and (5) left-sided sleeve 
resection. 
 If epidural opioids are to be used 
postoperatively, their intravenous use 
should be limited during surgery to 
prevent excessive postoperative respiratory 
depression. 
 Postoperative hemorrhage complicates 
about 3% of thoracotomies and may be 
associated with up to 20% mortality. Signs 
of hemorrhage include increased chest 
tube drainage (>200 mL/h), hypotension, 
tachycardia, and a falling hematocrit. 
1
2
3
4
 Bronchopleural ﬁ stula presents as a 
sudden large air leak from the chest tube 
that may be associated with an increasing 
pneumothorax and partial lung collapse. 
 Acute herniation of the heart into the 
operative hemithorax can occur through 
the pericardial defect that is left following a 
radical pneumonectomy. 
 Nitrous oxide is contraindicated in patients 
with cysts or bullae because it can expand 
the air space and cause rupture. The latter 
may be signaled by sudden hypotension, 
bronchospasm, or an abrupt rise in peak 
inﬂ ation pressure and requires immediate 
placement of a chest tube. 
 Following transplantation, peak inspiratory 
pressures should be maintained at the 
minimum pressure compatible with 
good lung expansion, and the inspired 
oxygen concentration should be 
maintained as close to room air as allowed 
by a Pa O 2  >60 mm Hg. 
 Regardless of the procedure, a common 
anesthetic concern for patients with 
esophageal disease is the risk of pulmonary 
aspiration. 
5
6
7
8
9
 Indications and techniques for thoracic surgery con-
tinually evolve. Common indications now include 
thoracic malignancies (mainly of the lungs and 
esophagus), chest trauma, esophageal disease, and 
mediastinal tumors. Diagnostic procedures such as 
bronchoscopy, mediastinoscopy, and open-lung biop-
sies are also common. Anesthetic techniques for pro-
viding lung separation have allowed the refi nement of 
surgical techniques to the point that many procedures 
are increasingly performed thoracoscopically. 
546 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
retraction. Although perfusion continues to favor 
the dependent (lower) lung, ventilation progressively 
favors the less perfused upper lung. Th e resulting 
mismatch increases the risk of hypoxemia. 
 The Awake State 
 When a supine patient assumes the lateral decu-
bitus position, ventilation/perfusion matching is 
preserved during spontaneous ventilation. Th e 
dependent (lower) lung receives more perfusion 
than does the upper lung due to gravitational infl u-
ences on blood fl ow distribution in the pulmonary 
circulation. Th e dependent lung also receives more 
ventilation because: (1) contraction of the depen-
dent hemidiaphragm is more effi  cient compared 
with the nondependent [upper] hemidiaphragm 
and (2) the dependent lung is on a more favorable 
part of the compliance curve ( Figure 25–1 ). 
 Induction of Anesthesia 
 Th e decrease in functional residual capacity (FRC) 
with induction of general anesthesia moves the upper 
lung to a more favorable part of the compliance 
 Physiological Considerations 
During Thoracic Anesthesia 
 Th oracic surgery presents a unique set of physiologi-
cal problems for the anesthesiologist. Th ese include 
physiological derangements caused by placing the 
patient in the lateral decubitus position, opening the 
chest  (open pneumothorax) , and the need for one-
lung ventilation. 
 THE LATERAL DECUBITUS 
POSITION 
 Th e lateral decubitus position provides optimal 
access for most operations on the lungs, pleura, 
esophagus, the great vessels, other mediastinal 
structures, and vertebrae. Unfortunately, this posi-
tion may signifi cantly alter the normal pulmonary 
 ventilation/ perfusion relationships. Th ese derange-
ments are further accentuated by induction of 
anesthesia, initiation of mechanical ventilation, neu-
romuscular blockade, opening the chest, and surgical 
Closed chest
Pressure
Volume
Up
Down
P
AWAKE
Lateral decubitus
position
AWAKE
Upright position
 FIGURE 251  The eﬀ ect of the lateral decubitus 
position on lung compliance. 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
547 
worsen ventilation/perfusion mismatching and pre-
dispose the patient to hypoxemia. 
 THE OPEN PNEUMOTHORAX 
 Th e lungs are normally kept expanded by a negative 
pleural pressure—the net result of the tendency of the 
lung to collapse and the chest wall to expand. When 
one side of the chest is opened, the negative pleural 
pressure is lost, and the elastic recoil of the lung on that 
side tends to collapse it. Spontaneous ventilation with 
an open pneumothorax in the lateral position results 
in paradoxical respirations and mediastinal shift . 
Th ese two phenomena can cause progressive hypox-
emia and hypercapnia, but, fortunately, their eff ects 
are overcome by the use of positive-pressure ventila-
tion during general anesthesia and thoracotomy. 
 Mediastinal Shift 
 During spontaneous ventilation in the lateral posi-
tion, inspiration causes pleural pressure to become 
curve, but moves the lower lung to a less favorable-
position ( Figure 25–2 ). As a result, the upper lung is 
ventilated more than the dependent lower lung; ven-
tilation/perfusion mismatching occurs because the 
dependent lung continues to have greater perfusion. 
 Positive-Pressure Ventilation 
 Controlled positive-pressure ventilation favors the 
upper lung in the lateral position because it is more 
compliant than the lower lung. Neuromuscular 
blockade enhances this eff ect by allowing the 
abdominal contents to rise up further against the 
dependent hemidiaphragm and impede ventila-
tion of the lower lung. Using a rigid “bean bag” to 
maintain the patient in the lateral decubitus position 
further restricts movement of the dependent hemi-
thorax. Finally, opening the nondependent side of 
the chest further accentuates diff erences in compli-
ance between the two sides because the upper lung is 
now less restricted in movement. All of these eff ects 
 FIGURE 252  The eﬀ ect of anesthesia on lung compliance in the lateral decubitus position. The upper lung assumes a 
more favorable position, and the lower lung becomes less compliant. 
Closed chest
Pressure
Volume
Up
Down
Up
Down
ANESTHETIZED
Lateral decubitus
position
AWAKE
Lateral decubitus
position
548 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
(paradoxical respiration [pendeluft ]). During inspi-
ration, the pneumothorax increases, and gas fl ows 
from the upper lung across the carina to the depen-
dent lung. During expiration, the gas fl ow reverses 
and moves from the dependent to the upper lung 
( Figure 25–4 ). 
 ONELUNG VENTILATION 
 Intentional collapse of the lung on the operative side 
facilitates most thoracic procedures, but greatly 
complicates anesthetic management. Because the 
more negative on the dependent side, but not on 
the side of the open pneumothorax. Th is results 
in a downward shift  of the mediastinum during 
inspiration and an upward shift  during expiration 
( Figure 25–3 ). Th e major eff ect of the mediastinal 
shift  is to decrease the contribution of the dependent 
lung to the tidal volume. 
 Paradoxical Respiration 
 Spontaneous ventilation in a patient with an open 
pneumothorax also results in to-and-fro gas fl ow 
between the dependent and nondependent lung 
 FIGURE 253  Mediastinal shift in a spontaneously breathing patient in the lateral decubitus position. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Tarhan S, Moﬃ  tt EA: Principles of thoracic anesthesia. Surg Clin North Am 1973;53:813.) 
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax
INSPIRATION
EXPIRATION
 FIGURE 254  Paradoxical respiration in spontaneously breathing patients on their side. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Tarhan S, Moﬃ  tt EA: Principles of thoracic anesthesia. Surg Clin North Am 1973;53:813.) 
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax
INSPIRATION
EXPIRATION
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery
549
bronchial tube; (2) use of a single-lumen tracheal 
tube in conjunction with a bronchial blocker; or 
(3) insertion of a conventional endotracheal tube 
into a mainstem bronchus. Double-lumen tubes are 
most oft en used. 
 DOUBLELUMEN 
BRONCHIAL TUBES 
 Th e principal advantages of double-lumen tubes are 
relative ease of placement, the ability to ventilate one 
or both lungs, and the ability to suction either lung. 
 All double-lumen tubes share the following 
characteristics: 
•  A longer bronchial lumen that enters either the 
right or left  main bronchus and another shorter 
tracheal lumen that terminates in the lower 
trachea 
•  A preformed curve that when properly “aimed” 
allows preferential entry into abronchus 
•  A bronchial cuff  
•  A tracheal cuff  
 Ventilation can be delivered to only one lung 
by clamping either the bronchial or tracheal lumen 
with both cuff s infl ated; opening the port on the 
collapsed lung continues to be perfused and is delib-
erately no longer ventilated, the patient develops a 
large right-to-left  intrapulmonary shunt (20% to 
30%).  During one-lung ventilation, the mixing 
of unoxygenated blood from the collapsed 
upper lung with oxygenated blood from the still-
ventilated dependent lung widens the alveolar-to-
arterial (A-a) O 2 gradient and oft en results in 
hypoxemia. Fortunately, blood fl ow to the nonventi-
lated lung is decreased by hypoxic pulmonary vaso-
constriction (HPV) and possibly surgical compression 
of the upper lung. 
 Factors known to inhibit HPV (increasing 
venous admixture), and thus worsen the right-to-left  
shunting, include (1) very high or very low pulmo-
nary artery pressures; (2) hypocapnia; (3) high or 
very low mixed venous P o 2 ; (4) vasodilators such 
as nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, phosophodiesterase 
inhibitors (milrinone and inamrinone), β-adrenergic 
agonists, calcium channel blockers; (5) pulmonary 
infection; and (6) inhalation anesthetics. 
 Factors that decrease blood fl ow to the venti-
lated lung can be equally detrimental; they counter-
act the eff ect of HPV by indirectly increasing blood 
fl ow to the collapsed lung. Such factors include 
(1) high mean airway pressures in the ventilated lung 
due to high positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 
hyperventilation, or high peak inspiratory pressures; 
(2) a low F io 2 , which produces hypoxic pulmonary 
vasoconstriction in the ventilated lung; (3) vasocon-
strictors that may have a greater eff ect on normoxic 
vessels than hypoxic ones; and (4) intrinsic PEEP 
that develops due to inadequate expiratory times. 
 Elimination of CO 2 is usually unchanged by 
one-lung ventilation, provided that minute ventila-
tion is unchanged and that preexisting CO 2 retention 
was not present while ventilating both lungs; arterial 
CO 2 tension is usually not appreciably altered. 
 Techniques for 
One-Lung Ventilation 
 One-lung ventilation can also be utilized to isolate a 
lung or to facilitate ventilatory management under 
certain conditions ( Table 25–1 ). Th ree techniques 
can be employed: (1) placement of a double-lumen 
1
 TABLE 251 Indications for one-lung 
ventilation. 
 Patient-related 
 Conﬁ ne infection to one lung 
 Conﬁ ne bleeding to one lung 
 Separate ventilation to each lung 
 Bronchopleural ﬁ stula 
 Tracheobronchial disruption 
 Large lung cyst or bulla 
 Severe hypoxemia due to unilateral lung disease 
 Procedure-related 
 Repair of thoracic aortic aneurysm 
 Lung resection 
 Pneumonectomy 
 Lobectomy 
 Segmental resection 
 Thoracoscopy 
 Esophageal surgery 
 Single-lung transplantation 
 Anterior approach to the thoracic spine 
 Bronchoalveolar lavage 
550 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
right bronchus has upper, middle, and lower lobe 
branches, whereas the left  bronchus divides into only 
upper and lower lobe branches; and (3) the orifi ce 
of the right upper lobe bronchus is typically about 
1–2.5 cm from the carina, whereas the bifurcation of 
the left  main bronchus is typically about 5 cm distal 
to the carina. Th ere is considerable anatomic varia-
tion: for example, the right upper lobe bronchus will 
occasionally arise from the trachea itself. 
 As previously noted, right-sided double-lumen 
tubes must have a portal through the bronchial cuff  
for ventilating the right upper lobe ( Figure 25–6 ). 
Anatomic variations among individuals in the dis-
tance between the carina and the right upper lobe 
orifi ce will occasionally result in diffi  culty ventilating 
that lobe with right-sided tubes. A left -sided double-
lumen tube can be used in most surgical procedures, 
irrespective of the operative side.  Th ere are 
certain clinical situations in which the use of 
a  right-sided double-lumen tube is recommended: 
2
appropriate connector allows the ipsilateral lung 
to collapse. Because of diff erences in bronchial 
anatomy between the two sides, tubes are designed 
specifi cally for either the right or left  bronchus. A 
right-sided double-lumen tube incorporates a modi-
fi ed cuff  and a proximal portal on the endobronchial 
side for ventilation of the right upper lobe. Th e most 
commonly used double-lumen tube are available in 
several sizes: 35, 37, 39, and 41F. 
 Anatomic Considerations 
 On average, the adult trachea is 11–13 cm long. It 
begins at the level of the cricoid cartilage (C6) and 
bifurcates at the level of the carina behind the ster-
nomanubrial joint (T5). Major diff erences between 
the right and left  main bronchi are as follows: 
(1) the larger diameter right bronchus diverges away 
from the trachea at a less acute angle in relation 
to the trachea, whereas the left  bronchus diverges 
at a more horizontal angle ( Figure 25–5 ); (2) the 
 FIGURE 255  Anatomy of the tracheobronchial tree. Note bronchopulmonary segments (1–10) as numbered. (Adapted 
and reproduced, with permission, from Gothard JWW, Branthwaite MA:  Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery. Blackwell, 1982.) 
1–2.5 cm
5 cm
Right
Left
Apical
bronchus
Posterior
bronchus
Anterior
bronchus
Superior
bronchus
Inferior
bronchus
Lateral basal
bronchus
Posterior basal
bronchus
Apical
bronchus
Posterior
bronchus
1
2
3
4
5
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
9
10
8
8
7
6
UPPER
LOBE
MIDDLE
LOBE
LOWER
LOBE
UPPER
LOBE
LINGULA
LOWER
LOBE
Anterior
bronchus
Lateral
bronchus
Medial
bronchus
Lateral basal
bronchus
Posterior
basal bronchus
Anterior
basal bronchus
Medial basal
(cardiac)
Anterior basal
bronchus
Apical
bronchus
(lower lobe)
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
551 
and is rotated 90° (toward the side of the bronchus 
to be intubated) aft er the tip passes the vocal cords 
and enters the larynx ( Figure 25–7 ). At this point, the 
operator has two options: the tube can be advanced 
until resistance is felt (the average depth of insertion is 
about 29 cm [at the teeth]), or alternatively, the fi ber-
optic bronchoscope can be inserted through the bron-
chial limb and advanced into the desired bronchus. 
Th e double-lumen tube can be advanced over the 
bronchoscope into the desired bronchus. Correct tube 
placement should be established using a preset proto-
col ( Figure 25–8 and  Table 25–2 ) and confi rmed by 
fl exible fi beroptic bronchoscopy. When problems are 
encountered in intubating the patient with the dou-
ble-lumen tube, placement of a single-lumen endo-
tracheal tube should be attempted; once positioned in 
the trachea, the latter can be exchanged for the dou-
ble-lumen tube by using a specially designed catheter 
guide (“tube exchanger”). 
(1) distorted anatomy of the left  main bronchus by an 
intrabronchial or extrabronchial mass; (2) compres-
sion of the left  main bronchus due to a descending 
thoracic aortic aneurysm; (3) left -sided pneumonec-
tomy; (4) left -sided single lung transplantation; and 
(5) left -sided sleeve resection. Finally, despite con-
cerns about right upper lobe atelectasis and poten-
tially diffi  cult placement, studies have failed to detect 
diff erences in clinical performance of right- and left -
sided double-lumen tubes when used clinically. 
 Placement of Double-Lumen Tubes 
 Laryngoscopy with a curved (MacIntosh) blade usu-
ally provides better intubating conditions than does a 
straight blade because the curved blade typically pro-
vides more room for manipulation of the large double-
lumen tube. Video laryngoscopy can also be employed 
to facilitate tube placement. Th e double-lumen tube 
is passed with the distal curvature concave anteriorly 
 FIGURE 256  Correct position of a left- and right-sided double-lumen tube. 
552 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
cuff  can be identifi ed distal to the carina. Th e opti-
mal position of a right-sided double-lumen tube is 
confi rmed by placing the fi beroptic scope through 
the endobronchial lumen, which should show 
alignment of the endobronchial side portal with 
the opening of the right upper lobe bronchus. Th e 
bronchial cuff  should be infl ated only to the point at 
which the audible leak from the open tracheal lumen 
disappears while ventilating only through the bron-
chial lumen. Tube position should be reconfi rmed 
aft er the patient is positioned for surgery because 
the tube may move relative to the carina as the 
patient is turned into the lateral decubitus position. 
Malpositioning of a double-lumen tube is usually 
 Most double-lumen tubes easily accommodate 
bronchoscopes with a 3.6- to 4.2-mm outer diam-
eter. When the bronchoscope is introduced into the 
tracheal lumen and advanced through the tracheal 
orifi ce, the carina should be visible ( Figure 25–9 ), 
and the bronchial limb of the tube should be seen 
entering the respective bronchus; additionally, the 
top of the bronchial cuff  (usually colored blue) 
should be visible, but should not extend above the 
carina. If the bronchial cuff  of a left -sided double-
lumen tube is not visible, the bronchial limb may 
have been inserted suffi  ciently far to allow the bron-
chial cuff  to obstruct the orifi ce of the left  upper or 
lower lobe; the tube should be withdrawn until the 
 FIGURE 257  Placement of a left-sided double-lumen tube. Note that the tube is turned 90° as soon as it enters the 
larynx.  A: Initial position.  B: Rotated 90°.  C: Final position. 
A
B
C
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
553 
when the bronchial lumen is clamped. In the same 
situation, if the surgical procedure is in the right 
thorax, clamping of the tracheal lumen will lead to 
ventilation of only the left  upper or left  lower lobe; 
hypoxia usually develops rapidly. 
 Right-sided double-lumen tubes can be acci-
dentally inserted into the left  main stem bronchus, 
inserted too distally or too proximally, or have 
indicated by failure of the operative lung to collapse, 
poor lung compliance, and low exhaled tidal vol-
ume. Problems with left -sided  double-lumen tubes 
are usually related to one of three possibilities: (1) 
the tube tip is too distal: (2) the tube tip is too proxi-
mal: or (3) the tube is in the right bronchus (the 
wrong side). If the tube tip is located too distally, 
the bronchial cuff  can obstruct the left  upper or the 
left  lower lobe orifi ce, and the bronchial lumen can 
be inserted into the orifi ce of the left  lower or left  
upper lobe bronchus, respectively. When the tube 
is not advanced distally enough, the infl ated bron-
chial cuff  may be above the carina and also occlude 
the tracheal lumen. In both instances, defl ation of 
the bronchial cuff  improves ventilation to the lung 
and helps to identify the problem. In some patients, 
the bronchial lumen may be within the left  upper 
or left  lower lobe bronchus but with the tracheal 
opening remaining above the carina; this situation 
is suggested by collapse of only one of the left  lobes 
 FIGURE 258  Results of unilateral clamping of the 
bronchial lumen tube when the double-lumen tube is in 
the correct position. 
Ipsilateral
breath sounds
disappear
Contralateral
breath sounds
remain
Contralateral
hemithorax
rises and falls
Contralateral
respiratory
gas moisture
disappears on
inhalation and
reappears on
exhalation
No change
in moisture
Breathing bag
has the
expected
compliance for
one-lung
ventilation
Ipsilateral
hemithorax
does not move
 TABLE 252 Protocol for checking 
placement of a left-sided double-lumen tube. 
1.  Inﬂ ate the tracheal cuﬀ  (5–10 mL of air). 
2.  Check for bilateral breath sounds. Unilateral breath 
sounds indicate that the tube is too far down (tracheal 
opening is bronchial). 
3.  Inﬂ ate the bronchial cuﬀ  (1–2 mL). 
4.  Clamp the tracheal lumen. 
5.  Check for unilateral left-sided breath sounds. 
  a.  Persistence of right-sided breath sounds indicates 
that the bronchial opening is still in the trachea (tube 
should be advanced). 
  b.  Unilateral right-sided breath sounds indicate 
incorrect entry of the tube in the right bronchus. 
  c.  Absence of breath sounds over the entire right lung 
and the left upper lobe indicates that the tube is too 
far down the left bronchus. 
6.  Unclamp the tracheal lumen and clamp the bronchial 
lumen. 
7.  Check for unilateral right-sided breath sounds. Absence 
or diminution of breath sounds indicates that the tube 
is not far enough down and that the bronchial cuﬀ  is 
occluding the distal trachea. 
Right bronchus
Bronchus
intermedius
Right upper
lobe bronchus
Carina
Posterior wall
of trachea
Bronchial tube
Bronchial cuff
 FIGURE 259  The view of the carina looking down the 
tracheal lumen of a properly positioned left double-lumen 
bronchial tube. 
554 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
tube, it does not need to be replaced with a conven-
tional tracheal tube if the patient remains intubated 
postoperatively (below). Its major disadvantage is 
that the “blocked” lung collapses slowly (and some-
times incompletely) because of the small size of the 
channel within the blocker. 
 Another way to achieve lung separation is by 
using an independent bronchial blocker passed 
through a single-lumen endotracheal tube. Th ere 
are several types of independent bronchial blockers. 
Th ey come in diff erent sizes (7Fr and 9Fr) and have 
a 1.4-mm diameter inner lumen. Bronchial block-
ers have a high-volume low-pressure cuff  with either 
an elliptical or spherical shape. Th e spherical shape 
of the cuff  facilitates adequate blockade of the right 
mainstem bronchus. Th e spherical or the elliptical 
cuff  can be used for the left  main stem bronchus. 
Th e inner lumen contains a nylon wire, which exits 
the distal end as a wireloop. Th e placement of the 
bronchial blocker involves inserting the endobron-
chial blocker through the endotracheal tube and 
using the fi beroptic bronchoscope and the distal 
loop of the guidewire to direct the blocker into a 
mainstem bronchus. Th e fi beroptic bronchoscope 
must be advanced beyond the bronchus opening 
so that the blocker enters the bronchus while it is 
being advanced. When the defl ated cuff  is beyond 
the entrance of the bronchus, the fi beroptic bron-
choscope is withdrawn, and the blocker is secured 
in position. In order to obtain bronchial blockade, 
the cuff  is fully infl ated under fi beroptic visualiza-
tion with 4 to 8 mL of air. Th e placement must be 
reconfi rmed when the patient is placed in the lateral 
position. Bronchial blockers may be good choices 
for lung separation in intubated critically ill patients 
who require one-lung ventilation, patients who 
are diffi  cult to intubate using direct laryngoscopy, 
patients with prior tracheostomies, and patients 
who may require postoperative mechanical ven-
tilation. However, because bronchial blockers are 
more prone to dislodgement compared with double-
lumen endotracheal tubes, and their small central 
lumens do not allow effi  cient suctioning of secre-
tions or rapid collapse of the lung, some clinicians 
prefer not to use them. 
 In smaller children, an infl atable embolec-
tomy (Fogarty) catheter can be used as a bronchial 
misalignment of the endobronchial side portal with 
the opening of the right upper lobe bronchus. If the 
tube inadvertently enters the wrong bronchus, the 
fi beroptic bronchoscope can be used to direct it 
into the correct side: (1) the bronchoscope is passed 
through the bronchial lumen to the tip of the tube; 
(2) under direct vision, the tube and the broncho-
scope are withdrawn together into the trachea just 
above the carina; (3) the bronchoscope alone is then 
advanced into the correct bronchus; and (4) the 
double-lumen tube is gently advanced over the bron-
choscope, which functions as a stylet to guide the 
bronchial lumen into the correct bronchus. 
 Complications of 
Double-Lumen Tubes 
 Major complications of double-lumen tubes include: 
(1) hypoxemia due to tube malplacement, tube 
occlusion, or excessive degrees of venous admixture 
with one-lung ventilation; (2) traumatic laryngitis; 
(3) tracheobronchial rupture resulting from trau-
matic placement or overinfl ation of the bronchial 
cuff ; and (4) inadvertent suturing of the tube to a 
bronchus during surgery (detected as the inability 
to withdraw the tube during attempted extubation). 
 SINGLELUMEN 
TRACHEAL TUBES WITH 
A BRONCHIAL BLOCKER 
 Bronchial blockers are infl atable devices that are 
passed alongside or through a single-lumen tracheal 
tube to selectively occlude a bronchial orifi ce. A 
 single-lumen tracheal tube with a built-in side chan-
nel for a retractable bronchial blocker is available. 
Th e tube is placed with the blocker fully retracted; its 
natural curve is such that turning the tube with the 
curve concave toward the right preferentially directs 
the bronchial blocker toward the right bronchus. 
Turning the tube with the curve concave toward the 
left  usually directs the blocker toward the left  bron-
chus. Th e bronchial blocker must be advanced, posi-
tioned, and infl ated under direct visualization via a 
fl exible bronchoscope. 
 Th e major advantage of a tube with an incorpo-
rated bronchial blocker is that, unlike a double-lumen 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
555 
Th e latter group includes squamous cell (epider-
moid) tumors, adenocarcinomas, and large cell 
(anaplastic) carcinomas. All types are more com-
monly encountered in smokers, but more “never 
smokers” die of lung cancer each year in the United 
States than the total number of people who die of 
ovarian cancer. Epidermoid and small cell carcino-
mas usually present as central masses with bronchial 
lesions; adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinomas 
are more typically peripheral lesions that oft en 
involve the pleura. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Symptoms may include cough, hemoptysis, wheez-
ing, weight loss, productive sputum, dyspnea, or 
fever. Pleuritic chest pain or pleural eff usion sug-
gests pleural extension. Involvement of mediastinal 
structures is suggested by hoarseness that results 
from compression of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
Horner’s syndrome caused by involvement of the 
sympathetic chain, an elevated hemidiaphragm 
caused by compression of the phrenic nerve, dys-
phagia caused by compression of the esophagus, 
or the superior vena cava syndrome caused by 
compression or invasion of the superior vena cava. 
Pericardial eff usion or cardiomegaly suggests car-
diac involvement. Extension of apical (superior 
sulcus) tumors can result in either shoulder or arm 
pain, or both, because of involvement of the C7–T2 
roots of the brachial plexus (Pancoast syndrome). 
Distant metastases most commonly involve the 
brain, bone, liver, and adrenal glands. 
 Lung carcinomas—particularly small cell—
can produce remote eff ects that are not related to 
malignant spread (paraneoplastic syndromes). 
Mechanisms include ectopic hormone produc-
tion and immunologic cross-reactivity between the 
tumor and normal tissues. Cushing’s syndrome, 
hyponatremia, and hypercalcemia may be encoun-
tered, resulting from secretion of ACTH, arginine 
vasopressin, and parathyroid hormone, respectively. 
Lambert–Eaton (myasthenic) syndrome is charac-
terized by a proximal myopathy in which muscle 
strength increases with repeated eff ort (in contrast 
to myasthenia gravis). Other paraneoplastic syn-
dromes include peripheral neuropathy and migra-
tory thrombophlebitis. 
blocker in conjunction with a conventional tracheal 
tube (with the embolectomy catheter placed either 
inside or alongside the tracheal tube); a guidewire 
in the catheter can be used to facilitate placement. 
Th is technique is occasionally used to collapse one 
lung when other techniques do not work. As the 
embolectomy catheter does not have a communi-
cating channel in the center, it also does not allow 
suctioning or ventilation of the isolated lung, and 
the catheter can be easily dislodged. Nonetheless, 
such bronchial blockers may be useful for one-lung 
anesthesia in pediatric patients and for tamponad-
ing bronchial bleeding in adult patients (see below). 
 Anesthesia for Lung Resection 
 PREOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Lung resections are usually carried out for the diag-
nosis and treatment of pulmonary tumors, and, less 
commonly, for complications of necrotizing pulmo-
nary infections and bronchiectasis. 
 1. Tumors 
 Pulmonary tumors can be either benign or malig-
nant, and, with the widespread use of bronchoscopic 
sampling, the diagnosis is usually available prior to 
surgery. Hamartomas account for 90% of benign 
pulmonary tumors; they are usually peripheral pul-
monary lesions and represent disorganized normal 
pulmonary tissue. Bronchial adenomas are usually 
central pulmonary lesions that are typically benign, 
but occasionally may be locally invasive and rarely 
metastasize. Th ese tumors include pulmonary car-
cinoids, cylindromas, and mucoepidermoid adeno-
mas. Th ey oft en obstruct the bronchial lumen and 
cause recurrent pneumonia distal to the obstruction 
in the same area. Primary pulmonary carcinoids may 
secrete multiple hormones, including adrenocortico-
tropic hormone (ACTH) and arginine vasopressin; 
however, manifestations of the carcinoid syndrome 
are uncommon and are more likely with metastases. 
 Malignant pulmonary tumors are divided into 
small (“oat”) cell and non–small cell carcinomas. 
556 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Evaluation for Lung Resection 
 A comprehensive preoperative pulmonary assess-
ment is necessary to assess the operative risk, 
minimize perioperative complications, and achieve 
better outcomes. Preoperative assessment of respi-
ratory function includes determinations of respira-
tory mechanics, gas exchange, and cardiorespiratory 
interaction. 
 Respiratory mechanics are assessed by pulmo-
nary function tests. Of these parameters, the most 
useful is the predicted postoperative forced expira-
tory volume in one sec (FEV 1 ), which is calculated 
as follows: 
 Postoperative FEV 1 =  preoperative FEV 1 × (1 – the 
percentage of functional lung 
tissue removed divided by 100) 
 Removal of extensively diseased lung (nonven-
tilated but perfused) does not necessarily adversely 
aff ect pulmonary function and may actually improve 
oxygenation. Mortality and morbidity are signifi -
cantly increased if postoperative FEV 1 is less than 
40% of normative FEV 1 , and patients with predicted 
postoperative FEV 1 of less than 30% may need post-
operative mechanical ventilatory support. 
 Gas exchange will sometimes be characterized 
by diff usion lung capacity for carbon monoxide 
(DLCO). DLCO correlates with the total function-
ing surface area of the alveolar–capillary interface. 
Predictive postoperative DLCO can be calculated in 
the same fashion as postoperative FEV 1 . A predicted 
postoperative DLCO of less than 40% also corre-
lates with increased postoperative respiratory and 
cardiac complications. Adequacy of gas exchange is 
more commonly assessed by arterial blood gas data 
such as Pa o 2 >60 mm Hg and a Pa co 2 <45 mm Hg. 
 Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q)
·
· scintigraphy pro-
vides the relative contribution of each lobe to over-
all pulmonary function and may further refi ne the 
assessment of predicted postoperative lung function, 
in patients where pneumonectomy is the indicated 
surgical procedure and there is concern whether a 
single lung will be adequate to support life. 
 Patients considered at greater risk of periop-
erative complications based on standard spirometry 
testing and calculation of postoperative function 
should undergo exercise testing for evaluation of 
 Treatment 
 Surgery is the treatment of choice to reduce the 
tumor burden in nonmetastatic lung cancer. Various 
chemotherapy and radiation treatments are likewise 
employed, but there is wide variation among tis-
sue types in their sensitivity to chemotherapy and 
radiation. 
 Resectability & Operability 
 Resectability is determined by the anatomic stage 
of the tumor, whereas operability is dependent on 
the interaction between the extent of the procedure 
required for cure and the physiological status of the 
patient. Anatomic staging is accomplished using 
chest radiography, computed tomography (CT) or 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), bronchoscopy, 
and (sometimes) mediastinoscopy. Th e extent of the 
surgery should maximize the chances for a cure but 
still allow for adequate residual pulmonary function 
postoperatively. Lobectomy via a posterior thora-
cotomy, through the fi ft h or sixth intercostal space, 
or thorough video assisted thoracoscopic surgery 
(VATS), is the procedure of choice for most lesions. 
Segmental or wedge resections may be performed in 
patients with small peripheral lesions and poor pul-
monary reserve. Pneumonectomy is necessary for 
curative treatment of lesions involving the left  or right 
main bronchus or when the tumor extends toward 
the hilum. A sleeve resection may be employed for 
patients with proximal lesions and limited pulmonary 
reserve as an alternative to pneumonectomy; in such 
instances, the involved lobar bronchus, together with 
part of the right or left  main bronchus, is resected, and 
the distal bronchus is reanastomosed to the proximal 
bronchus or the trachea. Sleeve pneumonectomy may 
be considered for tumors involving the trachea. 
 Th e incidence of pulmonary complications 
aft er thoracotomy and lung resection is about 30% 
and is related not only to the amount of lung tis-
sue resected, but also to the disruption of chest wall 
mechanics due to the thoracotomy. Postoperative 
pulmonary dysfunction seems to be less aft er VATS 
than “open” thoracotomy. Th e mortality rate for 
pneumonectomy is generally more than twice that of 
for a lobectomy. Mortality is greater for right-sided 
than left -sided pneumonectomy, possibly because of 
greater loss of lung tissue. 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
557 
massive hemoptysis. Responsible organisms include 
both bacteria and fungi. 
 3. Bronchiectasis 
 Bronchiectasis is a permanent dilation of bronchi. 
It is usually the end result of severe or recurrent 
infl ammation and obstruction of bronchi. Causes 
include a variety of viral, bacterial, and fungal patho-
gens, as well as inhalation of toxic gases, aspiration 
of gastric acid, and defective mucociliary clearance 
(cystic fi brosis and disorders of ciliary dysfunction). 
Bronchial muscle and elastic tissue are typically 
replaced by very vascular fi brous tissue. Th e lat-
ter predisposes to bouts of hemoptysis. Pulmonary 
resection is usually indicated for massive hemopty-
sis when conservative measures have failed and the 
disease is localized. Patients with diff use bronchiec-
tasis have a chronic obstructive ventilatory defect. 
 ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS 
 1. Preoperative Management 
 Th e majority of patients undergoing pulmonary 
resections have underlying lung disease. It should 
be emphasized that smoking is a risk factor for 
both chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
coronary artery disease; both disorders commonly 
coexist in patients presenting for thoracotomy. 
cardiopulmonary interaction. Stair climbing is the 
easiest way to assess exercise capacity and cardio-
pulmonary reserve. Patients capable of climbing 
two or three fl ights of stairs have decreased mortal-
ity and morbidity. On the other hand, the ability to 
climb less than two fl ights of stairs is associated with 
increased perioperative risk. Th e gold standard for 
evaluating cardiopulmonary interaction is by labo-
ratory exercise testing and measurement of maximal 
minute oxygen consumption. A  V˙ o2 >20 mL/kg is 
not associated with a signifi cant increase in peri-
operative mortality or morbidity, whereas a minute 
consumption of less than 10 mL/kg is associated 
with an increased perioperative risk. 
 A combination of tests to evaluate the three 
components of the respiratory function (ie, respira-
tory mechanics, gas exchange, and cardiopulmonary 
interaction) has been summarized in the so-called 
“three-legged” stool of respiratory assessment 
( Figure 25–10 ). 
 2. Infection 
 Pulmonary infections may present as a solitary nod-
ule or cavitary lesion (necrotizing pneumonitis). 
An exploratory thoracotomy may be carried out 
to exclude malignancy and diagnose the infectious 
agent. Lung resection is also indicated for cavitary 
lesions that are refractory to antibiotic treatment, 
are associated with refractory empyema, or result in 
 FIGURE 2510  The “three-legged” stool of prethoracotomy respiratory assessment. *Most valid test. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Slinger PD, Johnston MR: Preoperative assessment: an anesthesiologist’s perspective. Thorac Surg Clin 2005;15:11.) 
Respiratory
Mechanics
FEV 1*
(ppo >40%)
MVV,
RV/TLC, FVC
The “3-legged” Stool of Prethoracotomy
Respiratory Assessment
Cardio-Pulmon.
Reserve
V⋅
O2 max*
(>15ml/kg/min)
Stair climb >2 flight,
6 min walk,
Exercise SpO2 <4%
Lung Parench.
Function
DLCO*
(ppo >40%)
PaO2 >60
PaCO2 <45
558 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
and an anesthesia circuit adapter for administering 
bronchodilators—should be immediately available. 
 Patients undergoing open-lung resections (seg-
mentectomy, lobectomy, pneumonectomy) oft en 
receive postoperative thoracic epidural analgesia, 
unless there is a contraindication. However, patients 
are increasingly being treated with numerous anti-
platelet and anticoagulant medications, which may 
preclude epidural catheter placement. 
 Venous Access 
 At least one large-bore (14- or 16-gauge) intrave-
nous line is mandatory for all open thoracic surgi-
cal procedures. Central venous access (preferably 
on the side of the thoracotomy to avoid the risk of 
pneumothorax on the side that will be ventilated 
intraoperatively), a blood warmer, and a rapid infu-
sion device are also desirable if extensive blood loss 
is anticipated. 
 Monitoring 
 Direct monitoring of arterial pressure is indicated 
for resections of large tumors (particularly those 
with mediastinal or chest wall extension), and any 
procedure performed in patients who have limited 
pulmonary reserve or signifi cant cardiovascular 
disease. Central venous access with monitoring 
of central venous pressure (CVP) is desirable for 
pneumonectomies and resections of large tumors. 
Less invasive measures of cardiac output through 
use of pulse contour analysis and transpulmo-
nary thermodilution provide better estimates of 
cardiac function and volume responsiveness (See 
Chapter  5). Pulmonary artery catheters are very 
rarely used. Measurement of pulmonary artery 
pressures may also not be accurate due to intrin-
sic and extrinsic PEEP, lateral decubitus, and open 
chest. In patients with signifi cant coronary artery 
disease or pulmonary hypertension, intraoperative 
monitoring can be enhanced by the use of trans-
esophageal echocardiography. 
 Induction of Anesthesia 
 Aft er adequate preoxygenation, an intravenous 
anesthetic is used for induction of most patients. 
Th e selection of an induction agent should be 
based on  the patient’s preoperative status. Direct 
Echocardiography is useful for assessing baseline 
cardiac function and may suggest evidence of cor 
pulmonale (right ventricular enlargement or hyper-
trophy) in patients with poor exercise tolerance. 
Stress echocardiography (exercise or dobutamine) 
may be useful in diagnosing coronary artery disease 
in patients with suggestive signs and symptoms. 
 Patients with tumors should be evaluated for 
complications related to local extension of the tumor 
and paraneoplastic syndromes (above). Preoperative 
chest radiographs and CT or MR images should 
be reviewed. Tracheal or bronchial deviation can 
make tracheal intubation and proper positioning 
of bronchial tubes much more diffi  cult. Moreover, 
airway compression can lead to diffi  culty in venti-
lating the patient following induction of anesthesia. 
Pulmonary consolidation, atelectasis, and large pleu-
ral eff usions predispose to hypoxemia. Th e location 
of any bullous cysts or abscesses should be noted. 
 Patients undergoing thoracic procedures are at 
increased risk of postoperative pulmonary and car-
diac complications. Perioperative arrhythmias, par-
ticularly supraventricular tachycardias, are thought 
to result from surgical manipulations or distention 
of the right atrium following reduction of the pul-
monary vascular bed. Th e incidence of arrhythmias 
increases with age and the amount of pulmonary 
resection. 
 2. Intraoperative Management 
 Preparation 
 As with anesthesia for cardiac surgery, optimal prep-
aration may help to prevent potentially catastrophic 
problems. Th e frequent presence of poor pulmonary 
reserve, anatomic abnormalities, or compromise 
of the airways, and the need for one-lung ventila-
tion predispose these patients to the rapid onset of 
hypoxemia. A well thought-out plan to deal with 
potential diffi  culties is necessary. Moreover, in addi-
tion to items for basic airway management, special-
ized and properly functioning equipment—such as 
multiple sizes of single- and double-lumen tubes, a 
fl exible (pediatric) fi beroptic bronchoscope, a small-
diameter “tube exchanger” of adequate length to 
accommodate a double lumen tube, a continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) delivery system, 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery
559
 Maintenance of Anesthesia 
 All current anesthetic techniques have been success-
fully used for thoracic surgery, but the combination 
of a potent halogenated agent (isofl urane, sevofl u-
rane, or desfl urane) and an opioid is preferred by 
most clinicians. Advantages of the halogenated 
agents include: (1) potent dose-related bronchodila-
tion; (2) depression of airway refl exes; (3) the ability 
to use a high inspired oxygen concentration (F io 2 ), if 
necessary; (4) the ability to make relatively rapid 
adjustments in anesthetic depth; and (5) minimal 
eff ects on hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (see 
below). Halogenated agents generally have minimal 
eff ects on HPV in doses <1 minimum alveolar con-
centration (MAC). Advantages of an opioid include: 
(1) generally minimal hemodynamic eff ects; 
(2) depression of airway refl exes; and (3) residual 
postoperative analgesia.  If epidural opioids 
are  used postoperatively, intravenous opi-
oids  should be limited during surgery to prevent 
excessive postoperative respiratory depression. 
Maintenance of neuromuscular blockade with a 
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocker (NMB) 
during surgery facilitates rib spreading as well as 
anesthetic management. Intravenous fl uids should 
generally be restricted in patients undergoing pul-
monary resections. Excessive fl uid administration in 
thoracic surgical patients has been associated with 
acute lung injury in the postoperative period. No 
fl uid replacement for estimated “third space” losses 
should be administered during lung resection. 
Excessive fl uid administration in the lateral decubi-
tus position may promote a “lower lung syndrome” 
(ie, gravity-dependent transudation of fl uid into the 
dependent lung). Th e latter increases intrapulmo-
nary shunting and promotes hypoxemia, particularly 
3
laryngoscopy should generally be performed only 
aft er adequate depth of anesthesia has been achieved 
to prevent refl ex bronchospasm and to obtund 
the cardiovascular pressor response. Th is may be 
accomplished by incremental doses of the induction 
agent, an opioid, or deepening the anesthesia with 
a volatile inhalation agent (the latter is particularly 
useful in patients with reactive airways). 
 Tracheal intubation with a single-lumen tracheal 
tube (or with a laryngeal mask airway [LMA]) may be 
necessary, if the surgeon performs diagnostic bron-
choscopy (below) prior to surgery. Once the bron-
choscopy is completed, the single-lumen tracheal 
tube (or LMA) can be replaced with a  double-lumen 
bronchial tube (above). Controlled positive-pressure 
ventilation helps prevent atelectasis, paradoxical 
breathing, and mediastinal shift ; it also allows control 
of the operative fi eld to facilitate the surgery. 
 Positioning 
 Following induction, intubation, and confi rma-
tion of correct tracheal or bronchial tube position, 
additional venous access and monitoring may be 
obtained before the patient is positioned for surgery. 
Most lung resections are performed with the patient 
in the lateral decubitus position. Proper positioning 
avoids injuries and facilitates surgical exposure. Th e 
lower arm is fl exed and the upper arm is extended in 
front of the head, pulling the scapula away from the 
operative fi eld ( Figure 25–11 ). Pillows are placed 
between the arms and legs, and an axillary (chest) 
roll may be positioned just beneath the dependent 
axilla to reduce pressure on the inferior shoulder 
(it is assumed that this helps to protect the brachial 
plexus); care is taken to avoid pressure on the eyes 
and the dependent ear. 
 FIGURE 2511  Proper positioning for a lateral thoracotomy. (Reproduced, with permission, from Gothard JWW, Branthwaite MA: 
 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery. Blackwell, 1982.) 
560 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
way to treat hypoxemia that occurs immediately 
aft er the onset of one-lung ventilation. Patients 
with obstructive pathology may develop intrinsic 
PEEP. In these patients, the application of external 
PEEP may lead to unpredictable levels of total PEEP. 
Although the management of one-lung ventilation 
has long included the use of 100% oxygen, evidence 
of oxygen toxicity has accumulated both experimen-
tally and clinically. Although there is no convincing 
evidence that outcomes are worsened with the use of 
100% oxygen, some clinicians recommend titrating 
F io 2 to maintain the oxygen saturation above 90%, 
especially in patients who have undergone adjuvant 
therapy and are at risk of developing ALI. Although 
there is no unequivocal evidence that one mode of 
ventilation may be more benefi cial than the other, 
pressure-controlled ventilation may diminish the 
risk of barotrauma by limiting peak and plateau air-
way pressures, and the fl ow pattern results in a more 
homogenous distribution of the tidal volume and 
improved dead space ventilation. 
 At the end of the procedure, the operative lung 
is infl ated gradually to a peak inspiratory pressure 
of less than 30 cm H 2 O to prevent disruption of the 
staple line. During reinfl ation of the operative lung, 
it may be helpful to clamp the lumen serving the 
dependent lung to limit overdistension. 
 Periodic arterial blood gas analysis is helpful 
to ensure adequate ventilation. End-tidal CO 2 mea-
surement may not be reliable due to increased dead-
space and an unpredictable gradient between the 
arterial and end-tidal CO 2 partial pressure. 
 Management of Hypoxia 
 Hypoxemia during one-lung anesthesia requires 
one or more of the following interventions: 
1. 
 Adequate position of the bronchial tube (or 
bronchial blocker) must be confi rmed, as its 
position relative to the carina can change as 
a result of surgical manipulations or traction; 
repeat fi beroptic bronchoscopy through 
the tracheal lumen can quickly detect this 
problem. Both lumens of the tube should also 
be suctioned to exclude excessive secretions or 
obstruction as a factor. 
2. 
 Increase F io 2 to 1.0 
during one-lung ventilation. Moreover, the collapsed 
lung may be prone to acute lung injury due to surgi-
cal  retraction during the procedure and possible 
 ischemia–reperfusion injury. During lung resec-
tions, the bronchus (or remaining lung tissue) is usu-
ally divided with an automated stapling device. Th e 
bronchial stump is then tested for an air leak under 
water by transiently sustaining 30 cm of positive 
pressure to the airway. Prior to completion of chest 
closure, all remaining lung segments should be fully 
expanded manually under direct vision. Controlled 
mechanical ventilation is then resumed and contin-
ued until chest tubes are connected to suction. 
 Management of One-Lung Ventilation 
 Although still an intraoperative problem, hypox-
emia has become less frequent due to better lung 
isolation methods, ventilation techniques, and the 
use of anesthetic agents with less detrimental eff ects 
on hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. Attention 
has currently shift ed toward avoidance of acute lung 
injury (ALI). Fortunately, ALI occurs infrequently, 
with an incidence of 2.5 % of all lung resections 
combined, and an incidence of 7.9% aft er pneumo-
nectomy. However, when it occurs, ALI is associ-
ated with a risk of mortality or major morbidity of 
about 40%. 
 Based on current data, it seems that protective 
lung ventilation strategies may minimize the risk of 
acute lung injury  aft er lung resection. Th is ventila-
tory strategy includes the use of lower tidal volumes 
(6–8 mL/kg), routine use of PEEP (5–10 cm H 2 O), 
lower F io 2 (50% to 80%), lower ventilatory pres-
sures (plateau pressure <25 cm H 2 O; peak airway 
pressure <35 cm H 2 O) through the use of pressure-
controlled ventilation and permissive hypercapnia. 
Th e use of lower tidal volumes may lead to lung 
derecruitment, atelectasis, and hypoxemia. Lung 
derecruitment may be avoided by application of 
external PEEP and frequent recruitment maneuvers. 
Although PEEP may prevent alveolar collapse and 
development of atelectasis, it may cause a decrease 
in Pa o 2 due to diversion of blood fl ow away from 
the dependent, ventilated lung and an increase in 
total shunt. Th us, PEEP must be customized to the 
underlying disease of each patient, and a new appli-
cation of PEEP will almost never be the appropriate 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery
561
both lungs. Unfortunately, mediastinal “bounce”—
a to-and-fro movement—oft en interferes with the 
surgery. 
 3. Postoperative Management 
 General Care 
 Most patients are extubated shortly aft er surgery to 
decrease the risk of pulmonary barotrauma (par-
ticularly “blowout” [rupture] of the bronchial suture 
line). Patients with marginal pulmonary reserve 
should remain intubated until standard extubation 
criteria are met; if a double-lumen tube was used 
for one-lung ventilation, it should be replaced with 
a regular single-lumen tube at the end of surgery. A 
catheter guide (“tube exchanger”) should be used if 
the original laryngoscopy was diffi  cult (above). 
 Patients are observed in the postanesthesia care 
unit, and, in most instances, at least overnight or 
longer in an intensive care unit or intermediate care 
unit. Postoperative hypoxemia and respiratory aci-
dosis are common. Th ese eff ects are largely caused 
by atelectasis and “shallow breathing (‘splinting’)” 
due to incisional pain. Gravity-dependent transuda-
tion of fl uid into the intraoperative dependent lung 
may also be contributory. Reexpansion edema of the 
collapsed nondependent lung can also occur. 
 Postoperative hemorrhage complicates about 
3% of thoracotomies and may be associated 
with up to 20% mortality. Signs of hemorrhage 
include increased chest tube drainage (>200 mL/h), 
hypotension, tachycardia, and a falling hematocrit. 
Postoperative supraventricular tachyarrhythmias 
are common and usually require immediate treat-
ment. Routine postoperative care should include 
maintenance of a semiupright (>30°) position, 
supplemental oxygen (40% to 50%), incentive spi-
rometry, electrocardiographic and hemodynamic 
monitoring, a postoperative chest radiograph (to 
confi rm proper position of all thoracostomy tube 
drains and central lines and to confi rm expansion of 
both lung fi elds), and adequate pain relief. 
 Postoperative Analgesia 
 Th e importance of adequate pain management in 
the thoracic surgical patient cannot be overstated. 
Inadequate pain control in these high-risk patients 
4
3. 
 Recruitment maneuvers on the dependent, 
ventilated lung may eliminate atelectasis and 
improve shunt. 
4. 
 Optimize PEEP to the dependent, 
nonoperative lung. 
5. 
 Ensure adequate cardiac output and adequate 
oxygen carrying capacity. 
6. 
 CPAP or blow-by oxygen to the operative 
lung will decrease shunting and improve 
oxygenation. However, infl ation of the 
operative lung during VATS will make 
identifi cation and visualization of the lung 
structures diffi  cult for the surgeon; therefore, 
such maneuvers should be applied carefully 
and cautiously. 
7. 
 Two-lung ventilation should be instituted for 
severe hypoxemia. If possible, pulmonary 
artery clamp can also be placed during 
pneumonectomy to eliminate shunt. 
8. 
 In patients with chronic obstructive lung 
disease, one should always be suspicious of 
pneumothorax on the dependent, ventilated 
side as a cause of severe hypoxemia. Th is 
complication requires immediate detection 
and treatment by aborting the surgical 
procedure, reexpanding the operative lung, 
and immediately inserting a chest tube in the 
contralateral chest. 
 Alternatives to One-Lung Ventilation 
 Ventilation can be stopped for short periods if 100% 
oxygen is insuffl  ated at a rate greater than oxygen 
consumption  (apneic oxygenation) into an unob-
structed tracheal tube . Adequate oxygenation can 
oft en be maintained for prolonged periods, but pro-
gressive respiratory acidosis limits the use of this 
technique to 10–20 min in most patients. Arterial 
P co 2 rises 6 mm Hg in the fi rst minute, followed by a 
rise of 3–4 mm Hg during each subsequent minute. 
 High-frequency positive-pressure ventilation 
and high-frequency jet ventilation have been used 
during thoracic procedures as alternatives to one-
lung ventilation. A standard tracheal tube may be 
used with either technique. Small tidal volumes 
(<2 mL/kg) allow decreased lung excursion, which 
may facilitate the surgery but still allow ventilation of 
562 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
or ropivacaine), with the epidural catheter placed at 
a thoracic level. 
 Postoperative Complications 
 Postoperative complications following thoracotomy 
are relatively common, but fortunately most are 
minor and resolve uneventfully. Blood clots and 
thick secretions may obstruct the airways and 
result  in atelectasis; suctioning may be necessary. 
Atelectasis is suggested by tracheal deviation and 
shift ing of the mediastinum to the operative side fol-
lowing segmental or lobar resections. Th erapeutic 
bronchoscopy should be considered for persistent 
atelectasis, particularly when associated with thick 
secretions. Air leaks from the operative hemitho-
rax  are common following segmental and lobar 
resections. Most air leaks stop aft er a few days. 
 Bronchopleural fi stulae present as a sudden 
large air leak from the chest tube that may be 
associated with an increasing pneumothorax and 
partial lung collapse. When they occur within the 
fi rst 24–72 hr, they are usually the result of inade-
quate surgical closure of the bronchial stump. 
Delayed presentation is usually due to necrosis of 
the suture line associated with inadequate blood 
fl ow or infection. 
 Some complications are rare, but deserve spe-
cial consideration because they can be life-threaten-
ing and require immediate exploratory thoracotomy. 
Postoperative bleeding was discussed above. Torsion 
of a lobe or segment can occur as the remaining 
lung on the operative side expands to occupy the 
hemithorax. Th e torsion usually occludes the pul-
monary vein to that part of the lung, causing venous 
outfl ow obstruction. Hemoptysis and infarction can 
rapidly follow. Th e diagnosis is suggested by an 
enlarging homogeneous density on the chest radio-
graph and a closed lobar orifi ce on bronchoscopy. 
 Acute herniation of the heart into the opera-
tive hemithorax can occur through the peri-
cardial defect that may remain following a 
pneumonectomy. A large pressure diff erential 
between the two hemithoraces is thought to trigger 
this catastrophic event. Cardiac herniation into the 
right hemithorax results in sudden severe hypoten-
sion with an elevated CVP because of torsion of the 
 central veins. Cardiac herniation into the left 
5
6
will result in splinting; poor respiratory eff ort; and 
the inability to cough and clear secretions, with an 
end result of airway closure, atelectasis, shunting, and 
hypoxemia. Irrespective of the modality used, there 
must be a comprehensive plan for pain management. 
 A balance between comfort and respiratory 
depression in patients with marginal lung function 
is diffi  cult to achieve with parenteral opioids alone. 
Patients who have undergone thoracotomy clearly 
benefi t from the use of other techniques (described 
below) that may reduce the need for parenteral opi-
oids. If parenteral opioids are used alone, they are 
best administered via a patient-controlled analgesia 
device. 
 In the absence of an epidural catheter, intercos-
tal or paravertebral nerve blocks with long-acting 
local anesthetics may facilitate extubation, but have 
a limited duration of action, so alternative means of 
pain management must be employed. Alternatively, 
a cryoanalgesia probe may be used intraoperatively 
to freeze the intercostal nerves (cryoneurolysis) and 
produce long-lasting anesthesia; unfortunately, max-
imum analgesia may not be achieved until 24–48 hr 
aft er the cryoanalgesia procedure. Nerve regen-
eration is reported to occur approximately 1 month 
aft er the cryoneurolysis. Infusion of local anesthetic 
through a catheter placed in the surgical wound dur-
ing closure will markedly reduce the requirement for 
parenteral opioids and improve the overall quality of 
analgesia relative to parenteral opioids alone. 
 Epidural analgesia is the current optimal 
method for acute pain control following thoracic 
surgical procedures. It provides excellent pain relief, 
continuous therapy, and avoidance of the side eff ects 
associated with administration of systemic opioids. 
On the other hand, epidural techniques require 
attention from the acute pain team for the duration 
of the infusion and subject the patient to the long 
list of epidural-related side eff ects and complica-
tions. However, there is still much debate over the 
level of placement of the epidural catheter (tho-
racic versus lumbar), type of medication adminis-
tered (opioid and/or local anesthetic), and timing 
of medication administration (before surgical inci-
sion vs before end of surgery). Most practitioners 
use a combination of opioid (fentanyl, morphine, 
hydromorphone) and local anesthetic (bupivacaine 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery
563
 Multiple 
large-bore 
intravenous 
catheters 
should be placed. Sedating drugs should not be 
given to awake, nonintubated, spontaneously ven-
tilating patients because they are usually already 
hypoxic; 100% oxygen should be given continu-
ously. If the patient is already intubated and has 
bronchial blockers in place, sedation is helpful to 
prevent coughing. Th e bronchial blocker should be 
left  in position until the lung is resected. When the 
patient is not intubated, a rapid sequence induc-
tion (ketamine or etomidate with succinylcholine) 
is used. Patients usually swallow a large amount of 
blood and should be considered to have a full stom-
ach. A large double-lumen bronchial tube is ideal 
for protecting the normal lung from blood and for 
suctioning each lung separately. If any diffi  culty is 
encountered in placing the double-lumen tube, or its 
relatively small lumens occlude easily, a large (>8.0-
mm inner diameter) single-lumen tube may be used 
with a bronchial blocker to provide lung isolation. 
 Pulmonary Cyst & Bulla 
 Pulmonary cysts or bullae may be congenital or 
acquired as a result of emphysema. Large bullae can 
impair ventilation by compressing the surrounding 
lung. Th ese air cavities oft en behave as if they have a 
one-way valve, predisposing them to progressively 
enlarge. Lung resection may be undertaken for pro-
gressive dyspnea or recurrent pneumothorax. Th e 
greatest risk of anesthesia is rupture of the air cavity 
during positive-pressure ventilation, resulting in 
tension pneumothorax; the latter may occur on 
either side prior to thoracotomy or on the nonopera-
tive side during the lung resection. Induction of 
anesthesia with maintenance of spontaneous venti-
lation is desirable until the side with the cyst or bul-
lae is isolated with a double-lumen tube, or until a 
chest tube is placed; most patients have a large 
increase in dead space, so assisted ventilation is nec-
essary to avoid excessive hypercarbia.  Th e use 
of N 2 O is contraindicated in patients with 
cysts or bullae because it can expand the air space 
and cause rupture. Th e latter may be signaled by 
sudden hypotension, bronchospasm, or an abrupt 
rise in peak infl ation pressure and requires immedi-
ate placement of a chest tube. 
7
hemithorax following left  pneumonectomy results 
in sudden compression of the myocardium, result-
ing in hypotension, ischemia, and infarction. A 
chest radiograph shows a shift  of the cardiac shadow 
into the operative hemithorax. 
 Extensive mediastinal dissections can injure the 
phrenic, vagus, and left  recurrent laryngeal nerves. 
Postoperative phrenic nerve palsy presents as eleva-
tion of the ipsilateral hemidiaphragm together with 
diffi  culty in weaning the patient from the ventilator. 
Large chest wall resections may include part of the 
diaphragm, causing a similar problem, in addition 
to a fl ail chest. Paraplegia rarely follows thoracot-
omy for lung resection. Th ere are reports of cellulose 
gauze and other debris migrating from the thoracic 
gutter into the spinal canal, resulting in spinal cord 
compression. If an epidural catheter has been placed, 
any loss of motor function or unexplained back pain 
should immediately trigger imaging to rule out epi-
dural hematoma. 
 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
FOR PATIENTS UNDERGOING 
LUNG RESECTION 
 Massive Pulmonary Hemorrhage 
 Massive 
hemoptysis 
is 
usually 
defi ned 
as 
>500–600 mL of blood loss from the tracheo-
bronchial tree within 24 hr. Th e etiology is usu-
ally tuberculosis, bronchiectasis, or a neoplasm, or 
complication of transbronchial biopsies. Emergency 
surgical management with lung resection is reserved 
for “potentially lethal” massive hemoptysis. In most 
cases, surgery is usually carried out on an urgent 
rather than on a true emergent basis whenever pos-
sible; even then, operative mortality may exceed 
20% (compared with > 50% for medical manage-
ment). Embolization of the involved bronchial arter-
ies may be attempted. Th e most common cause of 
death is asphyxia secondary to blood in the airway. 
Patients may be brought to the operating room for 
rigid bronchoscopy when localization is not possible 
with fi beroptic fl exible bronchoscopy. A bronchial 
blocker or Fogarty catheter (above) may be placed 
to tamponade the bleeding, or laser coagulation may 
be attempted. 
564 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
intubation and tracheostomy. Squamous cell and 
adenoid cystic carcinomas account for the major-
ity of tumors. Compromise of the tracheal lumen 
results in progressive dyspnea. Wheezing or stridor 
may be evident only with exertion. Th e dyspnea 
may be worse when the patient is lying down, with 
progressive airway obstruction. Hemoptysis can 
also complicate tracheal tumors. CT is valuable in 
localizing the lesion.  Measurement of fl ow–volume 
loops confi rms the location of the obstruction and 
aids the clinician in evaluating the severity of the 
lesion ( Figure 25–12 ). 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Little premedication is given, as most patients pre-
senting for tracheal resection have moderate to 
severe airway obstruction. Use of an anticholinergic 
agent to dry secretions is controversial because of the 
theoretical risk of inspissation. Monitoring should 
include direct arterial pressure measurements. 
 An inhalation induction (in 100% oxygen) 
is carried out in patients with severe obstruction. 
Sevofl urane is preferred because it is the potent 
anesthetic that is least irritating to the airway. 
Spontaneous ventilation is maintained throughout 
induction. NMBs are generally avoided because of 
the potential for complete airway obstruction follow-
ing neuromuscular blockade. Laryngoscopy is per-
formed only when the patient is judged to be under 
deep anesthesia. Intravenous lidocaine (1–2 mg/kg) 
can deepen the anesthesia without depressing respi-
rations. Th e surgeon may then perform rigid bron-
choscopy to evaluate and possibly dilate the lesion. 
Following bronchoscopy, the patient is intubated 
with a tracheal tube small enough to be passed distal 
to the obstruction whenever possible. 
 A collar incision is utilized for high tracheal 
lesions. Th e surgeon divides the trachea in the neck 
and advances a sterile armored tube into the distal 
trachea, passing off  a sterile connecting breathing 
circuit to the anesthesiologist for ventilation during 
the resection. Following the resection and comple-
tion of the posterior part of the reanastomosis, the 
armored tube is removed, and the original tracheal 
tube is advanced distally, past the anastomosis 
( Figure 25–13 ). Alternatively, high-frequency jet 
ventilation may be employed during the anastomosis 
 Lung Abscess 
 Lung abscesses result from primary pulmonary 
 infections, 
obstructing 
pulmonary 
neoplasms 
(above), or, rarely, hematogenous spread of sys-
temic infections. Th e two lungs should be isolated to 
 prevent contamination of the healthy lung. A rapid-
sequence intravenous induction with tracheal intu-
bation with a double-lumen tube is generally 
recom mended, with the aff ected lung in a depen-
dent position. As soon as the double-lumen tube is 
placed, both bronchial and tracheal cuff s should be 
infl ated. Th e bronchial cuff  should make a tight seal 
before the patient is turned into the lateral decubitus 
position, with the diseased lung in a nondependent 
position. Th e diseased lung should be frequently 
suctioned during the procedure to decrease the like-
lihood of contaminating the healthy lung. 
 Bronchopleural Fistula 
 Bronchopleural fi stulas occur following lung resec-
tion (usually pneumonectomy), rupture of a pul-
monary abscess into a pleural cavity, pulmonary 
barotrauma, or spontaneous rupture of bullae. Th e 
majority of patients are treated (and cured) conser-
vatively; patients come to surgery when chest tube 
drainage has failed. Anesthetic management may 
be complicated by the inability to eff ectively ven-
tilate the patient with positive pressure because of 
a large air leak, the potential for a tension pneu-
mothorax, and the risk of contaminating the other 
lung if an empyema is present. Th e empyema is 
usually drained, prior to closure of the fi stula. 
 A correctly placed double-lumen tube greatly 
simplifi es anesthetic management by isolating the 
fi stula and allowing one-lung ventilation to the nor-
mal lung. Th e patient should be extubated as soon as 
possible aft er the repair. 
 Anesthesia for 
Tracheal Resection 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Tracheal resection is most commonly performed for 
tracheal stenosis, tumors, or, less commonly, con-
genital abnormalities. Tracheal stenosis can result 
from penetrating or blunt trauma, as well as tracheal 
 FIGURE 2512  A–D: Flow–volume loops. 
Expiration
Inspiration
Time
Time
Time
Time
Flow
A NORMAL
B VARIABLE EXTRATHORACIC OBSTRUCTION
C VARIABLE INTRATHORACIC OBSTRUCTION
D FIXED LARGE AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
0
0
Flow
0
0
-
-
-
-
-
+
+ +
+ +
+
+
565 
566 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
by passing the jet cannula past the obstruction and 
into the distal trachea ( Figure 25–14 ). Return of 
spontaneous ventilation and early extubation at the 
end of the procedure are desirable. Patients should 
be positioned with the neck fl exed immediately aft er 
the operation to minimize tension on the suture line 
( Figure 25–15 ). 
 Surgical management of low tracheal lesions 
requires a median sternotomy or right posterior 
thoracotomy. Anesthetic management is similar, 
but more regularly requires more complicated tech-
niques, such as high-frequency ventilation or even 
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) in complex congen-
ital cases. 
 Anesthesia for Video-Assisted 
Thoracoscopic Surgery (VATS) 
 VATS is now used for most lung resections that 
previously required open thoracotomy. Th e list of 
procedures that can be accomplished during VATS 
includes lung biopsy, segmental and lobar resec-
tions, pleurodesis, esophageal procedures, and 
pericardectomy. Most procedures are performed 
through three or more small incisions in the chest, 
with the patient in the lateral decubitus position. 
A
B
 FIGURE 2514  Tracheal resection using high-
frequency jet ventilation.  A: The catheter is advanced 
past the obstruction, and the cuﬀ  is deﬂ ated when jet 
ventilation is initiated.  B: The catheter is advanced distally 
by the surgeon. Jet ventilation can be continued without 
interruption during resection and reanastomosis. 
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 2513  A–D: Airway management of a high tracheal lesion. 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
567 
by the need to share the airway with the surgeon or 
pulmonologist; fortunately, they are oft en of short 
duration. Aft er a standard intravenous induction, 
anesthesia is oft en maintained with total intrave-
nous anesthesia, and a short- or intermediate-acting 
NMB. Brief airway procedures are among the few 
remaining indications for a succinylcholine infusion. 
One of three techniques can then be used during 
rigid bronchoscopy: (1) apneic oxygenation using 
a small catheter positioned alongside the broncho-
scope to insuffl  ate oxygen (above); (2) conventional 
ventilation through the side arm of a ventilating 
bronchoscope (when the proximal window of this 
 Anesthetic management is similar to that for 
open procedures, except that one-lung ventilation is 
required (as opposed to being desirable) for nearly 
all procedures. 
 Anesthesia for Diagnostic 
Thoracic Procedures 
 Bronchoscopy 
 Rigid bronchoscopy for removal of foreign bodies or 
tracheal dilatation is usually performed under gen-
eral anesthesia. Th ese procedures are complicated 
A
B
 FIGURE 2515  Position of the patient before ( A ) and after ( B ) tracheal resection and reanastomosis with the patient’s 
neck ﬂ exed for the ﬁ rst 24–48 hr. 
568 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Unilateral bronchoalveolar lavage is performed 
under general anesthesia with a double-lumen 
bronchial tube. Th e cuff s on the tube should be 
properly positioned and should make a watertight 
seal to prevent spillage of fl uid into the other side. 
Th e procedure is normally done in the supine posi-
tion; although lavage with the lung in a depen-
dent position helps to minimize contamination 
of the other lung, this position can cause severe 
 ventilation/perfusion mismatch. Warm normal 
saline is infused into the lung to be treated and is 
drained by gravity; treatment continues until the 
fl uid returning is clear (about 10–20 L). At the end 
of the procedure, both lungs are well suctioned, and 
the double-lumen tracheal tube is replaced with a 
single-lumen tracheal tube. 
 Anesthesia for Lung 
Transplantation 
 PREOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Lung transplantation is indicated for end-stage pul-
monary parenchymal disease or pulmonary hyper-
tension. Candidates are functionally incapacitated 
by dyspnea and have a poor prognosis. Criteria vary 
according to the primary disease process. Common 
etiologies are listed in  Table 25–3 . Lung transplan-
tation (as is true for all solid organ transplants) is 
limited by the availability of suitable organs, not by 
the availability of recipients. Patients typically have 
dyspnea at rest or with minimal activity and resting 
instrument is opened for suctioning or biopsies, 
ventilation must be interrupted); or (3) jet ventila-
tion through an injector-type bronchoscope. 
 Mediastinoscopy 
 Mediastinoscopy, much more commonly employed 
in the past than at present, provides access to the 
mediastinal lymph nodes and is used to establish 
either the diagnosis or the resectability of intratho-
racic malignancies (above). Preoperative CT or MR 
imaging is useful for evaluating tracheal distortion 
or compression. 
 Mediastinoscopy is performed under general 
tracheal anesthesia with neuromuscular paralysis. 
Venous access with a large-bore (14- to 16-gauge) 
intravenous catheter is mandatory because of the 
risk of bleeding and the diffi  culty in controlling 
bleeding when it occurs. Because the innominate 
artery may be compressed during the procedure, 
blood pressure should be measured in the left  arm. 
 Complications associated with mediastinos-
copy include: (1) vagally mediated refl ex bradycardia 
from compression of the trachea or the great ves-
sels; (2) excessive hemorrhage (see above); (3) cere-
bral ischemia from compression of the innominate 
artery (detected with a right radial arterial line or 
pulse oximeter on the right hand); (4) pneumotho-
rax (usually presents postoperatively); (5) air embo-
lism (because of a 30° head elevation, the risk is 
greatest during spontaneous ventilation); (6) recur-
rent laryngeal nerve damage; and (7) phrenic nerve 
injury. 
 Bronchoalveolar Lavage 
 Bronchoalveolar lavage may be employed for patients 
with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Th ese patients 
produce excessive quantities of surfactant and fail to 
clear it. Th ey present with dyspnea and bilateral con-
solidation on the chest radiograph. In such patients, 
bronchoalveolar lavage may be indicated for severe 
hypoxemia or worsening dyspnea. Oft en, one lung is 
lavaged, allowing the patient to recover for a few days 
before the other lung is lavaged; the “sicker” lung is 
therefore lavaged fi rst. Increasingly, both lungs are 
lavaged during the same procedure, creating unique 
challenges to ensure adequate oxygenation during 
lavage of the second lung. 
 TABLE 253 Indications for isolated lung 
transplantation. 
 Cystic ﬁ brosis 
 Bronchiectasis 
 Obstructive 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 α 1 -antitrypsin deﬁ ciency 
 Pulmonary lymphangiomatosis 
 Restrictive 
 Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁ brosis 
 Primary pulmonary hypertension 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
569 
 Induction & Maintenance 
of Anesthesia 
 A rapid-sequence induction is utilized. Induction 
with ketamine, etomidate, an opioid, or a combina-
tion of these agents is employed, avoiding precipi-
tous drops in blood pressure. An NMB is used to 
facilitate laryngoscopy. Hypoxemia and hypercar-
bia must be avoided to prevent further increases 
in pulmonary artery pressure. Hypotension should 
be treated with vasopressors instead of large fl uid 
boluses (see below). 
 Anesthesia is usually maintained with total 
intravenous anesthesia or a volatile agent. Intra-
operative diffi  culties in ventilation are not uncom-
mon. Progressive retention of CO 2 can also be a 
problem intraoperatively. Ventilation should be 
adjusted to maintain a Pa co 2 as close to the patient’s 
baseline as possible. However, in the presence of a 
reasonable cardiovascular reserve and normal right 
heart function, higher levels of Pa co 2 can be toler-
ated for short periods of time. Hypercarbia and aci-
dosis may lead to pulmonary vasoconstriction and 
acute right heart failure, and hemodynamic support 
with inotropes may be required for these patients. 
Patients with cystic fi brosis have copious secretions 
and require  frequent suctioning. 
 Single-Lung Transplantation 
 Single-lung transplantation is often attempted 
without CPB. The procedure is performed 
through a posterior thoracotomy. Whether to 
employ CPB during transplantation of one lung is 
based on the patient’s response to collapsing the 
lung to be replaced and clamping its pulmonary 
artery. Persistent arterial hypoxemia (Sp o 2 < 88%) 
or a sudden increase in pulmonary artery pres-
sures necessitates CPB. Prostaglandin E 1 , mil-
rinone, nitroglycerin, and dobutamine may be 
utilized to reduce pulmonary hypertension and 
prevent right ventricular failure. Inotropic sup-
port may be necessary. After the recipient lung 
is removed, the pulmonary artery, left atrial cuff 
(with the pulmonary veins), and bronchus of the 
donor lung are anastomosed. Flexible bronchos-
copy is used to examine the bronchial suture line 
after its completion. 
hypoxemia (Pa o 2 <50 mm Hg) with increasing oxy-
gen requirements. Progressive CO 2 retention is also 
very common. Patients may be ventilator depen-
dent. Cor pulmonale does not necessarily require 
combined heart–lung transplantation because right 
ventricular function may recover when pulmonary 
artery pressures normalize. Patients should have 
normal left  ventricular function and be free of coro-
nary artery disease, as well as other serious health 
problems. 
 Single-lung transplantation may be performed 
in selected patients with idiopathic pulmonary 
fi brosis, whereas double-lung transplantation is typ-
ically performed in patients with cystic fi brosis, bul-
lous emphysema, or vascular diseases. Patients with 
Eisenmenger syndrome require combined heart–
lung transplantation. 
 ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS 
 1. Preoperative Management 
 Eff ective coordination between the organ-retrieval 
team and the transplant team minimizes graft  isch-
emia time and avoids unnecessary prolongation of 
pretransplant anesthesia time. Th ese procedures 
are performed on an emergency basis; therefore, 
patients may have little time to fast for surgery. 
Oral cyclosporine also may be given preoperatively. 
Administration of a clear antacid, an H 2 blocker, or 
metoclopramide should be considered. Patients are 
very sensitive to sedatives, so premedication is usu-
ally administered only in the operating room when 
the patient is directly attended. Immunosuppressants 
and antibiotics are also administered aft er induction 
and prior to surgical incision. 
 2. Intraoperative Management 
 Monitoring 
 Strict asepsis should be observed for invasive moni-
toring procedures. Central venous access might be 
accomplished only aft er induction of anesthesia 
because patients may not be able to lie fl at while 
awake. Patients with a patent foramen ovale are at 
risk of paradoxical embolism because of high right 
atrial pressures. 
570 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
and renal and hepatic dysfunction. Deteriorating 
lung function may result from rejection or reperfu-
sion injury. Occasionally, temporary extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation may be necessary. Frequent 
bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsies and 
lavage are necessary to diff erentiate between rejec-
tion and infection. Nosocomial Gram-negative bac-
teria, cytomegalovirus,  Candida, Aspergillus , and 
Pneumocystis carinii are common pathogens. Other 
postoperative surgical complications include dam-
age to the phrenic, vagus, and left  recurrent laryn-
geal nerves. 
 Anesthesia for 
Esophageal Surgery 
 PREOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Common indications for esophageal surgery include 
tumors, gastroesophageal refl ux, and motility disor-
ders (achalasia). Surgical procedures include simple 
endoscopy, esophageal dilatation, cervical esoph-
agomyotomy, open or thoracoscopic distal esoph-
agomyotomy, insertion or removal of esophageal 
stents, and esophagectomy. Squamous cell carcino-
mas account for the majority of esophageal tumors; 
adenocarcinomas are less common, whereas benign 
tumors (leiomyomas) are rare. Most tumors occur 
in the distal esophagus. Operative treatment may 
be palliative or curative. Although the prognosis 
is generally poor, surgical therapy off ers the only 
hope of a cure. Aft er esophageal resection, the 
stomach is pulled up into the thorax, or the esopha-
gus is functionally replaced with part of the colon 
(interposition). 
 Gastroesophageal refl ux is treated surgi-
cally when the esophagitis is refractory to medi-
cal management or results in complications such 
as stricture, recurrent pulmonary aspiration, or 
Barrett’s esophagus (columnar epithelium). A 
variety of antirefl ux operations may be performed 
(Nissen, Belsey, Hill, or Collis–Nissen) via tho-
racic or abdominal approaches, oft en laparoscopi-
cally. Th ey all involve wrapping part of the stomach 
around the esophagus. 
 Double-Lung Transplantation 
 A “clamshell” transverse sternotomy can be used for 
double-lung transplantation. Th e procedure is occa-
sionally performed with CPB; sequential thoracoto-
mies for double-lung transplantation can also be 
performed. Heart lung transplantation is performed 
through median sternotomy with CPB. 
 Posttransplantation Management 
 Aft er anastomosis of the donor organ or organs, ven-
tilation to both lungs is resumed.  Following 
transplantation, peak inspiratory pressures 
should be maintained at the minimum pressure 
compatible with good lung expansion, and the 
inspired oxygen concentration should be maintained 
as close to room air as allowed by a Pa o 2 >60 mm Hg. 
Methylprednisolone and mannitol are usually 
administered prior to the release of vascular clamps. 
Hyperkalemia may occur as the preservative fl uid is 
washed out of the donor organ. If transplantation 
has been performed on CPB, the patient is separated 
from CPB. Pulmonary vasodilators, inhaled nitric 
oxide, and inotropes (above) may be necessary. 
Transesophageal echocardiography is helpful in dif-
ferentiating right and left  ventricular dysfunction, as 
well as in evaluating blood fl ow in the pulmonary 
vessels, particularly aft er transplantation. 
 Transplantation disrupts the neural innerva-
tion, lymphatic drainage, and bronchial circulation 
of the transplanted lung. Th e respiratory pattern is 
unaff ected, but the cough refl ex is abolished below 
the carina. Bronchial hyperreactivity is observed in 
some patients. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 
remains normal. Loss of lymphatic drainage increases 
extravascular lung water and predisposes the trans-
planted lung to pulmonary edema. Intraoperative 
fl uid replacement must therefore be kept to a mini-
mum. Loss of the bronchial circulation predisposes 
to ischemic breakdown of the bronchial suture line. 
 3. Postoperative Management 
 Patients are extubated aft er surgery as soon as 
is feasible. A thoracic epidural catheter may be 
employed for postoperative analgesia when coagu-
lation studies are normal. Th e postoperative course 
may be complicated by acute rejection, infections, 
8
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery
571
Monitoring of arterial and central venous pressure 
is indicated. Multiple large-bore intravenous access, 
fl uid warmers, and a forced-air body warmer are 
advisable. During the trans hiatal approach to esoph-
agectomy, substernal and diaphragmatic retractors 
can interfere with cardiac function. Moreover, as 
the esophagus is freed up blindly from the poste-
rior mediastinum by blunt dissection, the surgeon’s 
hand transiently interferes with cardiac fi lling and 
produces profound hypotension. Th e dissection can 
also induce marked vagal stimulation. 
 Colonic interposition involves forming a pedi-
cle graft  of the colon and passing it through the pos-
terior mediastinum up to the neck to take the place 
of the esophagus. Th is procedure is lengthy, and 
maintenance of an adequate blood pressure, cardiac 
output, and hemoglobin concentration is necessary 
to ensure graft  viability. Graft  ischemia may be her-
alded by a progressive metabolic acidosis. 
 Postoperative ventilation will oft en be used in 
patients undergoing esophagectomy, because so 
many of them will have coexisting cardiac and pul-
monary disease. Postoperative surgical complica-
tions include damage to the phrenic, vagus, and left  
recurrent laryngeal nerves. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Mediastinal Adenopathy 
 A 9-year-old boy with mediastinal lymphade-
nopathy seen on a chest radiograph presents for 
biopsy of a cervical lymph node. 
 What is the most important preoperative 
consideration? 
 Is there any evidence of airway compromise? 
Tracheal compression may produce dyspnea (prox-
imal obstruction) or a nonproductive cough (distal 
obstruction). 
 Asymptomatic compression is also common 
and may be evident only as tracheal deviation on 
physical or radiographic examinations. A CT scan 
of the chest provides invaluable information about 
the presence, location, and severity of airway 
compression. Flow–volume loops will also detect 
 Achalasia and systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) 
account for the majority of surgical procedures per-
formed for motility disorders. Th e former usually 
occurs as an isolated fi nding, whereas the latter is 
part of a generalized collagen–vascular disorder. 
Cricopharyngeal muscle dysfunction can be associ-
ated with a variety of neurogenic or myogenic dis-
orders and oft en results in a Zenker’s diverticulum. 
 ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS 
 Regardless of the procedure, a common anes-
thetic concern in patients with esophageal 
disease is the risk of pulmonary aspiration. Th is 
may result from obstruction, altered motility, or 
abnormal sphincter function. In fact, most patients 
typically complain of dysphagia, heartburn, regurgi-
tation, coughing, and/or wheezing when lying fl at. 
Dyspnea on exertion may also be prominent when 
chronic aspiration results in pulmonary fi brosis. 
Patients with malignancies may present with ane-
mia and weight loss. Esophageal cancer patients 
usually have a history of cigarette smoking and 
alcohol consumption, so patients should be evalu-
ated for coexisting chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, coronary artery disease, and liver dysfunc-
tion. Patients with systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) 
should be evaluated for involvement of other organs, 
particularly the kidneys, heart, and lungs; Raynaud’s 
phenomena is also common. 
 In patients with refl ux, consideration should 
be given to administering metoclopramide, an 
H 2 -receptor blocker, or a proton-pump inhibitor 
preoperatively. In such patients, a rapid-sequence 
induction should be used. A double-lumen tube is 
used for procedures involving thoracoscopy or tho-
racotomy. Th e anesthesiologist may be asked to pass 
a large-diameter bougie into the esophagus as part of 
the surgical procedure; great caution must be exer-
cised to help avoid pharyngeal or esophageal injury. 
 Transhiatal (blunt) and thoracic esophagec-
tomies deserve special consideration. Th ese pro-
cedures oft en involve considerable blood loss. Th e 
former requires an upper abdominal incision and a 
left  cervical incision, whereas the latter requires pos-
terolateral thoracotomy, an abdominal incision, and, 
fi nally, a left  cervical incision. Parts of the proce-
dure may be performed using laparoscopy or VATS. 
9
572 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
complications following induction of general anes-
thesia. Therefore, biopsy of a peripheral node (usu-
ally cervical or scalene) under local anesthesia is 
safest whenever possible. Although establishing 
a diagnosis is of prime importance, the presence 
of signiﬁ cant airway compromise or the superior 
vena cava syndrome may dictate empiric treat-
ment with corticosteroids prior to tissue diagnosis 
at surgery (cancer is the most common cause); pre-
operative radiation therapy or chemotherapy may 
also be considered. The patient can usually safely 
undergo surgery with general anesthesia once air-
way compromise and other manifestations of the 
superior vena cava syndrome are alleviated. 
 General anesthesia may be indicated for estab-
lishing a diagnosis in young or uncooperative 
patients who have no evidence of airway com-
promise or the superior vena cava syndrome, and, 
rarely, for patients unresponsive to steroids, radia-
tion, and chemotherapy. 
 How does the presence of airway obstruction 
and the superior vena cava syndrome inﬂ uence 
management of general anesthesia? 
1.  Premedication:  Only an anticholinergic should 
be given. The patient should be transported to 
the operating room in a semiupright position 
with supplemental oxygen. 
2.  Monitoring:  In addition to standard monitors, 
an arterial line is helpful, but it should be placed 
after induction in young patients. At least one 
large-bore intravenous catheter should be 
placed in a lower extremity, as venous drainage 
from the upper body may be unreliable. 
3.  Airway management:  Diﬃ  culties with ventila-
tion and intubation should be anticipated. 
Following preoxygenation, awake intubation 
with an armored tracheal tube may be saf-
est in a cooperative patient. Use of a ﬂ exible 
bronchoscope is advantageous in the pres-
ence of airway distortion and will deﬁ ne the 
site and degree of obstruction. Coughing or 
straining, however, may precipitate complete 
airway obstruction because the resultant posi-
tive pleural pressure increases intrathoracic 
subtle airway obstruction and provide important 
information regarding the location and functional 
importance of the obstruction (above). 
 Does the absence of any preoperative dyspnea 
make severe intraoperative respiratory 
compromise less likely? 
 No. Severe airway obstruction can occur fol-
lowing induction of anesthesia in these patients 
even in the absence of any preoperative symp-
toms. This mandates that the chest radiograph and 
CT scan be reviewed for evidence of asymptomatic 
airway obstruction. The point of obstruction is typi-
cally distal to the tip of the tracheal tube. Moreover, 
loss of spontaneous ventilation can precipitate 
complete airway obstruction. 
 What is the superior vena cava syndrome? 
 Superior vena cava syndrome is the result of 
progressive enlargement of a mediastinal mass 
and compression of mediastinal structures, par-
ticularly the vena cava. Lymphomas are most 
commonly responsible, but primary pulmonary 
or mediastinal neoplasms can also produce the 
syndrome. Superior vena cava syndrome is often 
associated with severe airway obstruction and car-
diovascular collapse on induction of general anes-
thesia. The caval compression produces venous 
engorgement and edema of the head, neck, and 
arms. Direct mechanical compression, as well as 
mucosal edema, severely compromise airﬂ ow in 
the trachea. Most patients favor an upright pos-
ture, as recumbency worsens the airway obstruc-
tion. Cardiac output may be severely depressed 
due to impeded venous return from the upper 
body, direct mechanical compression of the heart, 
and (with malignancies) pericardial invasion. An 
echocardiogram is useful in evaluating cardiac 
function and detecting pericardial ﬂ uid. 
 What is the anesthetic of choice for a patient 
with superior vena cava syndrome? 
 The absence of signs or symptoms of airway 
compression or superior vena cava syndrome 
does not preclude potentially life-threatening 
 
CHAPTER 25 Anesthesia for Thoracic Surgery 
573 
by ﬂ exible bronchoscopy or the presence of an 
air leak around the tracheal tube when the tra-
cheal cuﬀ  is deﬂ ated. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Campos J: An update on bronchial blockers during 
lung separation techniques in adults. Anesth Analg 
2003;97:1266. 
 Ehrenfeld JM, Walsh JL, Sandberg WS: Right- and left -
sided Mallinckrodt double-lumen tubes have identical 
clinical performance. Anesth Analg 2008;106:1847. 
 Gothard J: Anesthetic considerations for patients with 
anterior mediastinal masses. Anesthesiol Clin 
2008;26:305. 
 Grichnik K, Shaw A: Update on one lung ventilation: the 
use of continuous positive airway pressure ventilation 
and positive end expiratory pressure ventilation- 
clinical application. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 
2009;22:23. 
 Lohser J: Evidence based management of one lung 
ventilation. Anesthesiol Clin 2008;26:241. 
 Reilly JJ Jr: Evidence-based preoperative evaluation of 
candidates for thoracotomy. Chest 1999;116:474S. 
 Slinger P: Update on anesthetic management for 
pneumonectomy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:31. 
 Slinger P, Johnston M: Preoperative assessment: an 
anesthesiologist’s perspective. Th orac Surg Clin 
2005;15:11. 
tracheal compression. Passing the armored 
tube beyond the area of compression may 
obviate this problem. Uncooperative patients 
require a sevoﬂ urane inhalation induction. 
4.  Induction:  The goal should be a smooth induc-
tion maintaining spontaneous ventilation and 
hemodynamic stability. The ability to venti-
late the patient with a good airway should be 
established prior to use of an NMB. Using 100% 
oxygen, one of three induction techniques can 
be used: (1) intravenous ketamine (because 
it results in greater hemodynamic stability in 
patients with reduced cardiac output); (2) inha-
lational induction with a volatile agent (usually 
sevoﬂ urane); or (3) incremental small doses of 
propofol or etomidate. 
 
  Positive-pressure ventilation can precipitate 
severe hypotension, and volume loading prior 
to induction may partly oﬀ set impaired ven-
tricular ﬁ lling secondary to caval obstruction. 
5.  Maintenance of anesthesia:  The technique 
selected should be tailored to the patient’s 
hemodynamic status. Following intubation, 
neuromuscular blockade prevents coughing 
or straining. 
6.  Extubation:  At the end of the procedure, 
patients should be left intubated until the air-
way obstruction has resolved, as determined 
This page intentionally left blank 
 575
 Neurophysiology 
& Anesthesia 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
Cerebral perfusion pressure is the diﬀ erence 
between mean arterial pressure and 
intracranial pressure (or central venous 
pressure, whichever is greater) . 
The cerebral autoregulation curve is shifted 
to the right in patients with chronic arterial 
hypertension . 
 The most important extrinsic inﬂ uences on 
cerebral blood ﬂ ow (CBF) are respiratory gas 
tensions—particularly Pa CO 2 . CBF is directly 
proportionate to Pa CO 2  between tensions 
of 20 and 80 mg Hg. Blood ﬂ ow changes 
approximately 1–2 mL/100 g/min per mm 
Hg change in Pa CO 2 . 
 CBF changes 5% to 7% per 1°C change in 
temperature. Hypothermia decreases both 
cerebral metabolic rate and CBF, whereas 
pyrexia has the reverse eﬀ ect . 
 The movement of a given substance across 
the blood–brain barrier is governed simul-
taneously by its size, charge, lipid solubility, 
and degree of protein binding in blood . 
 The blood–brain barrier may be disrupted 
by severe hypertension, tumors, trauma, 
1
2
3
4
5
6
strokes, infection, marked hypercapnia, 
hypoxia, and sustained seizure activity . 
The cranial vault is a rigid structure with a 
ﬁ xed total volume, consisting of brain (80%), 
blood (12%), and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (8%). 
Any increase in one component must be 
oﬀ set by an equivalent decrease in another 
to prevent a rise in intracranial pressure . 
With the exception of ketamine, all 
intravenous agents either have little 
eﬀ ect on or reduce cerebral metabolic 
rate and CBF . 
With normal autoregulation and an 
intact blood–brain barrier, vasopressors 
increase CBF only when mean arterial 
blood pressure is below 50–60 mm Hg 
or above 150–160 mm Hg . 
The brain is very vulnerable to ischemic 
injury because of its relatively high oxygen 
consumption and near total dependence 
on aerobic glucose metabolism . 
Hypothermia is the most eﬀ ective method 
for protecting the brain during focal and 
global ischemia . 
7
8
9
10
11
26
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthetic agents may have profound eff ects on 
cerebral metabolism, blood fl ow, cerebrospinal 
fl uid (CSF) dynamics, and intracranial volume 
and pressure. In some instances, these alterations 
are deleterious, whereas in others they may be 
benefi cial. Th is chapter reviews important physi-
ological concepts in anesthetic practice and dis-
cusses the eff ects of commonly used anesthetics on 
cerebral physiology. 
576 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Neuronal
electrical
activity
Cellular
integrity
40%
60%
the brain. Paradoxically, hyperglycemia can exac-
erbate global and focal hypoxic brain injury by 
accelerating cerebral acidosis and cellular injury. 
Tight control of perioperative blood glucose con-
centration has been advocated in part because of 
adverse eff ects of hyperglycemia during ischemic 
episodes; however, overzealous blood glucose con-
trol can likewise produce injury through iatrogenic 
hypoglycemia. 
 CEREBRAL BLOOD FLOW 
 Cerebral blood fl ow (CBF) varies with metabolic 
activity. Th ere are a variety of methods available 
to directly measure CBF. Th ese methods include: 
positron emission tomography, xenon enhanced 
computed tomography, single photon emission 
computed tomography, and computed tomography 
perfusion scans. Th ese methods do not lend them-
selves to bedside monitoring of CBF. Blood fl ow 
studies confi rm that regional CBF parallels meta-
bolic activity and can vary from 10–300 mL/100 g/
min. For example, motor activity of a limb is associ-
ated with a rapid increase in regional CBF of the cor-
responding motor cortex. Similarly, visual activity is 
associated with an increase in regional CBF of the 
corresponding occipital visual cortex. 
 Although total CBF averages 50 mL/100 g/min, 
fl ow in gray matter is about 80 mL/100 g/min, 
whereas that in white matter is estimated to be 20 mL/
100 g/min. Total CBF in adults averages 750 mL/min 
(15% to 20% of cardiac output). Flow rates below 
20–25 mL/100 g/min are usually associated with 
cerebral impairment, as evidenced by slowing on the 
electroencephalogram (EEG). CBF rates between 
15 and 20 mL/100 g/min typically produce a fl at 
(isoelectric) EEG, whereas rates below 10 mL/
100 g/min are usually associated with irreversible 
brain damage. 
 Indirect measures are oft en used to estimate the 
adequacy of CBF and brain tissue oxygen delivery in 
clinical settings. Th ese methods include: 
 • Th e velocity of CBF can be measured using 
transcranial Doppler (TCD); see Chapters 5 
and 6 for a discussion of the Doppler eff ect. An 
ultrasound probe (2 mHz, pulse wave Doppler) 
is placed in the temporal area above the 
 Cerebral Physiology 
 CEREBRAL METABOLISM 
 Th e brain normally consumes 20% of total body 
oxygen. Most cerebral oxygen consumption (60%) 
is used to generate adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to 
support neuronal electrical activity ( Figure 26–1 ). 
Th e cerebral metabolic rate (CMR) is usually 
expressed in terms of oxygen consumption (CMR o 2 ) 
and averages 3–3.8 mL/100 g/min (50 mL/min) in 
adults. CMR o 2 is greatest in the gray matter of the 
cerebral cortex and generally parallels cortical elec-
trical activity. Because of the relatively high oxygen 
consumption and the absence of signifi cant oxygen 
reserves, interruption of cerebral perfusion usually 
results in unconsciousness within 10 sec, as oxygen 
tension rapidly drops below 30 mm Hg. If blood 
fl ow is not reestablished within 3–8 min under most 
conditions, ATP stores are depleted, and irreversible 
cellular injury begins to occur. Th e hippocampus 
and cerebellum seem to be most sensitive to hypoxic 
injury. 
 Neuronal cells normally utilize glucose as 
their primary energy source. Brain glucose con-
sumption is approximately 5 mg/100 g/min, of 
which more than 90% is metabolized aerobically. 
CMR o 2 therefore normally parallels glucose con-
sumption. Th is relationship is not maintained dur-
ing starvation, when ketone bodies (acetoacetate 
and β-hydroxybutyrate) also become major energy 
substrates. Although the brain can also take up 
and metabolize lactate, cerebral function is nor-
mally dependent on a continuous supply of glu-
cose. Acute sustained hypoglycemia is injurious to 
 FIGURE 261  Normal brain oxygen requirements. 
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia
577
pressure [CVP], if it is greater than ICP). MAP – ICP 
(or CVP) = CPP. CPP is normally 80–100 mm Hg. 
Moreover, because ICP is normally less than 10 mm 
Hg, CPP is primarily dependent on MAP. 
 Moderate to severe increases in ICP (>30 mm 
Hg) can compromise CPP and CBF, even in the 
presence of a normal MAP. Patients with CPP values 
less than 50 mm Hg oft en show slowing on the EEG, 
whereas those with a CPP between 25 and 40 mm 
Hg typically have a fl at EEG. Sustained perfusion 
pressures less than 25 mm Hg may result in irrevers-
ible brain damage. 
 2. Autoregulation 
 Much like the heart and kidneys, the brain nor-
mally tolerates a wide range of blood pressure, 
with little change in blood fl ow. Th e cerebral 
 vasculature rapidly (10–60 s) adapts to changes in 
CPP. Decreases in CPP result in cerebral vasodila-
tion, whereas elevations induce vasoconstriction. 
In normal individuals, CBF remains nearly con-
stant between MAPs of about 60 and 160 mm Hg 
( Figure 26–2 ). Beyond these limits, blood fl ow 
becomes pressure dependent. Pressures above 
150–160 mm Hg can disrupt the blood–brain bar-
rier (see below) and may result in cerebral edema 
and hemorrhage. 
 Th e cerebral autoregulation curve ( Figure 26–2 ) 
is shift ed to the right in patients with chronic 
2
zygomatic arch, which allows insonation of the 
middle cerebral artery. Normal velocity in the 
middle cerebral artery is approximately 55 cm/
sec. Velocities greater than 120 cm/sec can 
indicate cerebral artery vasospasm following 
subarachnoid hemorrhage or hyperemic blood 
fl ow. Comparison between the velocities in 
the extracranial internal carotid artery and the 
middle cerebral artery (the Lindegaard ratio) 
can distinguish between these conditions. 
Middle cerebral artery velocity three times that 
of the velocity measured in the extracranial 
internal carotid artery more likely refl ects 
cerebral artery vasospasm. 
 • Near infrared spectroscopy was discussed 
in Chapter 6. Decreased saturation is associated 
with impaired cerebral oxygen delivery, 
although near infrared spectroscopy primarily 
refl ects cerebral venous oxygen saturation. 
 • Brain tissue oximetry measures the oxygen 
tension in brain tissue through placement of 
a bolt with a Clark electrode oxygen sensor. 
Brain tissue CO 2 tension can also be measured 
using a similarly placed infrared sensor. 
Normal brain tissue oxygen tension varies from 
20–50 mm Hg. Brain tissue oxygen tensions 
less than 20 mm Hg warrant interventions, and 
values less than 10 mm Hg are indicative of 
brain ischemia. 
 • Intracerebral microdialysis can be used to 
measure changes in brain tissue chemistry 
that are indicative of ischemia and/or brain 
injury. Microdialysis can be used to measure 
cerebral lactate, neurotransmitters, markers 
of infl ammation, and glucose concentration. 
Increases in the ratio of lactate/pyruvate have 
been associated with cerebral ischemia. 
 REGULATION OF CEREBRAL 
BLOOD FLOW 
 1. Cerebral Perfusion Pressure 
 Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is the dif-
ference between mean arterial pressure (MAP) 
and intracranial pressure (ICP) (or central venous 
1
 FIGURE 262  Normal cerebral autoregulation curve. 
Mean arterial pressure (mm Hg)
0
50
60
120
160
200
Cerebral blood flow (mL/100 g/min)
578 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
be secondary to changes in the pH of CSF and 
cerebral tissue. Because ions do not readily cross 
the blood–brain barrier (see below) but CO 2 does, 
acute changes in Pa co 2 but not HCO 3 – aff ect CBF. 
Th us, acute metabolic acidosis has little eff ect on 
CBF because hydrogen ions (H + ) cannot readily 
cross the blood–brain barrier. Aft er 24–48 hr, CSF 
HCO 3 – concentration adjusts to compensate for the 
change in Pa co 2 , so that the eff ects of hypocapnia 
and hypercapnia are diminished. Marked hyper-
ventilation (Pa co 2 < 20 mm Hg) shift s the  oxygen–
hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left , and, 
with changes in CBF, may result in EEG changes 
suggestive of cerebral impairment, even in normal 
individuals. 
 Only marked changes in Pa o 2 alter CBF. 
Whereas hyperoxia may be associated with only 
minimal decreases (–10%) in CBF, severe hypox-
emia (Pa o 2 < 50 mm Hg) greatly increases CBF 
( Figure 26–3 ). 
 Temperature 
 CBF changes 5% to 7% per 1°C change in tem-
perature. Hypothermia decreases both CMR 
and CBF, whereas hyperthermia has the reverse 
eff ect. Between 17°C and 37°C, the Q10 for humans 
is approximately 2—that is, for every 10° increase 
in temperature, the CMR doubles. Conversely, the 
CMR decreases by 50% if the temperature of the 
brain falls by 10°C (eg, from 37°C to 27°C) and 
another 50% if the temperature decreases from 27°C 
to 17°C. At 20°C, the EEG is isoelectric, but further 
decreases in temperature continue to reduce CMR 
throughout the brain. Hyperthermia (above 42°C) 
may result in neuronal cell injury. 
 Viscosity 
 Th e most important determinant of blood viscosity 
is hematocrit. A decrease in hematocrit decreases 
viscosity and can improve CBF; unfortunately, a 
reduction in hematocrit also decreases the oxygen-
carrying capacity and thus can potentially impair 
oxygen delivery. Elevated hematocrit, as may be 
seen with marked polycythemia, increases blood 
viscosity and can reduce CBF. Some studies suggest 
4
arterial hypertension. Both upper and lower limits are 
shift ed. Flow becomes more pressure dependent at 
low “normal” arterial pressures in return for cerebral 
protection at higher arterial pressures. Studies suggest 
that long-term antihypertensive therapy can restore 
cerebral autoregulation limits toward normal. 
 Both myogenic and metabolic mechanisms 
may explain cerebral autoregulation. Myogenic 
mechanisms involve an intrinsic response of smooth 
muscle cells in cerebral arterioles to changes in 
MAP. Metabolic mechanisms indicate that cere-
bral metabolic demands determine arteriolar tone. 
Th us, when tissue demand exceeds blood fl ow, the 
release of tissue metabolites causes vasodilation and 
increases fl ow. Whereas hydrogen ions were once 
thought to mediate this response, other metabolites 
are likely involved. 
 3. Extrinsic Mechanisms 
 Respiratory Gas Tensions 
 Th e most important extrinsic infl uences 
on CBF are respiratory gas tensions— 
particularly Pa co 2 . CBF is directly proportionate 
to Pa co 2 between tensions of 20 and 80 mm Hg 
( Figure 26–3 ). Blood fl ow changes approximately 
1–2 mL/100 g/min per mm Hg change in Pa co 2 . 
Th is eff ect is almost immediate and is thought to 
3
 FIGURE 263  The relationship between cerebral 
blood ﬂ ow and arterial respiratory gas tensions. 
25
25
75
75
125
125
175
PaCO2
PaO2
Partial pressure (mm Hg)
Cerebral blood flow (mL/100 g/min)
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia
579
infection, marked hypercapnia, hypoxia, and sus-
tained seizure activity. Under these conditions, fl uid 
movement across the blood–brain barrier becomes 
dependent on hydrostatic pressure rather than 
osmotic gradients. 
 CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 
 CSF is found in the cerebral ventricles and cisterns 
and in the subarachnoid space surrounding the 
brain and spinal cord. Its major function is to protect 
the central nervous system (CNS) against trauma. 
 Most of the CSF is formed by the choroid 
plexuses of the cerebral (mainly lateral) ventricles. 
Smaller amounts are formed directly by the ven-
tricles’ ependymal cell linings, and yet smaller 
quantities are formed from fl uid leaking into the 
perivascular spaces surrounding cerebral vessels 
(blood–brain barrier leakage). In adults, normal 
total CSF production is about 21 mL/hr (500 mL/d), 
yet total CSF volume is only about 150 mL. CSF fl ows 
from the lateral ventricles through the intraventric-
ular foramina (of Monro) into the third ventricle, 
through the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius) into the 
fourth ventricle, and through the median aperture 
of the fourth ventricle (foramen of Magendie) and 
the lateral apertures of the fourth ventricle (foram-
ina of Luschka) into the cerebellomedullary cistern 
(cisterna magna) ( Figure 26–4 ). From the cerebello-
medullary cistern, CSF enters the subarachnoid 
space, circulating around the brain and spinal cord 
before being absorbed in arachnoid granulations 
over the cerebral hemispheres. 
 CSF formation involves active secretion of 
sodium in the choroid plexuses. Th e resulting fl uid 
is isotonic with plasma despite lower potassium, 
bicarbonate, and glucose concentrations. Its protein 
content is limited to the very small amounts that 
leak into perivascular fl uid. Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors (acetazolamide), corticosteroids, spirono-
lactone, furosemide, isofl urane, and vasoconstric-
tors decrease CSF production. 
 Absorption of CSF involves the translocation of 
fl uid from the arachnoid granulations into the cere-
bral venous sinuses. Smaller amounts are absorbed 
at nerve root sleeves and by meningeal lymphatics. 
that optimal cerebral oxygen delivery may occur at 
hematocrits of approximately 30%. 
 Autonomic Inﬂ uences 
 Intracranial vessels are innervated by the sympa-
thetic (vasoconstrictive) and parasympathetic (vaso-
dilatory) systems, Intense sympathetic stimulation 
induces vasoconstriction in these vessels, which can 
limit CBF. Autonomic innervation may also play 
an important role in cerebral vasospasm following 
brain injury and stroke. 
 BLOODBRAIN BARRIER 
 Cerebral blood vessels are unique in that the junc-
tions between vascular endothelial cells are nearly 
fused. Th e paucity of pores is responsible for what is 
termed the blood–brain barrier. Th is lipid barrier 
allows the passage of lipid-soluble substances, but 
restricts the movement of those that are ionized or 
have large molecular weights.  Th us, the move-
ment of a given substance across the blood–
brain barrier is governed simultaneously by its size, 
charge, lipid solubility, and degree of protein bind-
ing in blood. Carbon dioxide, oxygen, and lipid-
soluble molecules (such as most anesthetics) freely 
enter the brain, whereas most ions, proteins, and 
large substances (such as mannitol) penetrate poorly. 
 Water moves freely across the blood–brain bar-
rier as a consequence of bulk fl ow, whereas move-
ment of even small ions is impeded (the equilibration 
half-life of Na + is 2–4 h). As a result, rapid changes in 
plasma electrolyte concentrations (and, secondarily, 
osmolality) produce a transient osmotic gradient 
between plasma and the brain. Acute hypertonicity 
of plasma results in net movement of water out of 
the brain, whereas acute hypotonicity causes a net 
movement of water into the brain. Th ese eff ects are 
short-lived, as equilibration eventually occurs, but, 
when marked, they can cause rapid fl uid shift s in the 
brain. Mannitol, an osmotically active substance 
that does not normally cross the blood–brain barrier, 
causes a sustained decrease in brain water content 
and is oft en used to decrease brain volume. 
 Th e blood–brain barrier may be disrupted by 
severe hypertension, tumors, trauma, strokes, 
5
6
580 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Because the brain and spinal cord lack lymphat-
ics, absorption of CSF is also the principal means 
by which perivascular and interstitial protein is 
returned to the blood. 
 INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE 
 Th e cranial vault is a rigid structure with a 
fi xed total volume, consisting of brain (80%), 
blood (12%), and CSF (8%). Any increase in one 
7
 FIGURE 264  The ﬂ ow of cerebrospinal ﬂ uid in the 
central nervous system.  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Waxman SG:  Correlative Neuroanatomy , 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2000.) 
Superior sagittal sinus
Cerebral
aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Spinal cord
 FIGURE 265  Normal intracranial elastance. 
Intracranial volume
0
20
40
60
80
Intracranial pressure (mm Hg)
component must be off set by an equivalent decrease 
in another to prevent a rise in ICP. By convention, 
ICP means supratentorial CSF pressure measured 
in the lateral ventricles or over the cerebral cortex 
and is normally 10 mm Hg or less. Minor varia-
tions may occur, depending on the site measured, 
but, in the lateral recumbent position, lumbar CSF 
pressure normally approximates supratentorial 
pressure. 
 Intracranial elastance is determined by mea-
suring the change in ICP in response to a change in 
intracranial volume. Normally, small increases in 
volume of one component are initially well compen-
sated ( Figure 26–5 ). A point is eventually reached, 
however, at which further increases produce precipi-
tous rises in ICP. Major compensatory mechanisms 
include: (1) an initial displacement of CSF from the 
cranial to the spinal compartment, (2) an increase in 
CSF absorption, (3) a decrease in CSF production, 
and (4) a decrease in total cerebral blood volume 
(primarily venous). 
 Th e concept of total intracranial compliance is 
useful clinically, even though compliance probably 
varies in the diff erent compartments of the brain 
and is aff ected by arterial blood pressure and Pa co 2 . 
Cerebral blood volume is estimated to increase 
0.05 mL/100 g of brain per 1 mm Hg increase in 
Pa co 2 . Blood pressure eff ects upon cerebral blood 
volume are dependent on the autoregulation of CBF. 
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia 
581 
gyrus through the tentorium cerebelli, (3) the cerebel-
lar tonsils through the foramen magnum, or (4) any 
area beneath a defect in the skull (transcalvarial). 
 Eﬀ ect of Anesthetic Agents 
on Cerebral Physiology 
 Overall, most general anesthetics have a favorable 
eff ect on the CNS by reducing electrical activity. 
Determination of the eff ects of the specifi c agents 
is complicated by the concomitant administration 
of other drugs, surgical stimulation, intracranial 
compliance, blood pressure, and CO 2 tension. For 
example, hypocapnia blunts the increases in CBF 
and ICP that usually occur with ketamine and vola-
tile agents. 
 Th is section describes the changes gener-
ally associated with each drug when given alone. 
 Table 26–1 summarizes and compares the eff ects 
of the various anesthetics. Th e eff ects of vasoactive 
agents and neuromuscular blocking agents are also 
discussed. 
 FIGURE 266  Potential sites of brain herniation. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Fishman RA: Brain edema. N Engl J 
Med 1975;293:706.) 
1
2
3
4
 TABLE 261 Comparative eﬀ ects of anesthetic agents on cerebral physiology.  1  
Agent
CMR
CBF
CSF Production
CSF Absorption
CBV
ICP
Halothane
↓↓
↑↑↑
↓
↓
↑↑
↑↑
Isoflurane
↓↓↓
↑
±
↑
↑↑
↑
Desflurane
↓↓↓
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
Sevoflurane
↓↓↓
↑
?
?
↑
↑
Nitrous oxide
↓
↑
±
±
±
↑
Barbiturates
↓↓↓↓
↓↓↓
±
↑
↓↓
↓↓↓
Etomidate
↓↓↓
↓↓
±
↑
↓↓
↓↓
Propofol
↓↓↓
↓↓↓↓
?
?
↓↓
↓↓
Benzodiazepines
↓↓
↓
±
↑
↓
↓
Ketamine
±
↑↑
±
↓
↑↑
↑↑
Opioids
±
±
±
↑
±
±
Lidocaine
↓↓
↓↓
?
?
↓↓
↓↓
  1  ↑, increase; ↓, decrease; ±, little or no change; ?, unknown; CMR, cerebral metabolic rate; CBF, cerebral blood ﬂ ow; CSF, cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid; CBV, cerebral blood volume; ICP, intracranial pressure.
 Sustained elevations in ICP can lead to cata-
strophic herniation of the brain. Herniation may 
occur at one of four sites ( Figure 26–6 ): (1) the cin-
gulate gyrus under the falx cerebri, (2) the uncinate 
582 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 EFFECT OF 
INHALATION AGENTS 
 1. Volatile Anesthetics 
 Cerebral Metabolic Rate 
 Halothane, desfl urane, sevofl urane, and isofl u-
rane produce dose-dependent decreases in CMR. 
Isofl urane produces the greatest maximal depres-
sion (up to 50% reduction), whereas halothane has 
the least eff ect (<25% reduction). Th e eff ects of des-
fl urane and sevofl urane seem to be similar to that 
of isofl urane. No further reduction in CMR is pro-
duced by doses of anesthetics or other drugs greater 
than the doses that render the EEG isoelectric. 
 Cerebral Blood Flow & Volume 
 At normocarbia, volatile anesthetics dilate cere-
bral vessels and impair autoregulation in a dose-
dependent manner ( Figure 26–7 ). Halothane has 
the greatest eff ect on CBF; at concentrations greater 
than 1%, it nearly abolishes cerebral autoregulation. 
Moreover, the increase in blood fl ow is generalized 
throughout all parts of the brain. At an equivalent 
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) and blood 
pressure, halothane increases CBF up to 200%, 
 FIGURE 267  Dose-dependent depression of cerebral 
autoregulation by the volatile anesthetics. 
High dose
Moderate dose
Low dose
Awake
Mean arterial pressure (mm Hg)
0
50
150
Cerebral blood flow
compared with 20% for isofl urane. Qualitatively and 
quantitatively, desfl urane may be closest to isofl u-
rane. Sevofl urane produces the least cerebral vaso-
dilation. Th e eff ect of volatile agents on CBF also 
seems to be time dependent, because, with contin-
ued administration (2–5 h), blood fl ow begins to 
return to normal. 
 Th e response of the cerebral vasculature to 
CO 2 is generally retained with all volatile agents. 
Hyperventilation (hypocapnia) can therefore abol-
ish or blunt the initial eff ects of these agents on CBF. 
With halothane, the timing of the hyperventilation is 
important. Only if hyperventilation is initiated prior 
to the administration of halothane will halothane-
induced increases in CBF be prevented. In contrast, 
simultaneous hyperventilation with administration of 
either isofl urane or sevofl urane can prevent increases 
in CBF and ICP. 
 Increases in cerebral blood volume (10% to 
12%) generally parallel increases in CBF, but the 
relationship is not necessarily linear. Expansion 
of cerebral blood volume can markedly elevate 
ICP in patients with reduced intracranial compli-
ance. Hypocapnia can blunt the increase in cerebral 
blood volume associated with volatile anesthetic 
administration. 
 Altered Coupling of Cerebral 
Metabolic Rate & Blood Flow 
 As is apparent from the discussion above, volatile 
agents alter, but do not uncouple, the normal rela-
tionship of CBF and CMR. Th e combination of a 
decrease in neuronal metabolic demand with an 
increase in CBF (metabolic supply) has been termed 
luxury perfusion. In contrast to this potentially ben-
efi cial eff ect during global ischemia, a detrimen-
tal  circulatory steal phenomenon is possible with 
volatile anesthetics in the setting of focal ischemia. 
Volatile agents can increase blood fl ow in normal 
areas of the brain, but not in ischemic areas, where 
arterioles are already maximally vasodilated. Th e 
end result may be a redistribution (“steal”) of blood 
fl ow away from ischemic to normal areas. 
 Cerebrospinal Fluid Dynamics 
 Volatile anesthetics aff ect both formation and 
absorption of CSF. Halothane impedes absorption 
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia
583
barbiturates reduce metabolic rate uniformly 
throughout the brain. CMR is depressed slightly 
more than CBF, such that metabolic supply exceeds 
metabolic demand (as long as CPP is maintained). 
Because barbiturate-induced cerebral vasoconstric-
tion occurs only in normal areas, these agents tend 
to redistribute blood fl ow from normal to ischemic 
areas in the brain (Robin Hood, or reverse steal 
phenomenon). Th e cerebral vasculature in ischemic 
areas remains maximally dilated and is less aff ected 
by the barbiturate because of ischemic vasomotor 
paralysis. 
 Barbiturates also seem to facilitate absorption of 
CSF. Th e resultant reduction in CSF volume, com-
bined with decreases in CBF and cerebral blood 
volume, makes barbiturates highly eff ective in low-
ering ICP. Th eir anticonvulsant properties are also 
advantageous in neurosurgical patients who are at 
increased risk of seizures. 
 Opioids 
 Opioids generally have minimal eff ects on CBF, 
CMR, and ICP, unless Pa co 2 rises secondary to 
respiratory depression. Increases in ICP have been 
reported in some patients with intracranial tumors 
following administration of sufentanil and to a 
lesser degree, alfentanil. Th e mechanism seems to 
be a precipitous drop in blood pressure; refl ex cere-
bral vasodilation likely increases intracranial blood 
volume and potentially ICP. Signifi cant decreases in 
blood pressure can adversely aff ect CPP, regardless 
of the opioid selected. In addition, small doses of 
alfentanil (<50 mg/kg) can activate seizure foci in 
patients with epilepsy. Morphine is generally not 
considered optimal as a component of anesthe-
sia for intracranial surgery. Morphine’s poor lipid 
solubility results in slow CNS penetration and pro-
longed sedative eff ects. Normeperidine, a metabo-
lite of meperidine, can induce seizures, particularly 
in patients with renal failure. Th e accumulation of 
normeperidine and the associated cardiac depres-
sion limit the use of meperidine, except in small 
doses to treat shivering. 
 Etomidate 
 Etomidate decreases the CMR, CBF, and ICP in 
much the same way as thiopental. Its eff ect on CMR 
of CSF, but only minimally retards formation. 
Isofl urane, on the other hand, facilitates absorption 
and is therefore an agent with favorable eff ects on 
CSF dynamics. 
 Intracranial Pressure 
Th e net eff ect of volatile anesthetics on ICP is the 
result of immediate changes in cerebral blood vol-
ume, delayed alterations on CSF dynamics, and 
arterial CO  2   tension . Based on these factors, isofl u-
rane and sevofl urane seem to be the volatile agents 
of choice in patients with decreased intracranial 
compliance. 
 2. Nitrous Oxide 
 Th e eff ects of nitrous oxide are infl uenced by other 
agents or changes in CO 2 tension. Th us, when com-
bined with intravenous agents, nitrous oxide has 
minimal eff ects on CBF, CMR, and ICP. Adding 
this agent to a volatile anesthetic, however, can fur-
ther increase CBF. When given alone, nitrous oxide 
causes mild cerebral vasodilation and can poten-
tially increase ICP. 
 EFFECT OF 
INTRAVENOUS AGENTS 
 1. Induction Agents 
 With the exception of ketamine, all intra-
venous agents either have little eff ect on 
or reduce CMR and CBF. Moreover, with some 
exceptions, changes in blood fl ow generally par-
allel those in metabolic rate. Cerebral autoregula-
tion and CO 2 responsiveness are preserved with 
all agents. 
 Barbiturates 
 Barbiturates have four major actions on the CNS: 
(1) hypnosis, (2) depression of CMR, (3) reduction 
of CBF due to increased cerebral vascular resis-
tance, and (4) anticonvulsant activity. Barbiturates 
produce dose-dependent decreases in CMR and 
CBF until the EEG becomes isoelectric. At that 
point, maximum reductions of nearly 50% are 
observed; additional barbiturate dosing does not 
further reduce metabolic rate. Unlike isofl urane, 
8
584 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
auditory) such that total CMR does not change. 
Seizure activity in thalamic and limbic areas is also 
described. Ketamine may also impede absorp-
tion of CSF without aff ecting formation. Increases 
in CBF, cerebral blood volume, and CSF volume 
can potentially increase ICP markedly in patients 
with decreased intracranial compliance. However, 
ketamine administration does not increase ICP in 
neurologically impaired patients under controlled 
ventilation with concomitant administration of 
propofol or a benzodiazepine. Additionally, ket-
amine may off er neuroprotective eff ects, according 
to some investigations. Ketamine’s blockade of the 
N -methyl- d -aspartate (NMDA) receptor during 
periods of increased glutamate concentrations, 
as occurs during brain injury, may be protective 
against neuronal cell death ( Figure 26–8 ). 
 2. Anesthetic Adjuncts 
 Intravenous lidocaine decreases CMR, CBF, and 
ICP, but to a lesser degree than other agents. Its prin-
cipal advantage is that it decreases CBF (by increas-
ing cerebral vascular resistance) without causing 
other signifi cant hemodynamic eff ects. Lidocaine 
may also have neuroprotective eff ects. Lidocaine 
infusions are used in some centers as a supplement 
to general anesthesia to reduce emergence delirium 
and the requirement for opioids. 
 Droperidol has little or no eff ect on CMR and 
minimally reduces CBF. When used in larger doses 
with an opioid as part of a neuroleptic technique, 
droperidol may sometimes cause undesirable pro-
longed sedation. Droperidol and narcotics were 
once mainstays of neuroanesthesia. Droperidol’s 
prolongation of the QT interval and risk of fatal 
arrhythmia, as well as offi  cial warnings related to the 
drug, have retarded its use. 
 Reversal of opioids or benzodiazepines with 
naloxone or fl umazenil, respectively, can reverse any 
benefi cial reductions in CBF and CMR. Reversal of 
narcotics or benzodiazepines in chronic users can 
lead to symptoms of substance withdrawal. 
 3. Vasopressors 
 With normal autoregulation and an intact 
blood–brain barrier, vasopressors increase 
9
is nonuniform, aff ecting the cortex more than the 
brainstem. Its limited eff ect on the brainstem may 
be responsible for greater hemodynamic stability 
during anesthesia induction, compared with that of 
barbiturates. Etomidate also decreases production 
and enhances absorption of CSF. 
 Induction with etomidate is associated with a 
relatively high incidence of myoclonic movements, 
but these movements are not associated with seizure 
activity on the EEG in normal individuals. Th e drug 
has been used to treat seizures, but reports of seizure 
activity following etomidate suggest that the drug is 
best avoided in patients with a history of epilepsy. 
In fact, small doses of etomidate can activate seizure 
foci in patients with epilepsy. 
 Propofol 
 Propofol reduces CBF and CMR, similar to bar-
biturates and etomidate; however, the decrease in 
CBF may exceed that in metabolic rate. Although 
it has been associated with dystonic and chorei-
form movements, propofol seems to have signifi -
cant anticonvulsant activity. Moreover, its short 
elimination half-life makes it a useful agent for 
neuroanesthesia. Propofol infusion is commonly 
used for maintenance of anesthesia in patients with 
or at risk of intracranial hypertension. Propofol 
is by far the most common induction agent for 
neuroanesthesia. 
 Benzodiazepines 
 Benzodiazepines lower CBF and CMR, but to 
a lesser extent than barbiturates, etomidate, or 
propofol. Benzodiazepines also have useful anti-
convulsant properties. Midazolam is the benzo-
diazepine of choice in neuroanesthesia because of 
its short half-life. Midazolam used as an induction 
agent frequently causes decreases in CPP in elderly 
and unstable patients and may result in prolonged 
emergence. 
 Ketamine 
 Ketamine is the only intravenous anesthetic that 
dilates the cerebral vasculature and increases 
CBF (50% to 60%). Selective activation of cer-
tain areas (limbic and reticular) is partially off set 
by depression of other areas (somatosensory and 
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia 
585 
eff ect on CMR or CBF, whereas α 2 -adrenergic ago-
nists produce cerebral vasoconstriction. Excessive 
elevations in blood pressure with any agent can dis-
rupt the blood–brain barrier. 
 4. Vasodilators 
 In the absence of hypotension, most vasodilators 
induce cerebral vasodilation and increase CBF in a 
CBF only when mean arterial blood pressure is 
below 50–60 mm Hg or above 150–160 mm Hg. In 
the absence of autoregulation, vasopressors increase 
CBF by their eff ect on CPP. Changes in CMR gen-
erally parallel those in blood fl ow. β-Adrenergic 
agents seem to have a greater eff ect on the brain 
when the blood–brain barrier is disrupted; central 
β 1 -receptor stimulation increases CMR and blood 
fl ow. β-Adrenergic blockers generally have no direct 
 FIGURE 268  Pharmacological eﬀ ects reported 
for racemic and S(+)-ketamine which are presumed to 
be relevant for neuroprotection. After onset of brain 
injury, blockade of excessive stimulation of  N -methyl-
 D -aspartate (NMDA) receptors by ketamine reduces 
calcium inﬂ ux through the receptor channel (1). This 
attenuates supraphysiological increases in the assembly 
and interaction of NMDA receptor subunits, postsynaptic 
density proteins, and other intracellular signaling 
systems such as protein kinases (2). Thus, several kinase 
transduction cascades become less activated. This 
improves preservation of metabolism and maintenance 
of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential (3). This, 
in turn, reduces pathological activation of transcription 
factors (4). Proteins involved in apoptosis are less 
activated, which is associated with less DNA fragmentation 
(5). A better preservation of synaptic proteins occurs, 
and the expression of growth proteins indicating 
regeneration in adult neurons is enhanced. The prevention 
of pathological ampliﬁ cation of NMDA receptor signaling 
ﬁ nally results in increased cellular survival, preserved 
cellular and synaptic integrity, and regenerative eﬀ orts. 
*Superiority of eﬀ ects induced by S(+)-ketamine, only. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Himmelseher S, Durieux ME: 
Revising a dogma: ketamine for patients with neurological injury? 
Anesth Analg 2005:101:524.) 
Brain insults
Racemic ketamine
*S(+)-Ketamine
*NMDA-receptor
  blockade
*Cell survival
DNA Fragmentation
Transcription
factors
*Metabolism
*Mitochondrial potential
Postsynaptic
density
proteins
Src/Fyn
*Apoptosis-regulating
 proteins
*Cell integrity
*Regeneration
Synaptic
Growth-
related
proteins
Glutamate
Protein kinase
activation
Na+
K+
P
Ca+
NR2
1
2
4
3
6
5
5
8
7
O
Cl
NHCH3
Ca2+
586 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
oxygen tension, blood fl ow, and glucose supply 
are not reestablished within 3–8 min under most 
conditions, ATP stores are depleted, and irrevers-
ible neuronal injury begins. When CBF decreases 
below 10 mL/100 g/min, cell function is deranged, 
and ion pumps fail to maintain cellular vitality. Th e 
ratio of lactate to pyruvate is increased second-
ary to anaerobic metabolism. During ischemia, 
intracellular K + decreases, and intracellular Na +
increases. More importantly, intracellular Ca 2+
increases because of failure of ATP-dependent 
pumps to either extrude the ion extracellularly or 
into intracellular cisterns, increased intracellular 
Na + concentration, and release of the excitatory 
neurotransmitter glutamate. Glutamate acts at the 
NMDA receptor, further enhancing Ca 2+ entry 
into the cell, hence the potential benefi t of NMDA 
blockers for neuroprotection. 
 Sustained increases in intracellular Ca 2+ activate 
lipases and proteases, which initiate and propagate 
structural damage to neurons. Increases in free fatty 
acid concentration and cyclooxygenase and lipoxy-
genase activities result in the formation of prosta-
glandins and leukotrienes, some of which are potent 
mediators of cellular injury. Accumulation of toxic 
metabolites, such as lactic acid, also impairs cellu-
lar function and interferes with repair mechanisms. 
Lastly, reperfusion of ischemic tissues can cause 
additional tissue damage due to the formation of 
oxygen-derived free radicals. Likewise, infl amma-
tion and edema can promote further neuronal dam-
age, leading to cellular apoptosis. 
 STRATEGIES FOR 
BRAIN PROTECTION 
 Ischemic brain injury is usually classifi ed as focal 
(incomplete) or global (complete). Global ischemia 
includes total circulatory arrest as well as global 
hypoxia. Cessation of perfusion may be caused 
by cardiac arrest or deliberate circulatory arrest, 
whereas global hypoxia may be caused by severe 
respiratory failure, drowning, and asphyxia (includ-
ing anesthetic mishaps). Focal ischemia includes 
embolic, hemorrhagic, and atherosclerotic strokes, 
as well as blunt, penetrating, and surgical trauma. 
dose-related fashion. When these agents decrease 
blood pressure, CBF is usually maintained and 
may even increase. Th e resultant increase in cere-
bral blood volume can signifi cantly elevate ICP in 
patients with decreased intracranial compliance. 
Of this group of drugs, only the ganglionic blocker 
trimethaphan has little or no eff ect on CBF and 
cerebral blood volume. Trimethaphan is no longer 
available in the United States. 
 5. Neuromuscular Blocking Agents 
 Neuromuscular blockers (NMBs) lack direct action 
on the brain but can have important secondary 
eff ects. Hypertension and histamine-mediated cere-
bral vasodilation increase ICP, whereas systemic 
hypotension (from histamine release or ganglionic 
blockade) lowers CPP. Succinylcholine can increase 
ICP, possibly as a result of cerebral activation associ-
ated with enhanced muscle spindle activity, but the 
increase is generally minimal and clinically unim-
portant, if an adequate dose of propofol is given and 
hyperventilation is initiated at induction. Moreover, 
a small (defasciculating) dose of a nondepolarizing 
NMB seems to blunt the increase, at least partially. 
In the majority of instances, increases in ICP fol-
lowing administration of an NMB are the result of 
a hypertensive response due to light anesthesia dur-
ing laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation. Acute 
elevations in ICP will also be seen, if hypercapnia or 
hypoxemia results from prolonged apnea. 
 Physiology of Brain Protection 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF 
CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA 
 Th e brain is very vulnerable to ischemic 
injury because of its relatively high oxygen 
consumption and near total dependence on aero-
bic glucose metabolism (above). Interruption of 
cerebral perfusion, metabolic substrate (glucose), 
or severe hypoxemia rapidly results in functional 
impairment; reduced perfusion also impairs clear-
ance of potentially toxic metabolites. If normal 
10
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia
587
aff ecting diff erent parts of the brain to variable 
extents. 
 Ketamine may also have a protective eff ect 
because of its ability to block the actions of gluta-
mate at the NMDA) receptor. 
 No anesthetic agent has consistently been 
shown to be protective against global ischemia. Th e 
ever increasing number of studies highlighting the 
potential neurotoxicity of anesthetics (especially in 
infants) also questions the role of volatile anesthetics 
in neuroprotection. 
 Speciﬁ c Adjuncts 
 Nimodipine plays a role in the in the treatment of 
vasospasm associated with subarachnoid hemor-
rhage. Studies are ongoing to discern the roles of 
various NMDA receptor antagonists, erythropoi-
etin, Ca2+ antagonists, and free radical scavengers to 
mitigate ischemic neuronal injury. 
 General Measures 
 Maintenance of a satisfactory CPP is critical. Th us, 
arterial blood pressure should be normal or slightly 
elevated, and increases in venous and ICP should 
be avoided. Oxygen-carrying capacity should be 
maintained and normal arterial oxygen tension 
preserved. Hyperglycemia aggravates neurological 
injuries following either focal or global ischemia, 
and blood glucose should be maintained at less than 
180 mg/dL. Normocarbia should be maintained, as 
both hypercarbia and hypocarbia have no benefi -
cial eff ect in the setting of ischemia and could prove 
detrimental; hypocarbia-induced cerebral vaso-
constriction may aggravate the ischemia, whereas 
hypercarbia may induce a steal phenomenon (with 
focal ischemia) or worsen intracellular acidosis. 
 EFFECT OF ANESTHESIA ON 
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL 
MONITORING 
 Electrophysiological monitors are used to assess 
the functional integrity of the CNS. Th e most com-
monly used monitor for neurosurgical procedures is 
evoked potentials. EEG is much less commonly used. 
Proper application of these monitoring modalities 
 In some instances, interventions aimed at 
restoring perfusion and oxygenation are possible; 
these include reestablishing eff ective circulation, 
normalizing arterial oxygenation and oxygen-car-
rying capacity, or reopening an occluded vessel. 
With focal ischemia, the brain tissue surrounding 
a severely damaged area may suff er marked func-
tional impairment but still remain viable. Such areas 
are thought to have very marginal perfusion (<15 
mL/100 g/min), but, if further injury can be lim-
ited and normal fl ow is rapidly restored, these areas 
(the “ischemic penumbra”) may recover completely. 
When the above interventions are not applicable 
or available, the emphasis must be on limiting the 
extent of brain injury. 
 From a practical point of view, eff orts aimed 
at preventing or limiting neuronal tissue damage 
are oft en the same whether the ischemia is focal or 
global. Clinical goals are usually to optimize CPP, 
decrease metabolic requirements (basal and electri-
cal), and possibly block mediators of cellular injury. 
Clearly, the most eff ective strategy is prevention, 
because once injury has occurred, measures aimed 
at cerebral protection become less eff ective. 
 Hypothermia 
 Hypothermia is an eff ective method for pro-
tecting the brain during focal and global isch-
emia. Indeed, profound hypothermia is oft en used for 
up to 1 hr of total circulatory arrest. Unlike anesthetic 
agents, hypothermia decreases both basal and elec-
trical metabolic requirements throughout the brain; 
metabolic requirements continue to decrease even 
aft er complete electrical silence. Additionally, hypo-
thermia reduces free radicals and other mediators 
of ischemic injury. Induced hypothermia has shown 
benefi t following cardiac arrest and is a routine part of 
most postarrest protocols for comatose patients. 
 Anesthetic Agents 
 Barbiturates, etomidate, propofol, and isofl urane can 
produce complete electrical silence of the brain and 
eliminate the metabolic cost of electrical activity; 
unfortunately, these agents have no eff ect on basal 
energy requirements. Furthermore, with the excep-
tion of barbiturates, their eff ects are nonuniform, 
11
588 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
sevofl urane produce a burst suppression pattern 
at high doses (>1.2 and >1.5 MAC, respectively) 
but not electrical silence . Nitrous oxide is also 
unusual in that it increases both frequency and 
amplitude (high-amplitude activation). 
 Intravenous Agents 
 Benzodiazepines can produce both activation and 
depression of the EEG. Barbiturates, etomidate, and 
propofol produce a similar pattern and are the only 
intravenous agents capable of producing burst sup-
pression and electrical silence at high doses. In 
contrast, opioids characteristically produce only 
dose-dependent depression of the EEG. Lastly, ket-
amine produces an unusual activation consisting 
of rhythmic high-amplitude theta activity followed 
by very high-amplitude gamma and low-amplitude 
beta activities. 
 EVOKED POTENTIALS 
 Somatosensory evoked potentials test the integrity 
of the spinal dorsal columns and the sensory cortex 
and may be useful during resection of spinal tumors, 
instrumentation of the spine, CEA, and aortic surgery. 
Th e adequacy of perfusion of the spinal cord during 
aortic surgery is probably better assessed with motor 
evoked potentials (which assess the anterior part of the 
spinal cord). Brainstem auditory evoked potentials test 
the integrity of the eighth cranial nerve and the audi-
tory pathways above the pons and are used for surgery 
in the posterior fossa. Visual evoked potentials may be 
used to monitor the optic nerve and occipital cortex 
during resections of large pituitary tumors. 
 Interpretation of evoked potentials is more 
complicated than that of the EEG. Evoked potentials 
have poststimulus latencies that are described as 
short, intermediate, and long. Short-latency evoked 
potentials arise from the nerve stimulated or the 
brain stem. Intermediate- and long-latency evoked 
potentials are primarily of cortical origin. In general, 
short-latency potentials are least aff ected by anes-
thetic agents, whereas long-latency potentials are 
aff ected by even subanesthetic levels of most agents. 
Visual evoked potentials are most aff ected by anes-
thetics, whereas brain stem auditory evoked poten-
tials are least aff ected. 
is critically dependent on monitoring the specifi c 
area at risk and recognizing anesthetic-induced 
changes. Both monitoring modalities are described 
in  Chapter 6 . 
 Th e eff ects of anesthetic agents on the EEG are 
summarized in  Table 26–2 . 
 ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
 EEG monitoring is useful for assessing the adequacy 
of cerebral perfusion during carotid endarterectomy 
(CEA), as well as anesthetic depth (most oft en with 
processed EEG). EEG changes can be simplistically 
described as either activation or depression. EEG 
activation (a shift  to predominantly high-frequency 
and low-voltage activity) is seen with light anesthe-
sia and surgical stimulation, whereas EEG depres-
sion (a shift  to predominantly low-frequency and 
high-voltage activity) occurs with deep anesthesia 
or cerebral compromise.  Most anesthetics produce 
an EEG consisting of an initial activation (at sub-
anesthetic doses) followed by dose-dependent 
depression . 
 Inhalation Anesthetics 
 Isofl urane can produce an isoelectric EEG at 
high clinical doses (1–2 MAC).  Desfl urane and 
 TABLE 262 Electroencephalographic 
changes during anesthesia. 
Activation
Depression
Inhalational agents 
(subanesthetic)
Inhalation agents 
(1-2 MAC)
Barbiturates (small doses)
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines (small doses)
Opioids
Etomidate (small doses)
Propofol
Nitrous oxide
Etomidate
Ketamine
Hypocapnia
Mild hypercapnia
Marked hypercapnia
Sensory stimulation
Hypothermia
Hypoxia (early)
Hypoxia (late) 
Ischemia
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia 
589 
anesthetized should evidence of cerebral ischemia 
develop . 
 More recently, regional anesthesia has been 
advocated as providing an adequate surgical 
ﬁ eld, a comfortable and relaxed patient (if done 
with monitored anesthesia care), stable hemody-
namics, and ideal monitoring of cerebral function 
during crossclamping because an awake patient 
provides the best evidence of adequate cerebral 
perfusion. The patient can indicate or be observed 
for evidence of aphasia, facial droop, or hemipare-
sis. Regional anesthesia is usually performed with 
superﬁ cial cervical plexus blocks . 
 How should cerebral function be monitored 
intraoperatively in this patient? 
 When the carotid is crossclamped, the ability 
to identify inadequate cerebral circulation in the 
ipsilateral hemisphere is critical, as there is a win-
dow of opportunity for immediate intervention 
and correction of any deﬁ cit . 
 Global and focal neurological status can 
continuously be assessed in awake patients, if 
the patient is mildly sedated when undergoing 
regional anesthesia. In such a situation, practical 
assessment consists of frequent (every 2–5 min) 
examination of strength using the contralat-
eral handgrip and maintenance of constant ver-
bal contact with the patient to assess level of 
consciousness . 
 In patients undergoing general anesthesia, 
indirect cerebral monitoring techniques have 
been used to assess the adequacy of the cere-
bral circulation. These techniques include stump 
bleeding, stump pressure, jugular venous oxy-
gen saturation, EEG, a processed EEG (such as 
the bispectral index or evoked potentials), TCD, 
arteriography, and measurement of blood ﬂ ow 
using xenon. Back bleeding of the distal carotid 
artery following crossclamp and incision of the 
artery suggests reasonable collateral circula-
tion above the clamp. It is very subjective and 
nonquantitative . 
 To better qualify and quantify the adequacy 
of collateral perfusion ( Figure 26–9 ), stump pres-
sure measurements can be used. Some surgeons 
 Intravenous agents in clinical doses gener-
ally have less marked eff ects on evoked potentials 
than do volatile agents, but, in high doses, can also 
decrease amplitude and increase latencies (see 
Chapter 6). 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Postoperative Hemiplegia 
 A 62-year-old man has undergone a right 
carotid endarterectomy (CEA). Immediately fol-
lowing surgery, in the recovery room, he is noted 
to be weak on the contralateral side . 
 How is a patient undergoing CEA evaluated 
preoperatively? 
 Patients with cerebrovascular disease, and, in 
particular, carotid stenosis are at very high risk of 
coronary artery and peripheral arterial disease. It 
would be unusual for a patient to have carotid ste-
nosis who did not have evidence of atherosclero-
sis elsewhere. Patients undergoing CEA, therefore, 
require a preoperative cardiac evaluation, accord-
ing to American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association guidelines . 
 With respect to patient risk factors, the guide-
lines provide algorithms for how patients should 
be evaluated and managed intraoperatively. As 
part of this patient’s preoperative evaluation, a 
thorough neurological examination should have 
been performed with special attention paid to 
motor function. This patient may well have been 
weak on the left side prior to surgery, in which case 
the hemiparesis might be due to a preexisting con-
dition. If this is a new ﬁ nding, it requires aggressive 
management . 
 Is general or regional anesthesia the optimal 
anesthetic technique for managing patients 
undergoing CEA? 
 For the past several decades, the majority of 
patients undergoing CEAs in the United States 
have had general anesthesia. General anesthesia 
was chosen because many surgeons operating in 
the neck area felt more comfortable if the airway 
was controlled, and the patient was completely 
590 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 FIGURE 269  The cerebral circulation. 
Internal carotid artery
Ophthalmic artery
Middle cerebral artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Posterior communicating artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Superior cerebellar artery
Internal carotid artery
Basilar artery with pontine branches
Anterior inferior cerebellar artery
Foramen magnum
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Anterior spinal artery
Vertebral artery
Subclavian artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Anterior communicating artery
 
CHAPTER 26 Neurophysiology & Anesthesia 
591 
in patients with more severe carotid stenosis. This 
could be due to a cerebral protective process. 
Cerebral autoregulation protects the brain from 
reperfusion by reducing cerebral production of 
renin, vasopressin, and norepinephrine, which 
results in hypotension. Hypertension is also a fre-
quent ﬁ nding in patients undergoing CEA. Many 
patients have hypertension as a comorbid condi-
tion, which is often further exacerbated by the sur-
gical stress and manipulation of the carotid body, 
which causes release of catecholamines and sym-
pathetic stimulation . 
 Invasive arterial pressure monitoring and suit-
able venous access to infuse vasoactive medica-
tions are necessary during carotid surgery . 
 What is the most likely etiology of 
this patient’s ﬁ ndings? 
 This patient most likely has had a cerebro-
vascular accident due to an arterio-to-arterial 
embolus; more than 95% of patients will ﬁ t into this 
category. Weakness can also develop as a result of a 
hyperperfusion syndrome, which occurs in patients 
with severe carotid stenosis who have now rees-
tablished ﬂ ow to the aﬀ ected cerebral hemisphere. 
Such patients usually have a greater than 95% 
carotid stenosis with a less than 1-mm channel in 
the aﬀ ected carotid artery. Typically, the syndrome 
does not develop in the postoperative anesthesia 
care unit (PACU), but several hours afterward when 
the patient begins complaining of a headache, and, 
in severe cases, develops hemiparesis . 
 Because a cerebrovascular accident is most 
likely, when the anesthesiologist is called to see 
such a patient in the PACU, a thorough neuro-
logical examination quantifying any cranial nerve 
involvement and the degree of weakness on 
the contralateral side should be performed. Any 
hemodynamic changes need to be treated imme-
diately, with assurance of adequate hemoglobin 
and oxygenation levels. Ultrasonic evaluation 
of the carotid artery is frequently required. The 
surgeon needs to be notiﬁ ed at once, as it may 
be necessary to return to the operating room to 
explore the carotid artery. 
believe that a shunt should be used in all patients 
with a previous cerebrovascular accident, indepen-
dent of stump pressure, and for any patient whose 
stump pressure is less than 25 mm Hg. However, 
this is controversial, as many neurosurgeons and 
vascular surgeons use 50 mm Hg as a cutoﬀ  . 
 The EEG is sometimes used for monitoring 
patients undergoing CEA under general anesthe-
sia. In such a circumstance, inhalation or intrave-
nous anesthesia can inﬂ uence the EEG, but gross 
changes associated with carotid clamping can be 
detected .  However, analyzing the EEG is labor and 
technology intensive and requires interpretation of 
the data . 
 For this reason, techniques that employ a 
processed EEG (eg, the bispectral index moni-
tor) are being explored as a monitor for cerebral 
ischemia. Evoked potentials, such as auditory and 
visual evoked potentials, have also been exam-
ined, but do not seem to have signiﬁ cant clinical 
application . 
 Jugular venous oxygen saturation has been 
studied in an attempt to identify the acute onset 
of cerebral ischemia. Because it is a global mea-
sure, it does not reﬂ ect regional, or, in particular, 
focal cerebral ischemia and therefore is not used 
for routine clinical practice. TCD ultrasonography 
provides noninvasive assessment of blood ﬂ ow in 
the middle cerebral artery . 
 How should hemodynamics be 
controlled intraoperatively? 
 During carotid clamping and immediately 
afterward in the recovery room, patients are often 
hemodynamically labile.  Bradycardia can develop 
during surgical manipulation of the carotid sinus 
because of the direct stimulation of the vagus 
nerve . Tachycardia may develop as a result of stress 
or pain or as a direct result of manipulation of the 
carotid sinus with release of catecholamines into 
the circulation . 
 Hypotension is also observed because of 
the direct vasodilating and negative ionotropic 
eﬀ ects of anesthetic agents. Hypotension follow-
ing carotid unclamping is common, particularly 
592 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Gupta A, Azami J: Update on neuromonitoring. Current 
Anaesth Crit Care 2002;13:120. 
 Grocott H, Davie S, Fedorow C: Monitoring of brain 
function in anesthesia and intensive care. Curr Opin 
Anesthesiol 2010;23;759. 
 Himmelseher S, Durieux M: Revising a dogma: ketamine 
for patients with neurological injury. Anesth Analg 
2005;101:524. 
 Rabinstein A: Elucidating the value of continuous brain 
oxygenation monitoring. Neurocrit Care 2010;12:144. 
 Saqqur M, Zygun D, Demchuk D: Role of transcranial 
Doppler in neurocritical care. Crit Care Med 
2007;35:S216. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Chan M, Gin T, Goh K: Interventional neurophysiologic 
monitoring. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2004;17:389. 
 Dagal A, Lam A: Cerebral blood fl ow and the injured 
brain: how should we monitor and manipulate it? 
Curr Opin Anesthesiol 2011;24:131. 
 Drummond J, Sturaitis M: Brain tissue oxygenation 
during dexmedetomidine administration in surgical 
patients with neurovascular injuries. J Neurosurg 
Anesthesiol 2010;22:336. 
 Friedman D, Claassen J, Hirsch L: Continuous 
electroencephalogram monitoring in the intensive 
care unit. Anesth Analg 2009;109:506. 
 593
 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
Regardless of the cause, intracranial masses 
present according to growth rate, location, 
and intracranial pressure. Slowly growing 
masses are frequently asymptomatic for 
long periods (despite relatively large size), 
whereas rapidly growing ones may present 
when the mass remains relatively small . 
Computed tomographic and magnetic 
resonance imaging scans should be 
reviewed for evidence of brain edema, 
a midline shift greater than 0.5 cm, and 
ventricular displacement or compression . 
Operations in the posterior fossa can 
injure vital circulatory and respiratory 
brainstem centers, as well as cranial 
nerves or their nuclei . 
Venous air embolism can occur when 
the pressure within an open vein is 
subatmospheric. These conditions may exist 
in any position (and during any procedure) 
whenever the wound is above the level of 
the heart . 
1
2
3
4
Optimal recovery of air following 
venous air embolism is provided by a 
multioriﬁ ced catheter positioned at the 
junction between the right atrium and 
the superior vena cava. Conﬁ rmation 
of correct catheter positioning can 
be accomplished by intravascular 
electrocardiography, radiography, or 
transesophageal echocardiography . 
In a patient with head trauma, 
correction of hypotension and control 
of any bleeding take precedence over 
radiographic studies and deﬁ nitive 
neurosurgical treatment because 
systolic arterial blood pressures of 
less than 80 mm Hg predict a poor 
outcome . 
Massive blood loss from injuries 
to the great vessels can occur 
intraoperatively with thoracic or 
lumbar spine procedures . 
5
6
7
 Anesthetic techniques must be modifi ed in the 
presence of intracranial hypertension and marginal 
cerebral perfusion. In addition, many neurosurgi-
cal procedures require patient positions (eg, sit-
ting, prone) that further complicate management. 
Th is chapter applies the principles developed in 
 Chapter 26 to the anesthetic care of neurosurgical 
patients. 
 Intracranial Hypertension 
 Intracranial hypertension is defi ned as a sustained 
increase in intracranial pressure (ICP) above 
15 mm Hg. Intracranial hypertension may result 
from an expanding tissue or fl uid mass, a depressed 
skull fracture, interference with normal absorption 
27
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
594 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
of obstructive hydrocephalus and entry of CSF into 
brain interstitium. Cerebral edema can also be the 
result of intracellular movement of water second-
ary to acute decreases in serum osmolality (water 
intoxication). 
 TREATMENT 
 Treatment of intracranial hypertension and cerebral 
edema is ideally directed at the underlying cause. 
Metabolic disturbances are corrected, and operative 
intervention is undertaken whenever appropriate. 
Vasogenic edema—particularly that associated with 
tumors—oft en responds to corticosteroids (dexa-
methasone). Vasogenic edema from trauma typically 
does not respond to corticosteroids. Blood glucose 
should be monitored frequently and controlled 
with insulin infusions (if indicated) when steroids 
are used. Regardless of the cause, fl uid restriction, 
osmotic agents, and loop diuretics are usually eff ec-
tive in temporarily decreasing brain edema and ICP 
until more defi nitive measures can be undertaken. 
Diuresis lowers ICP chiefl y by removing intracellular 
water from normal brain tissue. Moderate hyperven-
tilation (Pa co 2 of 30–33 mm Hg) is oft en very help-
ful in reducing CBF, CBV, and ICP acutely, but may 
aggravate ischemia in patients with focal ischemia. 
 Mannitol, in doses of 0.25–0.5 g/kg, is particu-
larly eff ective in rapidly decreasing intracranial fl uid 
volume and ICP. Its effi  cacy is primarily related to 
its eff ect on serum osmolality. A serum osmolality 
of 300–315 mOsm/L is generally considered desir-
able. Mannitol can transiently decrease blood pres-
sure by virtue of its weak vasodilating properties, 
but its principal disadvantage is a transient increase 
in intravascular volume, which can precipitate pul-
monary edema in patients with borderline cardiac 
or renal function. Mannitol should generally not be 
used in patients with intracranial aneurysms, arte-
riovenous malformations (AVMs), or intracranial 
hemorrhage until the cranium is opened. Osmotic 
diuresis in such instances can expand a hematoma 
as the volume of the normal brain tissue around it 
decreases. Rapid osmotic diuresis in elderly patients 
can also occasionally cause a subdural hematoma 
due to rupture of fragile bridging veins entering the 
sagittal sinus. Rebound edema may follow the use of 
mannitol; thus, it is ideally used in procedures (such 
of cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF), excessive cerebral 
blood volume (CBV), or systemic disturbances 
promoting brain edema (see below). Multiple fac-
tors are oft en simultaneously present. For example, 
tumors in the posterior fossa usually are not only 
associated with some degree of brain edema and 
mass eff ect, but they also readily obstruct CSF out-
fl ow by compressing the fourth ventricle (obstruc-
tive hydrocephalus). 
 Although many patients with increased ICP 
are initially asymptomatic, they typically develop 
characteristic symptoms and signs, including head-
ache, nausea, vomiting, papilledema, focal neuro-
logical defi cits, and altered consciousness. When 
ICP exceeds 30 mm Hg, cerebral blood fl ow (CBF) 
progressively decreases, and a vicious circle is estab-
lished: ischemia causes brain edema, which in turn, 
increases ICP, resulting in more ischemia. If left 
unchecked, this cycle continues until the patient 
dies of progressive neurological damage or cata-
strophic herniation.  Periodic increases in arterial 
blood pressure with refl ex slowing of the heart 
rate (Cushing response) can be correlated with 
abrupt increases in ICP (plateau or A waves) last-
ing 1–15 min . Th is phenomenon is the result of 
autoregulatory mechanisms periodically decreasing 
cerebral vascular resistance and increasing arterial 
blood pressure in response to cerebral ischemia; 
unfortunately, the latter further increases ICP as 
CBV increases. Eventually, severe ischemia and aci-
dosis completely abolish autoregulation (vasomotor 
paralysis). 
 CEREBRAL EDEMA 
 An increase in brain water content can be produced 
by several mechanisms. Disruption of the blood–
brain barrier (vasogenic edema) is most common 
and allows the entry of plasma-like fl uid into the 
brain. Increases in blood pressure enhance the for-
mation of this type of edema. Common causes of 
vasogenic edema include mechanical trauma, high 
altitudes, infl ammatory lesions, brain tumors, hyper-
tension, and infarction. Cerebral edema following 
metabolic insults (cytotoxic edema), such as hypox-
emia or ischemia, results from failure of brain cells 
to actively extrude sodium causing progressive cel-
lular swelling. Interstitial cerebral edema is the result 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery
595
evidence of brain edema, a midline shift  greater than 
0.5 cm, and ventricular displacement or compres-
sion. Th e neurological examination should docu-
ment mental status and any sensory or motor 
defi cits. Medications should be reviewed with spe-
cial reference to corticosteroid, diuretic, and anti-
convulsant therapy. Laboratory evaluation should 
rule out corticosteroid-induced hyperglycemia, 
electrolyte disturbances due to diuretics, or abnor-
mal secretion of antidiuretic hormone. Anticonvul-
sant blood concentrations may be measured, 
particularly when seizures are not well controlled. 
 Premedication 
 Sedative or opioid premedication is best avoided if 
intracranial hypertension is suspected. Hypercapnia 
secondary to respiratory depression increases ICP. 
Corticosteroids and anticonvulsant therapy should 
be continued until the time of surgery. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Monitoring 
 In addition to standard monitors, direct intraarterial 
pressure monitoring and bladder catheterization 
are used for most patients undergoing craniotomy. 
Rapid changes in blood pressure during anesthetic 
procedures, positioning, and surgical manipulation 
are best managed with guidance from continuous 
invasive monitoring of blood pressure. Moreover, 
arterial blood gas analyses are necessary to closely 
regulate Pa co 2 . Many neuroanesthesiologists zero 
the arterial pressure transducer at the level of the 
head (external auditory meatus)—instead of the 
right atrium—to facilitate calculation of cerebral 
perfusion pressure (CPP). End-tidal CO 2 measure-
ments alone cannot be relied upon for precise regu-
lation of ventilation; the arterial to end-tidal CO 2
gradient must be determined. Central venous access 
and pressure monitoring should be considered 
for patients requiring vasoactive drugs. Use of the 
internal jugular vein for access is theoretically prob-
lematic because of concern that the catheter might 
interfere with venous drainage from the brain. Some 
clinicians avoid this issue by passing a long catheter 
into the central circulation from the median basilic 
as a craniotomy for tumor resection) in which intra-
cranial volume will be reduced. 
 Use of a loop diuretic (furosemide), although 
having a lesser maximal eff ect than mannitol and 
requiring up to 30 min, may have the additional 
advantage of directly decreasing formation of CSF. 
Th e combined use of mannitol and furosemide may 
be synergistic, but requires close monitoring of the 
serum potassium concentration. 
 Anesthesia & Craniotomy for 
Patients with Mass Lesions 
 Intracranial masses may be congenital, neoplastic 
(benign or malignant), infectious (abscess or cyst), 
or vascular (hematoma or arteriovenous malforma-
tion). Craniotomy is commonly undertaken for neo-
plasms of the brain. Primary tumors usually arise 
from glial cells (astrocytoma, oligodendroglioma, or 
glioblastoma), ependymal cells (ependymoma), 
or  supporting tissues (meningioma, schwannoma, 
or choroidal papilloma). Childhood tumors include 
medulloblastoma, neuroblastoma, and astrocytoma. 
 Regardless of the cause, intracranial masses 
present according to growth rate, location, and 
ICP. Slowly growing masses are frequently asymp-
tomatic for long periods (despite relatively large size), 
whereas rapidly growing ones may present when the 
mass remains relatively small. Common presenta-
tions include headache, seizures, a general decline 
in cognitive or specifi c neurological functions, and 
focal neurological defi cits. Symptoms typical to 
supratentorial masses include seizures, hemiplegia, 
or aphasia, whereas symptoms typical of infraten-
torial may include cerebellar dysfunction (ataxia, 
nystagmus, and dysarthria) or brainstem compres-
sion (cranial nerve palsies, altered consciousness, 
or abnormal respiration). As ICP increases, signs of 
intracranial hypertension also develop (see above). 
 PREOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT 
 Th e preoperative evaluation for patients undergoing 
craniotomy should attempt to establish the presence 
or absence of intracranial hypertension.  Com-
puted tomography (CT) and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) scans should be reviewed for 
1
2
596 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
blocker (NMB) is given to facilitate ventilation and 
prevent straining or coughing, both of which can 
abruptly increase ICP. An intravenous opioid given 
with propofol blunts the sympathetic response, par-
ticularly in young patients. Esmolol, 0.5–1.0 mcg/
kg, is eff ective in preventing tachycardia associated 
with intubation in lightly anesthetized patients. 
 Th e actual induction technique can be var-
ied according to individual patient responses and 
coexisting diseases). Succinylcholine may theo-
retically increase ICP, particularly if intubation is 
attempted prior to the establishment of deep anes-
thesia. Succinylcholine, however, remains the agent 
of choice for rapid sequence induction or when 
there are concerns about a potentially diffi  cult air-
way, as hypoxemia and hypercarbia are much more 
detrimental than any eff ect of succinylcholine to the 
patient with intracranial hypertension. 
 Hypertension during induction can be treated 
with β 1 -blockers or by deepening the anesthetic with 
additional propofol. Modest concentrations of vola-
tile agents (eg, sevofl urane) may also be used, pro-
vided that hyperventilation is also used. Sevofl urane 
best preserves autoregulation of CBF and produces 
limited vasodilatation; it may be the preferred vol-
atile agent in patients with elevated ICP. Because 
of their potentially deleterious eff ect on CBV 
and ICP, vasodilators (eg, nicardipine, nitroprus-
side, nitroglycerin, and hydralazine) are avoided 
until the dura is opened. Hypotension is generally 
treated with incremental doses of vasopressors (eg, 
phenylephrine). 
 Positioning 
 Frontal, temporal, and parietooccipital craniotomies 
are performed in the supine position. Th e head is 
elevated 15–30° to facilitate venous and CSF drain-
age of CSF. Th e head may also be turned to the side 
to facilitate exposure. Excessive fl exion or rotation 
of the neck impedes jugular venous drainage and 
can increase ICP. Before and aft er positioning, the 
tracheal tube should be secured, and all breathing 
circuit connections checked. Th e risk of unrecog-
nized disconnections may be increased because the 
patient’s airway will not be easily assessed aft er surgi-
cal draping; moreover, the operating table is usually 
turned 90° or 180° away from the anesthesiologist. 
vein. Th e external jugular, subclavian, and femo-
ral veins may be suitable alternatives for intraop-
erative use. A bladder catheter is necessary because 
of the use of diuretics, the long duration of most 
neurosurgical procedures, and its utility in guid-
ing fl uid therapy. Neuromuscular function should 
be monitored on the unaff ected side in patients 
with hemiparesis because the twitch response is 
oft en abnormally resistant on the aff ected side. 
Monitoring visual evoked potentials may be useful 
in preventing optic nerve damage during resections 
of large pituitary tumors. Additional monitors for 
surgery in the posterior fossa are described below. 
 Management of patients with intracranial 
hypertension may be guided by monitoring ICP 
perioperatively. Various ventricular, intraparenchy-
mal, and subdural devices can be placed by neu-
rosurgeons to provide measurements of ICP. Th e 
transducer should be zeroed to the same reference 
level as the arterial pressure transducer (usually 
the external auditory meatus; see above). A ventric-
ulostomy catheter provides the added advantage of 
allowing removal of CSF to decrease ICP. 
 Induction 
 Induction of anesthesia and tracheal intubation are 
critical periods for patients with compromised intra-
cranial pressure to volume relationships, particularly 
if there is an elevated ICP. Intracranial elastance can 
be improved by osmotic diuresis, dexamethasone, 
or removal of small volumes of CSF via a ventricu-
lostomy drain. Th e goal of any technique should be 
to induce anesthesia and intubate the trachea with-
out increasing ICP or compromising CBF. Arterial 
hypertension during induction increases CBV and 
promotes cerebral edema. Sustained hypertension 
can lead to marked increases in ICP, decreasing CPP 
and risking herniation. Excessive decreases in arte-
rial blood pressure can be equally detrimental by 
compromising CPP. 
 Th e most common induction technique 
employs propofol together with modest hyperventi-
lation to reduce ICP and blunt the noxious eff ects of 
laryngoscopy and intubation. Cooperative patients 
can be asked to hyperventilate during preoxygen-
ation. All patients receive controlled ventilation once 
the propofol has been injected. A neuromuscular 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 
597 
that neurological function is intact. Patients who 
will remain intubated should be sedated to prevent 
agitation. Extubation in the operating room requires 
special handling during emergence. Straining or 
bucking on the tracheal tube may precipitate intra-
cranial hemorrhage or worsen cerebral edema. As 
the skin is being closed, the patient should resume 
breathing spontaneously. Should the patient’s head 
be secured in a Mayfi eld pin apparatus, care must 
be taken to avoid any patient motions (eg, “bucking 
on the tube”), which could promote neck or cra-
nial injuries. Aft er the head dressing is applied and 
full access to the patient is regained (the table is 
turned back to its original position as at induc-
tion), any anesthetic gases are completely discontin-
ued, and the neuromuscular blockade is reversed. 
Rapid awakening facilitates immediate neurological 
assessment and can generally be expected follow-
ing an appropriate anesthetic. Delayed awakening 
may be seen following opioid or sedative overdose, 
when the end-tidal concentration of the volatile 
agent remains >.2 minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC), because of various metabolic derangements, 
or when there is a perioperative neurological injury. 
Patients may need to be transported to the CT scan-
ner directly from the operating room for evaluation 
when they do not respond as predicted. Immediate 
reexploration may be required. Most patients are 
taken to the intensive care unit postoperatively for 
close monitoring of neurological function. 
 Anesthesia for Surgery 
in the Posterior Fossa 
 Craniotomy for a mass in the posterior fossa pres-
ents a unique set of potential problems: obstructive 
hydrocephalus, possible injury to vital brainstem 
centers, pneumocephalus, and, with unusual posi-
tioning, postural hypotension and  venous air 
embolism. 
 Obstructive Hydrocephalus 
 Infratentorial masses can obstruct CSF fl ow through 
the fourth ventricle or the cerebral aqueduct of 
Sylvius. Small but critically located lesions can mark-
edly increase ICP. In such cases, a ventriculostomy is 
 Maintenance of Anesthesia 
 Anesthesia can be maintained with inhalation 
anesthesia, total intravenous anesthesia techniques 
(TIVA), or a combination of an opioid and intrave-
nous hypnotic (most oft en propofol) and a low-dose 
inhalation agent. Even though periods of stimulation 
are few, neuromuscular blockade is recommended—
unless neurophysiological monitoring contradicts 
its use—to prevent straining, bucking, or movement. 
Increased anesthetic requirements can be expected 
during the most stimulating periods: laryngoscopy–
intubation, skin incision, dural opening, periosteal 
manipulations, including Mayfi ed pin placement 
and closure. TIVA with remifentanil and propofol 
facilitates rapid emergence and immediate neuro-
logical assessment. Likewise, the α 2 -agonist dexme-
detomidine can be employed during both asleep and 
awake craniotomies to similar eff ect. 
 Hyperventilation should be continued intraop-
eratively to maintain Pa co 2 at roughly 30–35 mm 
Hg. Lower Pa co 2 tensions provide little additional 
benefi t and may be associated with cerebral isch-
emia and impaired oxygen dissociation from hemo-
globin. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 
and ventilatory patterns resulting in high mean air-
way pressures (a low rate with large tidal volumes) 
should be avoided because of a potentially adverse 
eff ect on ICP by increasing central venous pressure 
and the potential for lung injury. Hypoxic patients 
may require PEEP and increased mean airway pres-
sures; in such patients, the eff ect of PEEP on ICP is 
variable. 
 Intravenous fl uid replacement should be limited 
to glucose-free isotonic crystalloid or colloid solu-
tions. Hyperglycemia is common in neurosurgical 
patients (corticosteroid eff ect) and has been impli-
cated in increasing ischemic brain injury. Colloid 
solutions can be used to restore intravascular vol-
ume defi cits, whereas isotonic crystalloid solu-
tions are used for maintenance fl uid requirements. 
Neurosurgical procedures are oft en associated with 
“occult” blood loss (underneath surgical drapes or 
on the fl oor). 
 Emergence 
 Most patients undergoing elective craniotomy can 
be extubated at the end of the procedure, provided 
598 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
obstruction), and, rarely, quadriplegia (due to com-
pression of the cervical spinal cord). Preexisting cer-
vical spinal stenosis probably predisposes patients to 
the latter injury. 
 Pneumocephalus 
 Th e sitting position increases the likelihood of pneu-
mocephalus. In this position, air readily enters the 
subarachnoid space, as CSF is lost during surgery. 
In patients with cerebral atrophy, drainage of CSF is 
marked; air can replace CSF on the surface of the 
brain and in the lateral ventricles. Expansion of a 
pneumocephalus following dural closure can com-
press the brain. Postoperative pneumocephalus can 
cause delayed awakening and continued impairment 
of neurological function. Because of these concerns, 
nitrous oxide is rarely used for sitting craniotomies.
(see also below). 
 Venous Air Embolism 
 Venous air embolism can occur when the 
pressure within an open vein is subatmo-
spheric. Th ese conditions may exist in any position 
(and during any procedure) whenever the wound is 
above the level of the heart. Th e incidence of venous 
air embolism is greater during sitting craniotomies 
(20% to 40%) than in craniotomies in any other 
4
oft en performed under local anesthesia to decrease 
ICP prior to induction of general anesthesia. 
 Brain Stem Injury 
 Operations in the posterior fossa can injure 
vital circulatory and respiratory brainstem 
centers and cranial nerves or their nuclei. Such inju-
ries may occur as a result of direct surgical trauma 
or ischemia from retraction or other interruptions 
of the blood supply. Damage to respiratory centers 
is said to nearly always produce circulatory changes; 
therefore, abrupt changes in blood pressure, heart 
rate, or cardiac rhythm should alert the anesthesiolo-
gist to the possibility of such an injury. Such changes 
should be communicated to the surgeon. Isolated 
damage to respiratory centers may rarely occur with-
out premonitory circulatory signs during operations 
in the fl oor of the fourth ventricle. Historically, some 
clinicians have employed spontaneous ventilation 
during these procedures as an additional monitor of 
brain function. At completion of the surgery, brain-
stem injuries may present as an abnormal respiratory 
pattern or an inability to maintain a patent airway 
following extubation. Monitoring brainstem audi-
tory evoked potentials may be useful in preventing 
eighth nerve damage during resections of acoustic 
neuromas. Electromyography is also used to avoid 
injury to the facial nerve, but requires incomplete 
neuromuscular blockade intraoperatively. 
 Positioning 
 Although most explorations of the posterior fossa 
can be performed with the patient in either a modi-
fi ed lateral or prone position, the sitting position 
may be preferred by some surgeons. 
 Th e patient is actually semirecumbent in the 
standard sitting position ( Figure 27–1 ); the back 
is elevated to 60°, and the legs are elevated with 
the knees fl exed. Th e head is fi xed in a three-point 
holder with the neck fl exed; the arms remain at the 
sides with the hands resting on the lap. 
 Careful positioning and padding helps avoid 
injuries. Pressure points, such as the elbows, 
ischial spines, heels, and forehead, must be pro-
tected. Excessive neck fl exion has been associated 
with swelling of the upper airway (due to venous 
3
 FIGURE 271  The sitting position for craniotomy. 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery
599
pressure gradient can develop at some time dur-
ing the cardiac cycle, even when the overall mean 
gradient remains left  > right. 
 A. Central Venous Catheterization 
 A properly positioned central venous catheter can 
be used to aspirate entrained air, but there is only 
limited evidence that this infl uences outcomes aft er 
venous air embolism. Some clinicians have consid-
ered right atrial catheterization mandatory for sit-
ting craniotomies, but this is a minority viewpoint. 
 Optimal recovery of air following venous air 
embolism is provided by a multiorifi ced cath-
eter positioned at the junction between the right 
atrium and the superior vena cava. Confi rmation of 
correct catheter positioning can be accomplished 
by intravascular electrocardiography, radiography, 
or transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Intra-
vascular electrocardiography is accomplished by 
using the saline-fi lled catheter as a “V” lead. Correct 
high atrial position is indicated by the appearance of 
a biphasic P wave. If the catheter is advanced farther 
into the heart, the P wave changes from a biphasic to 
a undirectional defl ection. A right ventricular or 
pulmonary artery waveform may also be observed 
when the catheter is connected to a pressure 
transducer and advanced too far. 
 B. Monitoring for Venous Air Embolism 
 Th e most sensitive monitors available should be used. 
Detecting even small amounts of venous air embo-
lism is important because it allows surgical control 
of the entry site before additional air is entrained. 
Currently, the most sensitive intraoperative moni-
tors are TEE and precordial Doppler sonography. 
Th ese monitors can detect air bubbles as small as 
0.25 mL. TEE has the added benefi t of detecting the 
volume of the bubbles and any transatrial passage 
through a patent foramen ovale, as well as evaluating 
any eff ect venous air embolism may have on cardiac 
function. Doppler methods employ a probe over the 
right atrium (usually to the right of the sternum and 
between the third and sixth ribs). Interruption of 
the regular swishing of the Doppler signal by spo-
radic roaring sounds indicates venous air embolism. 
Changes in end-tidal respiratory gas concentrations 
are less sensitive but are important monitors that can 
5
position. Entry into large cerebral venous sinuses 
increases the risk. 
 Th e physiological consequences of venous air 
embolism depend on the volume and the rate of air 
entry and whether the patient has a right-to-left  intra-
cardiac shunt (eg, patent foramen ovale [10% to 25% 
incidence]). Th e latter are important because they can 
facilitate passage of air into the arterial circulation 
( paradoxical air embolism ). Modest quantities of air 
bubbles entering the venous system ordinarily lodge 
in the pulmonary circulation, where they are eventu-
ally absorbed. Small quantities of embolized air are 
well tolerated by most patients. When the amount 
entrained exceeds the rate of pulmonary clear-
ance, pulmonary artery pressure rises progressively. 
Eventually, cardiac output decreases in response to 
increases in right ventricular aft erload. Preexisting 
cardiac or pulmonary disease enhances the eff ects of 
venous air embolism; relatively small amounts of air 
may produce marked hemodynamic changes. Nitrous 
oxide, by diff using into the bubbles and increasing 
their volume, can markedly accentuate the eff ects 
of even small amounts of entrained air. Th e dose 
for lethal venous air embolism in animals receiving 
nitrous oxide anesthesia is one-third to one-half that 
of control animals not receiving nitrous oxide. 
 Defi nitive signs of venous air embolism are 
oft en not apparent until large volumes of air have 
been entrained. A decrease in end-tidal CO 2 or 
arterial oxygen saturation might be noticed prior 
to hemodynamic changes. Arterial blood gas val-
ues may show only slight increases in Pa co 2 as a 
result of increased pulmonary dead space (areas 
with normal ventilation but decreased perfusion). 
Conversely, major hemodynamic manifestations, 
such as sudden hypotension, can occur well before 
hypoxemia is noted. Moreover, large amounts of 
intracardiac air impair tricuspid and pulmonic valve 
function and can produce sudden circulatory arrest 
by obstructing right ventricular outfl ow. 
 Paradoxic air embolism can result in a stroke 
or coronary occlusion, which may be apparent 
only postoperatively. Paradoxic air emboli are 
more likely to occur in patients with right-to-left  
intracardiac shunts, particularly when the nor-
mal transatrial (left  > right) pressure gradient is 
reversed. Some studies suggest that a right > left 
600 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Anesthesia for 
Stereotactic Surgery 
 Stereotaxis can be employed in treating involuntary 
movement disorders, intractable pain, and epilepsy 
and can also be used when diagnosing and treating 
tumors that are located deep within the brain. 
 Th ese procedures are oft en performed under 
local anesthesia to allow evaluation of the patient. 
Propofol or dexmedetomidine infusions are rou-
tinely used for sedation and amnesia. Sedation 
should be omitted, however, if the patient already 
has increased ICP. Th e ability to rapidly provide con-
trolled ventilation and general anesthesia for emer-
gency craniotomy is mandatory, but is complicated 
by the platform and localizing frame that is attached 
to the patient’s head for the procedure. Although 
mask ventilation or ventilation through a laryngeal 
mask airway (LMA) or orotracheal intubation might 
be readily accomplished in an emergency, awake 
intubation with a fi beroptic bronchoscope prior to 
positioning and surgery may be the safest approach 
when intubation is necessary for a patient whose 
head is already in a stereotactic head frame. 
 Functional neurosurgery is increasingly per-
formed for removal of lesions adjacent to speech 
and other vital brain centers. Sometimes patients are 
managed with an asleep–awake–asleep technique, 
with or without instrumentation of the airway. Such 
operations require the patient to be awake to par-
ticipate in cortical mapping to identify key speech 
centers, such as Broca’s area. Patients sleep during 
the painful periods of surgery (ie, during opening 
and closure). LMAs are oft en employed to assist air-
way management during the asleep portions of these 
surgeries. 
 Patients undergo deep brain stimulator inser-
tion for control of movement and other disorders. A 
stimulator electrode is placed via a burr hole using 
radiologic guidance to establish coordinates for 
electrode placement. A microelectrode recording 
(MER) is obtained to determine the correct place-
ment of the stimulator in brain structures. Th e eff ect 
of stimulation upon the patient is noted. Sedative 
medications can adversely aff ect MER potentials, 
complicating the location of the correct depth of 
also detect venous air embolism before overt clini-
cal signs are present. Venous air embolism causes 
a sudden decrease in end-tidal CO 2 tension in pro-
portion to the increase in pulmonary dead space; 
however, decreases can also be seen with hemody-
namic changes unrelated to venous air embolism, 
such as decreased cardiac output. A reappearance 
(or increase) of nitrogen in expired gases may also 
be seen with venous air embolism. Changes in blood 
pressure and heart sounds (“mill wheel” murmur) 
are late manifestations of venous air embolism. 
 C. Treatment of Venous Air Embolism 
 1. 
Th e surgeon should be notifi ed so that he or 
she can fl ood the surgical fi eld with saline or 
pack it with wet gauzes and apply bone wax to 
the skull edges until the entry site is identifi ed 
and occluded. 
 2. 
Nitrous oxide (if used) should be discontinued, 
and the inhalation anesthetic should be 
delivered in 100% oxygen. 
 3. 
If a central venous catheter is present, it should 
be aspirated in an attempt to retrieve the 
entrained air. 
 4. 
Intravascular volume infusion should be given 
to increase central venous pressure. 
 5. 
Vasopressors should be given to treat 
hypotension. 
 6. 
Bilateral jugular vein compression, by 
increasing cranial venous pressure, may slow 
air entrainment and cause back bleeding, 
which might help the surgeon identify the 
entry point of the embolus. 
 7. 
Some clinicians advocate PEEP to increase 
cerebral venous pressure; however, reversal of 
the normal transatrial pressure gradient may 
promote paradoxic embolism in a patient with 
incomplete closure of the foramen ovale. 
 8. 
If the above measures fail, the patient should 
be placed in a head-down position, and the 
wound should be closed quickly. 
 9. 
Persistent circulatory arrest necessitates the 
supine position and institution of resuscitation 
eff orts using advanced cardiac life support 
algorithms. 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 
601 
hypercapnia, or hypotension; (2) formation and 
expansion of an epidural, subdural, or intracerebral 
hematoma; and (3) sustained intracranial hyper-
tension. Surgical and anesthetic management of 
these patients is directed at preventing these sec-
ondary insults. Th e  Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 
score ( Table 27–2 ) generally correlates well with 
the severity of injury and outcome. A GCS score of 
8 or less on admission is associated with approxi-
mately 35% mortality. Evidence of greater than a 
5-mm midline shift  (on imaging) and ventricular 
compression on imaging are associated with sub-
stantially increased morbidity. 
 Specifi c lesions include skull fractures, sub-
dural and epidural hematomas, brain contusions 
(including intracerebral hemorrhages), penetrating 
head injuries, and traumatic vascular occlusions and 
dissections. Th e presence of a skull fracture greatly 
increases the likelihood of an intracranial lesion. 
Linear skull fractures are commonly associated 
stimulator placement. Dexmedetomidine has been 
used to provide sedation to these patients; however, 
during MER and stimulation testing, sedative infu-
sions should be discontinued to facilitate patient 
participation in determining correct electrode 
placement ( Table 27–1 ). 
 Anesthesia for Head Trauma 
 Head injuries are a contributory factor in up to 
50% of deaths due to trauma. Most patients with 
head trauma are young, and many (10% to 40%) 
have associated intraabdominal or intrathoracic 
injuries, long bone fractures, and/or spinal inju-
ries. Th e outcome from a head injury is dependent 
not only on the extent of the neuronal damage at 
the time of injury, but also on the occurrence of 
any secondary insults. Th ese additional insults 
include: (1) systemic factors such as hypoxemia, 
 TABLE 271 Advantages and disadvantages of drugs used for conscious sedation. 
Agents
Advantages
Disadvantages
GABA receptor agonists
 Benzodiazepines
Anxiolysis
Large dose abolishes MER
Alters the threshold for stimulation
Induces dyskinesia 
 Propofol
Widely used
Short acting
Predictable emergence profile
Abolish tremors 
Attenuation of MER
Unpredictable dosing in patients with 
Parkinson disease 
Induces dyskinesia
Tendency to cause sneezing 
Opioids
 Fentanyl
 Remifentanil
? Minimal effect on MER
Short acting
Rigidity 
Suppression of tremors 
Alpha-2 agonist
 Dexmedetomidine
Non-GABA-mediated action
Less effect on MER
Anxiolysis and analgesic effects 
Sedation—easily arousable
Does not ameliorate clinical signs of 
Parkinsonism
Maintains hemodynamic stability
Preserves respiration
High doses can abolish MER 
Hypotension, bradycardia
MER, microelectrode recording; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid.
Modiﬁ ed, with permission, from Venkatraghavan L, Luciano M, Manninen P: Anesthetic management of patients undergoing deep brain stimulator 
insertion. Anesth Analg 2010;110:1138.
602 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
hemorrhage, or evidence of edema on imaging 
studies. ICP monitoring should also be considered 
in patients with signs of intracranial hypertension 
who are undergoing nonneurological procedures. 
Intracranial hypertension should be treated with 
moderate hyperventilation, mannitol, pentobar-
bital, or propofol Studies suggest that sustained 
increases in ICP of greater than 60 mm Hg result 
in severe disability or death. Unlike treatment fol-
lowing spinal cord trauma, multiple randomized 
trials have failed to detect the effi  cacy of early use 
of large doses of glucocorticoids in patients with 
head trauma. 
 PREOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT 
 Anesthetic care of patients with severe head trauma 
begins in the emergency department. Measures to 
ensure patency of the airway, adequacy of ventila-
tion and oxygenation, and correction of systemic 
hypotension should go forward simultaneously with 
neurological and trauma surgical evaluation. Airway 
obstruction and hypoventilation are common. Up to 
70% of such patients have hypoxemia, which may be 
complicated by pulmonary contusion, fat emboli, or 
neurogenic pulmonary edema. Th e latter is attrib-
uted to marked systemic and pulmonary hyper-
tension secondary to intense sympathetic nervous 
system activity. Supplemental oxygen should be 
given to all patients while the airway and ventilation 
are evaluated. All patients must be assumed to have a 
cervical spine injury (up to 10% incidence) until the 
contrary is proven radiographically. Patients with 
obvious hypoventilation, an absent gag refl ex, or a 
persistent score below 8 on the GCS ( Table 27–2 ) 
require tracheal intubation and hyperventilation. 
All other patients should be carefully observed for 
deterioration. 
 Intubation 
 All patients should be regarded as having a full 
stomach and should have cricoid pressure applied 
during ventilation and tracheal intubation. In-line 
stabilization should be used during airway manip-
ulation to maintain the head in a neutral position, 
unless radiographs confi rm that there is no cervical 
with subdural or epidural hematomas. Basilar skull 
fractures may be associated with CSF rhinorrhea, 
pneumocephalus, cranial nerve palsies, or even a 
cavernous sinus–carotid artery fi stula. Depressed 
skull fractures oft en present with an underlying 
brain contusion. Contusions may be limited to the 
surface of the brain or may involve hemorrhage in 
deeper hemispheric structures or the brainstem. 
Deceleration injuries oft en produce both coup (fron-
tal) and contrecoup (occipital) lesions. Epidural and 
subdural hematomas can occur as isolated lesions, as 
well as in association with cerebral contusions (more 
commonly with subdural than epidural lesions). 
 Operative treatment is usually elected for 
depressed skull fractures; evacuation of epidural, 
subdural, and some intracerebral hematomas; and 
debridement of penetrating injuries. Decompressive 
craniectomy is used to provide room for cerebral 
swelling. Th e cranium is subsequently reconstructed 
following resolution of cerebral edema. 
 ICP monitoring is usually indicated in patients 
with lesions associated with intracranial hyperten-
sion: large contusions, mass lesions, intracerebral 
 TABLE 272 Glasgow coma scale. 
Category
Score
Eye opening
 Spontaneous
 To speech
 To pain
 Nil
4
3
2
1
Best motor response
 To verbal command
  Obeys
 To pain
  Localizes
  Withdraws
  Decorticate flexion
  Extensor response
  Nil
6
5
4
3
2
1
Best verbal response
 Oriented
 Confused conversation
 Inappropriate words
 Incomprehensible sounds
 Nil
5
4
3
2
1
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery
603
and electrocardiographic abnormalities in the 
T wave, U wave, ST segment, and QT interval are 
common following head injuries, but are not neces-
sarily associated with cardiac injury; they likely 
represent altered autonomic function. 
 Diagnostic Studies 
 Th e choice between operative and medical manage-
ment of head trauma is based on radiographic and 
clinical fi ndings. Patients should be stabilized prior 
to any CT or other imaging studies. Critically ill 
patients should be closely monitored during such 
studies. Restless or uncooperative patients may 
additionally require general anesthesia. Sedation 
without control of the airway should generally be 
avoided because of the risk of further increases in 
ICP from hypercapnia or hypoxemia. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Anesthetic management is generally similar to that 
for other mass lesions associated with intracranial 
hypertension. Management of the airway is dis-
cussed above. Invasive monitoring should be estab-
lished, if not already present, but should not delay 
surgical decompression in a rapidly deteriorating 
patient. 
 Anesthetic technique and agents are designed to 
preserve cerebral perfusion and mitigate increases in 
intracranial pressure. Hypotension may occur aft er 
induction of anesthesia as a result of the combined 
eff ects of vasodilation and hypovolemia and should 
be treated with an α-adrenergic agonist and volume 
infusion if necessary. Subsequent hypertension is 
common with surgical stimulation, but may also 
occur with acute elevations in ICP. Th e latter may be 
associated with bradycardia (Cushing refl ex). 
 Hypertension can be treated with additional 
doses of the induction agent, with increased concen-
trations of an inhalation anesthetic or vasodilators. 
β-Adrenergic blockade is usually eff ective in con-
trolling hypertension associated with tachycardia. 
CPP should be maintained between 70 and 110 mm 
Hg. Vasodilators should be avoided until the dura 
spine injury. Following preoxygenation and hyper-
ventilation by mask, the adverse eff ects of intuba-
tion on ICP are blunted by prior administration of 
propofol, 1.5–3.0 mg/kg, and a rapid-onset NMB. 
Succinylcholine may produce mild and transient 
increases in ICP in patients with closed head injury; 
however, the necessity for expeditious airway man-
agement trumps these concerns. Rocuronium is 
oft en used to facilitate intubation. Video laryngos-
copy performed with in-line stabilization generally 
permits neutral position intubation of the trauma 
patient. An intubating bougie should be available 
to facilitate tube placement. If a diffi  cult intubation 
is encountered with video laryngoscopy, fi beroptic 
or other techniques (eg, intubating LMA) can be 
attempted. If airway attempts are unsuccessful, a 
surgical airway should be obtained. Blind nasal intu-
bation is contraindicated in the presence of a basilar 
skull fracture, which is suggested by CSF rhinorrhea 
or otorrhea, hemotympanum, or ecchymosis into 
periorbital tissues (raccoon sign) or behind the ear 
(Battle’s sign). 
 Hypotension 
 Hypotension in the setting of head trauma is nearly 
always related to other associated injuries (oft en 
intraabdominal). Bleeding from scalp lacerations 
may be responsible in children. Hypotension may 
be seen with spinal cord injuries because of the 
sympathectomy associated with spinal shock. 
 In a patient with head trauma, correction of 
hypotension and control of any bleeding take pre-
cedence over radiographic studies and defi nitive 
neurosurgical treatment because systolic arterial 
blood pressures of less than 80 mm Hg predict a 
poor outcome. Glucose-containing or hypotonic 
solutions should not be used (see above). Other-
wise, a mix of colloid, crystalloid, and blood prod-
ucts can be administered as necessary. Massive 
blood loss in the patient with multiple injuries 
should result in activation of a massive transfusion 
protocol to provide a steady supply of platelets, 
fresh frozen plasma, and packed red blood cells. 
Invasive monitoring of arterial pressure, central 
venous pressure, and ICP are valuable, but should 
not delay diagnosis and treatment. Arrhythmias 
6
604 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 CEREBRAL ANEURYSMS 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Cerebral aneurysms typically occur at the bifurca-
tion of the large arteries at the base of the brain; 
most are located in the anterior circle of Willis. 
Approximately 10% to 30% of patients have more 
than one aneurysm. Th e general incidence of sac-
cular aneurysms in some estimates is reported to 
be 5%, but only a minority of those with aneurysms 
will have complications. Rupture of a saccular 
aneurysm is the most common cause of subarach-
noid hemorrhage. Th e acute mortality following 
rupture is approximately 10%. Of those that sur-
vive the initial hemorrhage, about 25% die within 
3 months from delayed complications. Moreover, 
up to 50% of survivors are left  with neurological 
defi cits. As a result, the emphasis in management 
is on prevention of rupture. Unfortunately, most 
patients present only aft er rupture has already 
occurred. 
 Unruptured Aneurysms 
 Patients may present with prodromal symptoms 
and signs suggesting progressive enlargement. 
Th e most common symptom is headache, and the 
most common physical sign is a third-nerve palsy. 
Other manifestations could include brainstem 
dysfunction, visual fi eld defects, trigeminal nerve 
dysfunction, cavernous sinus syndrome, seizures, 
and hypothalamic–pituitary dysfunction. Th e most 
commonly used techniques to diagnose an aneu-
rysm are MRI angiography, angiography, and heli-
cal CT angiography. Following diagnosis, patients 
are brought to the operating room, or more likely 
the radiology suite, for elective clipping or oblit-
eration of the aneurysm. Most patients are in the 
40- to 60-year-old age group and in otherwise good 
health. 
 Ruptured Aneurysms 
 Ruptured aneurysms usually present acutely as sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage. Patients typically complain 
of a sudden severe headache without focal neuro-
logical defi cits, but oft en associated with nausea 
and vomiting. Transient loss of consciousness may 
is opened. Hyperventilation to a Pa co 2 <30 should 
be avoided in trauma patients to avoid excessive 
decreases in oxygen delivery. 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation occa-
sionally may be seen with severe head injuries. Such 
injuries cause the release of large amounts of brain 
thromboplastin and may also be associated with 
the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Pulmonary 
aspiration and neurogenic pulmonary edema may 
also be responsible for deteriorating lung function. 
PEEP can be applied on the ventilator. When PEEP 
is used, ICP monitoring can be useful to confi rm an 
adequate CPP. Diabetes insipidus, characterized by 
excessive dilute urine, is frequently seen following 
injuries to the pituitary stalk. Other likely causes of 
polyuria should be excluded and the diagnosis con-
fi rmed by measurement of urine and serum osmo-
lality prior to treatment with fl uid restriction and 
vasopressin Gastrointestinal bleeding is common in 
patients not receiving prophylaxis; it is usually due 
to stress ulceration. 
 Th e decision whether to extubate the trachea at 
the conclusion of the surgical procedure depends on 
the severity of the injury, the presence of concomi-
tant abdominal or thoracic injuries, preexisting ill-
nesses, and the preoperative level of consciousness. 
Young patients who were conscious preoperatively 
may be extubated following the removal of a local-
ized lesion, whereas patients with diff use brain 
injury should remain intubated. Moreover, persis-
tent intracranial hypertension requires continued 
paralysis, sedation, and hyperventilation. 
 Anesthesia & Craniotomy for 
Intracranial Aneurysms & 
Arteriovenous Malformations 
 Saccular aneurysms and AVMs are common 
causes of nontraumatic intracranial hemorrhages. 
Surgical or interventional neuroradiologic treat-
ment may be undertaken either electively to pre-
vent hemorrhage or emergently to prevent further 
complications once hemorrhage has taken place. 
Other nontraumatic hemorrhages (eg, from hyper-
tension, sickle cell disease, or vasculitis) are usually 
treated medically. 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 
605 
guide vasospasm therapy ( Figure 27–2 ). Increased 
velocity of fl ow >200cm/sec is indicative of severe 
spasm. Th e Lindegaard ratio compares the blood 
velocity of the cervical carotid artery with that of the 
middle cerebral artery. A ratio >3 is likewise indica-
tive of severe spasm. Brain tissue oxygen tension 
less than 20 mm Hg is also worrisome.  In patients 
with symptomatic vasospasm with an inadequate 
response to nimodipine, intravascular volume 
expansion and induced hypertension (“triple H” 
therapy: hypervolemia, hemodilution, and hyper-
tension) are added as part of the therapeutic regi-
men . Refractory vasospasm may be treated with 
infusion of papaverine, infusion of nicardipine, or 
angioplasty. However, radiologic improvement in 
the vessel diameter does not necessarily correlate 
with an improvement in clinical status. 
occur and may result from a sudden rise in ICP and 
precipitous drop in CPP. If ICP does not decrease 
rapidly aft er the initial sudden increase, death usu-
ally follows. Large blood clots can cause focal neu-
rological signs in some patients. Minor bleeding 
may cause only a mild headache, vomiting, and 
nuchal rigidity. Unfortunately, even minor bleed-
ing in the subarachnoid space seems to predispose 
to delayed complications. Th e severity of subarach-
noid hemorrhage (SAH) is graded according to 
the Hunt and Hess scale ( Table 27–3 ), as well as 
the World Federation of Neurological Surgeons 
Grading Scale of SAH ( Table 27–4 ). Th e Fisher 
grading scale, which uses CT to assess the amount of 
blood detected, gives the best indication of the likeli-
hood of the development of cerebral vasospasm and 
patient outcome ( Table 27–5 ). 
 Delayed complications include cerebral vaso-
spasm, rerupture, and hydrocephalus. Cerebral 
vasospasm occurs in 30% of patients (usually aft er 
4–14 days) and is a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality. Manifestations of vasospasm are due to 
cerebral ischemia and infarction and depend on 
the severity and distribution of the involved ves-
sels. Th e Ca 2+ channel antagonist nimodipine may 
antagonize vasospasm. Both transcranial Doppler 
and brain tissue oxygen monitoring can be used to 
 TABLE 273 Hunt and Hess grading scale 
for SAH. 
Grade
Clinical Description
I
Asymptomatic or minimal headache and 
slight nuchal rigidity
II
Moderate to severe headache, nuchal rigidity, 
no neurological deficit other than cranial 
nerve palsy
III
Drowsiness, confusion, or mild focal deficit
IV
Stupor, moderate to severe hemiparesis, 
and possibly early decerebrate rigidity 
and vegetative disturbances
V
Deep coma, decerebrate rigidity, and 
moribund appearance
Reproduced, with permission, from Priebe H-J: Aneurysmal 
subarachnoid haemorrhage and the anaesthetist. Br J Anaesth 
2007;99:102.
 TABLE 274 World Federation of 
Neurological Surgeons Grading scale for 
aneurismal SAH. 
Grade
GCS score
Motor Deﬁ cit1
I
15
Absent
II
13 or 14
Absent
III
13 or 14
Present
IV
7-12
Present or absent
V
3-6
Present or absent
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale.
1Excludes cranial neuropathies, but includes dysphasia.
Reproduced, with permission, from Priebe H-J: Aneurysmal subarachnoid 
haemorrhage and the anaesthetist. Br J Anaesth 2007;99:102.
 TABLE 275 Fisher grading scale of 
cranial computerized tomography (CCT). 
Grade
Findings on CCT
1
No subarachnoid blood detected
2
Diffuse or vertical layers ≤ 1mm
3
Localized clot and/or vertical layer > 1mm
4
Intracerebral or intraventricular clot with diffuse 
or no subarachnoid haemorrhage
Reproduced, with permission, from Priebe H-J: Aneurysmal subarachnoid 
haemorrhage and the anaesthetist. Br J Anaesth 2007;99:102.
606 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
persistent elevation in ICP should receive little or 
no  premedication to avoid hypercapnia. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Aneurysm surgery can result in exsanguinating 
hemorrhage as a consequence of rupture or rebleed-
ing. Blood should be available prior to the start of 
these operations. 
 Regardless of the anesthetic technique emplo-
yed, anesthetic management should focus on pre-
venting rupture (or rebleeding) and avoiding factors 
that promote cerebral ischemia or vasospasm. 
 PREOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT 
 In addition to assessing neurological fi ndings, the 
preoperative evaluation should include a search 
for coexisting diseases, such as hypertension and 
renal, cardiac, or ischemic cerebrovascular disease. 
Electrocardiographic abnormalities are commonly 
seen in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
but do not necessarily refl ect underlying heart dis-
ease. However, increases of cardiac troponin during 
SAH are associated with myocardial injury and may 
herald a poor outcome. Most conscious patients 
with normal ICP are sedated following rupture to 
prevent rebleeding; such sedation should be con-
tinued until induction of anesthesia. Patients with 
Secure Aneurysm
Normal Exam
Change in Exam
CT head; Trans-Cranial Doppler
Continue Management
Aggressive HHH therapy
• SBP > 200 mm hg
• CVP > 12   • Mg > 4.0
• PAWP > 14
TCD < 200 cm/s, Lindegard < 3,
PbrO2 > 20 mm hg
TCD > 200 cm/s, Lindegard > 3,
PbrO2 < 20 mm hg
No change in exam, PbrO2
Endovascular operating room for 
angioplasty/non-thrombolytic infusion
Consider mild hyptertension
(SBP > 160)
Exam, PbrO2, Normalizes
Close Neurologic Exam Monitoring/Prophlyaxis
• ICP monitor/Ventriculostomy
• Cerebral Oximeter
• Licox monitor
• Cerebral Microdialysis
• Nimodipine
Improvement 
should be seen 
within 2 hours
 FIGURE 272  Schematic diagram of algorithm 
for management of vasospasm and delayed ischemic 
neurological deﬁ cit after aneurismal SAH. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Bell RS, Vo AH, Veznedaroglu E, Armonda RA. 
The endovascular operating room as an extension of the intensive care 
unit: changing strategies in the management of neurovascular disease. 
Neurosurgery 2006;59:S3–56.) 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 
607 
neurological evaluation in the operating room, prior 
to transfer to the intensive care unit. 
 Th e anesthetic concerns of patients taken for 
aneursymal coiling in the neurointerventional 
suite are similar to those of surgical interventions. 
General anesthesia is employed. Patients require 
heparin anticoagulation and radiologic contrast. 
Communication with the surgeon or neuroradi-
ologist as to the desired activated clotting time and 
need for protamine reversal is essential. Moreover, 
anesthesia staff  in the neuroradiology suite must be 
prepared to manipulate and monitor the blood pres-
sure, as with an open surgical procedure. 
 ARTERIOVENOUS 
MALFORMATIONS 
 AVMs cause intracerebral hemorrhage more oft en 
than subarachnoid hemorrhage. Th ese lesions are 
developmental abnormalities that result in arte-
riovenous fi stulas; they typically grow in size with 
time. AVMs may present at any age, but bleed-
ing is most common between 10 and 30 years of 
age. Other common presentations include head-
ache and seizures. Th e combination of high blood 
fl ow with low vascular resistance can rarely result 
in high-output cardiac failure. Acutely, neurora-
diologists try to embolize AVMs. When neuro-
radiological interventions are not successful or 
available, surgical excision may be undertaken. 
Neuroradiological embolization employs various 
coils, glues, and balloons to obliterate the AVM. 
Risks include embolization into cerebral arteries 
feeding the normal brain, as well as systemic or 
pulmonary embolism. 
 Anesthetic management of patients undergoing 
surgical treatment of AVMs may be complicated by 
extensive blood loss. Venous access with multiple 
large-bore cannulas is necessary. Embolization may 
be carried out prior to surgery to reduce operative 
blood loss. Hyperventilation and mannitol may be 
used to facilitate surgical access. Hyperemia and 
swelling can develop following resection, possibly 
because of altered autoregulation in the remaining 
normal brain. Emergence hypertension is typically 
controlled using β 1 -blockers to avoid any vasodilator 
induced increase in CBF. 
Intraarterial and central venous pressure monitoring 
are useful. Sudden increases in blood pressure with 
tracheal intubation or surgical stimulation should 
be avoided. Judicious intravascular volume loading 
permits surgical levels of anesthesia without exces-
sive decreases in blood pressure. Because calcium 
channel blockers, angiotensin receptor blockers, 
and ACE inhibitors cause systemic vasodilation and 
reduce systemic vascular resistance, patients receiv-
ing these agents preoperatively may be particularly 
prone to hypotension. Hyperventilation is unlikely 
to overcome ischemia-induced vasodilation. Once 
the dura is opened, mannitol is oft en given to facili-
tate surgical exposure and reduce the need for surgi-
cal retraction. Rapid decreases in ICP prior to dural 
opening may promote rebleeding by removing a 
tamponading eff ect on the aneurysm. 
 Elective (controlled) hypotension has been 
used in aneurysm surgery. Decreasing mean arte-
rial blood pressure reduces the transmural tension 
across the aneurysm, making rupture (or rebleed-
ing) less likely and facilitating surgical clipping. 
Controlled hypotension can also decrease blood 
loss and improve surgical visualization in the event 
of bleeding. Th e combination of a slightly head-
up position with a volatile anesthetic enhances the 
eff ects of any of the commonly used hypotensive 
agents. Should accidental rupture of the aneurysm 
occur, the surgeon may request transient hypoten-
sion to facilitate control of the bleeding aneurysm. 
 Technical improvements in temporary vascular 
clips have enabled surgeons to use them more oft en 
to interrupt blood fl ow during aneurysm surgery; 
induced hypertension is oft en requested when tem-
porary clips are applied. Neurophysiologic monitor-
ing may be employed during aneurysm surgery to 
identify potential ischemia during temporary clip 
application. 
 Mild hypothermia has been used to protect the 
brain during periods of prolonged or excessive hypo-
tension or vascular occlusion; however, its effi  cacy 
has been questioned. Rarely, hypothermic circula-
tory arrest is used for large basilar artery aneurysms. 
 Depending on neurological condition, most 
patients should be extubated at the end of surgery. 
Extubation should be handled similarly to other 
craniotomies (see above). A rapid awakening allows 
608 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
or pedicle screw fi xation) can additionally injure the 
spinal cord. Transthoracic approaches to the spine 
require one-lung ventilation. Anterior/posterior 
approaches require the patient to be repositioned in 
the middle of surgery. 
 Positioning 
 Most spine surgical procedures are carried out in the 
prone position. Th e supine position may be used for 
an anterior approach to the cervical spine, making 
anesthetic management easier, but increasing the 
risk of injury to the trachea, esophagus, recurrent 
laryngeal nerve, sympathetic chain, carotid artery, 
or jugular vein. A sitting (for cervical spine pro-
cedures) or lateral decubitus (most commonly for 
lumbar spine procedures) position may occasionally 
be used. 
 Following induction of anesthesia and tra-
cheal intubation in the supine position, the patient 
is turned to the prone position. Care must be taken 
to maintain the neck in a neutral position. Once in 
the prone position, the head may be turned to the 
side (not exceeding the patient’s normal range of 
motion) or (more commonly) can remain face down 
on a cushioned holder. Caution is necessary to avoid 
corneal abrasions or retinal ischemia from pressure 
on either globe, or pressure injuries of the nose, 
ears, forehead, chin, breasts (females), or genitalia 
(males). Th e chest should rest on parallel rolls (of 
foam, gel, or other padding) or special supports—if 
a frame is used—to facilitate ventilation. Th e arms 
may be tucked by the sides in a comfortable posi-
tion or extended with the elbows fl exed (avoiding 
excessive abduction at the shoulder). 
 Turning the patient prone is a critical maneuver, 
sometimes complicated by hypotension. Abdominal 
compression, particularly in obese patients, may 
impede venous return and contribute to exces-
sive intraoperative blood loss from engorgement of 
epidural veins. Prone positioning that permits the 
abdomen to hang freely can mitigate this increase 
in venous pressure. Deliberate hypotension has been 
advocated in the past to reduce bleeding associ-
ated with spine surgery. However, this should only 
be undertaken with a full understanding that con-
trolled hypotension may increase the risk of periop-
erative vision loss (POVL). 
 Anesthesia for Surgery 
on the Spine 
 Spinal surgery is most oft en performed for symp-
tomatic nerve root or cord compression secondary 
to trauma or degenerative disorders. Compression 
may occur from protrusion of an intervertebral disk 
or osteophytic bone (spondylosis) into the spinal 
canal or an intervertebral foramen. Prolapse of an 
intervertebral disk usually occurs at either the fourth 
or fi ft h lumbar or the fi  fth or sixth cervical levels in 
patients 30–50 years old. Spondylosis tends to aff ect 
the lower cervical spine more than the lumbar spine 
and typically affl  icts older patients. Operations on 
the spinal column can help correct deformities (eg, 
scoliosis), decompress the cord, and fuse the spine 
if disrupted by trauma. Spinal surgery may also be 
performed to resect a tumor or vascular malforma-
tion or to drain an abscess or hematoma. 
 PREOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Preoperative evaluation should focus on any exist-
ing anatomic abnormalities and limited neck 
movements due to disease, traction, or braces that 
might complicate airway management and neces-
sitate special techniques. Neurological defi cits 
should be documented. Neck mobility should be 
assessed in all patients presenting for spine sur-
gery at any level. Patients with unstable cervical 
spines can be managed with either awake fi ber-
optic intubation or asleep intubation with in-line 
stabilization. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 For many of these procedures, anesthetic manage-
ment is complicated by the use of the prone position. 
Spinal operations involving multiple levels, fusion, 
and instrumentation are also complicated by the 
potential for large intraoperative blood losses; a red 
cell salvage device is oft en used. Excessive distrac-
tion during spinal instrumentation (Harrington rod 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery
609
 CASE DISCUSSION
Resection of a Pituitary Tumor 
 A 41-year-old woman presents to the operating 
room for resection of a 10-mm pituitary tumor. 
She had complained of amenorrhea and had 
started noticing some decrease in visual acuity . 
 What hormones does the pituitary 
gland normally secrete? 
 Functionally and anatomically, the pituitary 
is divided into two parts: anterior and posterior. 
The latter is part of the neurohypophysis, which 
also includes the pituitary stalk and the median 
eminence . 
 The anterior pituitary is composed of sev-
eral cell types, each secreting a speciﬁ c hormone. 
Anterior pituitary hormones include adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone (ACTH), thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH), growth hormone (GH), the gonad-
otropins (follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH] and 
luteinizing hormone [LH]), and prolactin (PRL). 
Secretion of each of these hormones is regulated 
by hypothalamic peptides (releasing hormones) 
that are transported to the adenohypophysis by 
a capillary portal system. The secretion of FSH, 
LH, ACTH, TSH, and their respective releasing hor-
mones is also under negative feedback control by 
the products of their target organs. For example, 
an increase in circulating thyroid hormone inhibits 
the secretion of TSH-releasing factor and TSH . 
 The posterior pituitary secretes antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH, also called vasopressin) and oxyto-
cin. These hormones are actually formed in supra-
optic and paraventricular neurons, respectively, 
and are transported down axons that terminate in 
the posterior pituitary. Hypothalamic osmorecep-
tors, and, to a lesser extent, peripheral vascular 
stretch receptors, regulate secretion of ADH . 
 What is the function of these hormones? 
 ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete 
glucocorticoids. Unlike production of mineralocor-
ticoids, production of glucocorticoids is dependent 
on ACTH secretion. TSH accelerates the synthe-
sis and release of thyroid hormone (thyroxine). 
 POVL occurs secondary to: 
 • Ischemic optic neuropathy 
 • Perioperative glaucoma 
 • Cortical hypotension/embolism 
 Prolonged surgery in a head-down position, 
major blood loss, relative hypotension, diabetes, 
obesity, and smoking all put patients at greater risk 
of POVL following spine surgery. 
 Airway and facial edema can likewise 
develop aft er prolonged “head-down” positioning. 
Reintubation, if required, will likely present more 
diffi  culty than the intubation at the start of surgery. 
 When patients are placed in the prone posi-
tion, the face must be checked periodically 
to  determine that the eyes, nose, and ears are 
free  of pressure. Even foam cushions can exert 
pressure over time on the chin, orbit, and maxilla. 
Turning the head is not easily accomplished when 
the head is positioned on a cushion; therefore, if 
prolonged procedures are planned, the head can 
be secured with pins keeping the face free from 
any pressure. 
 Monitoring 
 When major blood loss is anticipated or the 
patient has preexisting cardiac disease, intra-
arterial and possibly central venous pressure moni-
tors should be considered prior to “positioning” or 
“turning.”  Massive blood loss from injuries to the 
great vessels can occur intraoperatively with tho-
racic or lumbar spine procedures. 
 Instrumentation of the spine requires the abil-
ity to intraoperatively detect spinal cord injury. 
Intraoperative wake-up techniques employing 
nitrous oxide-narcotic or total intravenous anes-
thesia allow the testing of motor function following 
distraction. Once preservation of motor function is 
established, the patient’s anesthetic can be deepened. 
Continuous monitoring of somatosensory evoked 
potentials and motor evoked potentials provides 
alternatives that avoid the need for intraoperative 
awakening. Th ese monitoring techniques require 
substitution of propofol, opioid, and/or ketamine 
infusions for volatile anesthetics and avoidance of 
neuromuscular paralysis. 
7
610 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 What are the major problems associated 
with the transsphenoidal approach? 
 Problems include (1) the need for mucosal 
injections of epinephrine-containing solution to 
reduce bleeding, (2) the accumulation of blood 
and tissue debris in the pharynx and stomach, (3) 
the risk of hemorrhage from inadvertent entry into 
the cavernous sinus or the internal carotid artery, 
(4) cranial nerve damage, and (5) pituitary hypo-
function. Prophylactic administration of glucocor-
ticoids is routinely used in most centers. Diabetes 
insipidus develops postoperatively in up to 40% of 
patients but is usually transient. Less commonly, 
the diabetes insipidus presents intraoperatively. 
The supine and slightly head-up position used for 
this procedure may also predispose to venous air 
embolism . 
 What type of tumor does this patient have? 
 Tumors in or around the sella turcica account 
for 10% to 15% of intracranial neoplasms. Pituitary 
adenomas are most common, followed by cranio-
pharyngiomas and then parasellar meningiomas. 
Primary malignant pituitary and metastatic tumors 
are rare. Pituitary tumors that secrete hormones 
(functional tumors) usually present early, when 
they are still relatively small (<10 mm). Other 
tumors present late, with signs of increased ICP 
(headache, nausea, and vomiting) or compression 
of contiguous structures (visual disturbances or 
pituitary hypofunction). Compression of the optic 
chiasm classically results in bitemporal hemiano-
pia. Compression of normal pituitary tissue pro-
duces progressive endocrine dysfunction. Failure of 
hormonal secretion usually progresses in the order 
of gonadotropins, GH, ACTH, and TSH. Diabetes 
insipidus can also be seen preoperatively. Rarely, 
hemorrhage into the pituitary results in acute pan-
hypopituitarism (pituitary apoplexy) with signs of a 
rapidly expanding mass, hemodynamic instability, 
and hypoglycemia . 
 This patient has the most common type of 
secretory adenoma—that producing hyperprolac-
tinemia. Women with this tumor typically have 
amenorrhea, galactorrhea, or both. Men with 
Normal thyroid function is dependent on produc-
tion of TSH. The gonadotropins FSH and LH are 
necessary for normal production of testosterone 
and spermatogenesis in males and cyclic ovarian 
function in females. GH promotes tissue growth 
and increases protein synthesis as well as fatty acid 
mobilization. Its eﬀ ects on carbohydrate metabo-
lism are to decrease cellular glucose uptake and 
utilization and increase insulin secretion. PRL func-
tions to support breast development during preg-
nancy. Dopamine receptor antagonists are known 
to increase secretion of PRL . 
 Through its eﬀ ect on water permeability in 
renal collecting ducts, ADH regulates extracellular 
osmolarity and blood volume  Oxytocin acts on are-
olar myoepithelial cells as part of the milk letdown 
reﬂ ex during suckling and enhances uterine activ-
ity during labor. 
 What factors determine the surgical 
approach in this patient? 
 The pituitary gland is attached to the brain by 
a stalk and extends downward to lie in the sella tur-
cica of the sphenoid bone. Anteriorly, posteriorly, 
and inferiorly, it is bordered by bone. Laterally, it is 
bordered by the cavernous sinus, which contains 
cranial nerves III, IV, V 1 , and VI, as well as the cav-
ernous portion of the carotid artery. Superiorly, the 
diaphragma sella, a thick dural reﬂ ection, usually 
tightly encircles the stalk and forms the roof of the 
sella turcica. In close proximity to the stalk lie the 
optic nerves and chiasm. The hypothalamus lies 
contiguous and superior to the stalk . 
 Tumors less than 10 mm in diameter are usually 
approached via the transsphenoidal route, whereas 
tumors greater than 20 mm in diameter and with 
signiﬁ cant suprasellar extension are approached via 
a bifrontal craniotomy. With the use of prophylactic 
antibiotics, morbidity and mortality rates are signiﬁ -
cantly less with the transsphenoidal approach; the 
operation is carried out with the aid of a microscope 
through an incision in the gingival mucosa beneath 
the upper lip. The surgeon enters the nasal cavity, 
dissects through the nasal septum, and ﬁ nally pen-
etrates the roof of the sphenoid sinus to enter the 
ﬂ oor of the sella turcica . 
 
CHAPTER 27 Anesthesia for Neurosurgery 
611 
prolactin-secreting adenomas may have galactor-
rhea or infertility, but more commonly present 
with symptoms of an expanding mass . 
 What other types of secretory hormones are seen? 
 Adenomas secreting ACTH (Cushing’s disease) 
produce classic manifestations of Cushing’s syn-
drome: truncal obesity, moon facies, abdominal 
striae, proximal muscle weakness, hypertension, 
and osteoporosis. Glucose tolerance is typically 
impaired, but frank diabetes is less common 
(<20%). Hirsutism, acne, and amenorrhea are also 
commonly seen in women . 
 Adenomas that secrete GH are often large and 
result in either gigantism (prepubertal patients) 
or acromegaly (adults). Excessive growth prior to 
epiphyseal fusion results in massive growth of the 
entire skeleton. After epiphyseal closure, the abnor-
mal growth is limited to soft tissues and acral parts: 
hands, feet, nose, and mandible. Patients develop 
osteoarthritis, which often aﬀ ects the temporo-
mandibular joint and spine. Diabetes, myopathies, 
and neuropathies are common. Cardiovascular 
complications include hypertension, premature 
coronary disease, and cardiomyopathy in some 
patients. The most serious anesthetic problem 
encountered in these patients is diﬃ  culty in intu-
bating the trachea . 
 Are any special monitors required for 
transsphenoidal surgery? 
 Monitoring should be carried out in somewhat 
the same way as for craniotomies. Visual evoked 
potentials may be employed with large tumors 
that involve the optic nerves. Precordial Doppler 
sonography may be used for detecting venous air 
embolism. Venous access with large bore catheters 
is desirable in the event of massive hemorrhage 
 What modiﬁ cations, if any, are necessary in the 
anesthetic technique? 
 The same principles discussed for cranioto-
mies apply, particularly if the patient has evidence 
of increased ICP. Intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis 
and glucocorticoid coverage (hydrocortisone, 100 
mg) are usually given prior to induction. Many 
clinicians avoid nitrous oxide to prevent prob-
lems with a postoperative pneumocephalus (see 
above). Intense neuromuscular blockade is impor-
tant to prevent movement while the surgeon is 
using the microscope. In some circumstances, the 
surgeon may request placement of a lumbar intra-
thecal catheter to drain CSF, thereby facilitating 
surgical exposure . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Bell R, Vo A, Vexnedaroglu E, et al: Th e endovascular 
operating room as an extension of the intensive 
care unit: changing strategies in the management 
of neurovascular disease. Neurosurgery 2006;59:
S3-56. 
 Dinsmore J: Anaesthesia for elective neurosurgery. 
Br J Anaesth 2007;99:68. 
 Frost E, Booij L: Anesthesia in the patient for awake 
craniotomy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007;20:331. 
 Gonzalez A, Jeyanandarajan D, Hansen C, et al: 
Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring 
during spine surgery: a review. Neurosurg Focus 
2009;27:1. 
 Gupta AK, Azami J: Update of neuromonitoring. 
Curr Anaesth Crit Care 2002;13:120. 
 Nadjat C, Ziv K, Osborn I: Anesthesia for carotid 
and cerebrovascular procedures in interventional 
neuroradiology. Int Anesthesiol Clin 2009;47:29. 
 Poon C, Irewin M: Anaesthesia for deep brain 
stimulation and in patients with implanted 
neurostimulator devices. Br J Anaesth 2009;
103:152. 
 Priebe H: Aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage and 
the anaesthetist. Br J Anaesth 2007;99:102. 
 Rozet I: Anesthesia for functional neurosurgery: the 
role of dexmedetomidine. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 
2008;21:537. 
 Wang L, Paech M: Neuroanesthesia for the pregnant 
woman. Anesth Analg 2008;107:193. 
 Venkatraghavan L, Luciano M, Manninen P: Anesthetic 
management of patients undergoing deep brain 
stimulation insertion. Anesth Analg 2010;110:1138. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 613
28
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Neurologic & 
Psychiatric Diseases 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Induction of anesthesia in patients receiving 
long-term levodopa therapy may result in 
either marked hypotension or hypertension . 
 In patients with multiple sclerosis, increases 
in body temperature cause exacerbation of 
symptoms . 
 The major risk of anesthesia in patients 
with autonomic dysfunction is severe 
hypotension, compromising cerebral and 
coronary blood ﬂ ow . 
1
2
3
 Autonomic hyperreﬂ exia should be expected 
in patients with lesions above T6 and can be 
precipitated by surgical manipulations . 
 The most important interaction 
between anesthetic agents and tricyclic 
antidepressants is an exaggerated response 
to both indirect-acting vasopressors and 
sympathetic stimulation . 
4
5
 Patients with vascular and nonvascular neurologic 
diseases and/or psychiatric disorders are frequently 
encountered by anesthesia staff . Anesthesiologists 
must have a basic understanding of the major neu-
rologic and psychiatric disorders and their drug 
therapy. Failure to recognize potential adverse an-
esthetic interactions may result in avoidable periop-
erative morbidity. 
 Cerebrovascular Disease 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients with diagnosed cerebrovascular disease 
typically have a history of transient ischemic attacks 
(TIAs) or stroke. Patients with TIAs undergoing 
surgery for other indications have an increased 
risk of perioperative stroke. Asymptomatic carotid 
bruits occur in up to 4% of patients older than age 
40 years, but do not necessarily indicate signifi -
cant carotid artery obstruction. Fewer than 10% 
of patients with completely asymptomatic bruits 
have hemodynamically signifi cant carotid artery 
lesions. An asymptomatic carotid bruit may not 
increase the risk of stroke following surgery, but 
increases the likelihood of coexisting coronary 
artery disease. Moreover, the absence of a bruit 
does not exclude signifi cant carotid obstruction. 
 Th e risk of perioperative stroke increases with 
patient age and varies with the type of surgery. Th e 
overall risk of stroke associated with surgery is low, 
but is greater in patients undergoing cardiovascu-
lar surgery. Rates of stroke aft er general anesthe-
sia and surgery range from 0.08% to 0.4%. Even 
in patients with known cerebrovascular disease, 
the risk is only 0.4% to 3.3%. Patients at greatest 
risk of postoperative stroke are those undergoing 
open heart procedures for valvular disease, coro-
nary artery disease with ascending aortic athero-
sclerosis, and diseases of the thoracic aorta. Stroke 
following open heart surgery is usually due to 
embolism of air, clots, or atheromatous debris. In 
614 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
imaging studies. Th e presence of an ulcerative 
plaque of greater than 60% occlusion is generally 
an indication for carotid endarterectomy or endo-
vascular intervention. 
 PREOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Preoperative assessment requires neurologic and 
cardiovascular evaluations. Th e type of stroke, 
the presence of neurologic defi cits, and the extent 
of residual impairment should be determined. 
Th romboembolic strokes usually occur in patients 
with generalized atherosclerosis. Most patients are 
elderly and have comorbid conditions, such as hyper-
tension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes. Coexisting 
coronary artery disease and renal impairment are 
common. Following nonhemorrhagic strokes or 
TIAs, many patients are placed on long-term war-
farin and/or antiplatelet therapy. Management of 
antiplatelet therapy and antithrombotic therapy 
should be reviewed by the anesthesia, primary care, 
and surgical teams to determine the risk/benefi t of 
the discontinuation or maintenance of such ther-
apy perioperatively. Other systemic diseases, such 
as diabetes, hypertension, coronary artery disease, 
heart failure, and chronic obstructive lung disease 
frequently manifest in the patient with cerebrovas-
cular disease. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Patients may present for surgery following embolic, 
thrombotic, and hemorrhagic strokes. 
 Management of the patient following acute 
embolic stroke is directed toward the embolic 
source. Cardiac surgery is performed to remove 
atrial myxomas. Systemic emboli can also be pro-
duced from endocarditic vegetations, as well as from 
degenerated heart valves and intracardiac thrombus. 
 Patients with acute strokes secondary to 
carotid occlusive disease present for carotid end-
arterectomy and endovascular procedures. When 
an awake carotid endarterectomy is undertaken, 
the patient serves as a monitor of the adequacy of 
cerebral blood fl ow during application of vessel 
one study, 6.1% of patients experienced an adverse 
neurological outcome following cardiac surgery. 
Stroke following thoracic aortic surgery may be 
due to emboli or ischemia secondary to prolonged 
circulatory arrest or a clamp placed close to the ori-
gin of the carotid artery. 
 Th e pathophysiology of postoperative strokes 
following noncardiovascular surgery is less clear, 
but may involve severe sustained hypotension 
or hypertension. Hypotension with severe hypo-
perfusion can result in so-called “watershed” 
zone infarctions or thrombosis of cerebral arter-
ies, whereas hypertension can result in intracere-
bral hemorrhage (hemorrhagic stroke). Sustained 
hypertension can disrupt the blood–brain barrier 
and promote cerebral edema. Widened pulse pres-
sure (>80 mm Hg) can produce endothelial vessel 
injury, potentially resulting in cerebral hypoperfu-
sion or embolism. Perioperative atrial fi brillation 
can likewise lead to atrial clot formation and cere-
bral embolism. Th e period of time during which 
anesthesia and surgery should best be avoided 
following a stroke has not been determined. 
Abnormalities in regional blood fl ow and metabolic 
rate usually resolve aft er 2 weeks, whereas altera-
tions in CO 2 responsiveness and the blood–brain 
barrier may require more than 4 weeks. However, 
urgent surgery is performed for acute intracranial 
hemorrhage, symptomatic carotid disease, and car-
diac sources of emboli. 
 Patients with TIAs have a history of tran-
sient (<24 h) impairment, and, by defi nition, no 
residual neurologic impairment. Th ese attacks are 
thought to result from emboli of fi brin-platelet 
aggregates or atheromatous debris from plaques in 
extracranial vessels. Unilateral visual impairment, 
numbness or weakness of an extremity, or aphasia 
is suggestive of carotid disease, whereas bilateral 
visual impairment, dizziness, ataxia, dysarthria, 
bilateral weakness, or amnesia is suggestive of 
vertebral–basilar disease. Patients with TIAs 
have a 30% to 40% chance of developing a frank 
stroke within 5 years; 50% of these strokes occur 
within the fi rst year. Patients with TIAs should 
not undergo any elective surgical procedure with-
out an adequate medical evaluation that generally 
includes at least noninvasive (Doppler) fl ow and 
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
615 
clamps to facilitate the surgical repair. When gen-
eral anesthesia is used electroencephalography, 
evoked potentials, carotid stump pressure, cerebral 
infrared spectroscopy, transcranial Doppler, and 
surgeon subjective sense of collateral back fl ow are 
all used to estimate the adequacy of cerebral oxy-
gen delivery during cross clamp. When monitors or 
lack of appropriate patient response indicate hypo-
perfusion, the surgeon places a shunt to deliver 
blood to the brain around the cross-clamped ves-
sel. Even with adequate cerebral blood fl ow, peri-
operative stroke can occur during carotid surgery 
secondary to emboli. 
 Management of patients following thrombotic 
or hemorrhagic stroke for nonneurological surgery 
must be individualized. Cerebral autoregulation of 
blood fl ow may fail, leaving fl ow directly dependent 
upon cerebral perfusion pressure ( Figure 28–1 ). Th e 
penumbra of potentially salvageable neurologic tis-
sue may therefore be very sensitive to injury from 
the eff ects of both hypotension and hypertension 
( Figure 28–2 ). 
 Patients taken to surgery following administra-
tion of thrombolytic therapy are at risk of cerebral 
hemorrhage, and tighter blood pressure control may 
be indicated to mitigate the possibility of cerebral 
bleeding. 
 Patients with intracerebral hemorrhage or 
traumatic brain injury undergo evacuation of 
 FIGURE 281  Cerebral autoregulation in a normal 
person, cerebral ischemia, and chronic hypertension. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Shaikh S: Anesthesia consideration 
for the patient with acute ischemic stroke. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc 
Anesth 2010;14:62.) 
Cerebral Blood Flow (mL/100g)
Cerebral Ischemia
Normal Person
Chronic
Hypertension
Cerebral Perfusion Pressure (mm Hg)
75
50
25
25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
 FIGURE 282  Penumbra.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Shaikh S: Anesthesia consideration for the patient with acute 
ischemic stroke. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2010;14:62.) 
Normal brain
Pennumbra (potentially
salvagable ischemic tissue)
Infarcted core
hematoma and decompressive craniectomy. Th ese 
patients usually require invasive arterial pressure 
monitoring to facilitate blood pressure manage-
ment in settings where cerebral autoregulation is 
likely deranged ( Figure 28–1 ). Hypertension is fre-
quently treated with intravenous vasodilators and 
β-blockers. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is discussed 
in  Chapter 27 . 
 INTRACRANIAL 
MASS LESIONS 
 Patients with intracranial mass lesions present to 
surgery with both malignant and nonmalignant 
lesions. Such patients frequently present to their pri-
mary care physicians with complaints of headache, 
vision disturbance, or seizures. Radiologic studies 
confi rm the presence of a lesion, and initial treat-
ment is aimed at decreasing cerebral edema with 
dexamethasone. Electrolytes should be reviewed 
perioperatively in all patients undergoing cranial 
surgery, as both hyponatremia and hypernatre-
mia can develop secondary to cerebral salt wast-
ing, inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, 
or central diabetes insipidus ( Table 28–1 ). Patients 
with altered mentation preoperatively may likewise 
be dehydrated. Hyperglycemia secondary to steroid 
use is frequently seen. 
616 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
seizures (also called focal) are clinically manifested 
by motor, sensory, autonomic, or psychiatric symp-
toms, depending on the cortical area aff ected. Focal 
seizures associated with impairment in conscious-
ness are termed “complex partial” (psychomotor or 
temporal lobe) seizures. Generalized seizures char-
acteristically produce bilaterally symmetric electri-
cal activity without local onset. Th ey result with 
or without abnormal motor activity, loss of con-
sciousness, or both. Generalized activity resulting 
in isolated, transient lapses in consciousness are 
called absence (petit mal) seizures. Other general-
ized seizures are usually classifi ed according to the 
type of motor activity. Tonic–clonic (grand mal) 
seizures are most common and are characterized 
by a loss of consciousness followed by clonic and 
then tonic motor activity. 
 PREOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 Anesthetic evaluation should focus primarily on 
the underlying disorder and secondarily on the 
seizures. One should determine the cause and 
type of seizure activity and the drugs with which 
the patient is being treated. Seizures in adults are 
most commonly due to structural brain lesions 
(head trauma, tumor, degeneration, or stroke) 
or metabolic abnormalities (uremia, hepatic fail-
ure, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, drug toxicity, 
or drug/alcohol withdrawal). Idiopathic seizures 
occur most oft en in children, but may persist 
into adulthood. Characterization of the type of 
seizure is important in detecting such activity 
 Seizure Disorders 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Seizures represent abnormal synchronized electrical 
activity in the brain. Th ey may be a manifestation 
of an underlying central nervous system disease, a 
systemic disorder, or idiopathic. Potential underly-
ing mechanisms are thought to include (1) loss of 
inhibitory activity, (2) enhanced release of excitatory 
amino acids, and (3) enhanced neuronal fi ring due 
to abnormal voltage-mediated Ca 2+ currents. Up to 
2% of the population may experience a seizure in 
their lifetime. Epilepsy is a disorder characterized by 
recurrent paroxysmal seizure activity. Healthy indi-
viduals who experience an isolated nonrecurrent 
seizure are not considered to have epilepsy. 
 Seizure activity may be localized to a specifi c 
area in the brain or may be generalized. Moreover, 
initially localized (focal) seizures can subsequently 
spread, becoming generalized. A simple classifi -
cation scheme is presented in  Table 28–2 . Partial 
 TABLE 282 Classiﬁ cation of seizures. 
 Partial (focal)
 Simple 
 Complex 
 Secondarily generalized tonic–clonic 
 Generalized
 Absence (petit mal) 
 Myoclonic 
 Clonic 
 Tonic 
 Tonic–clonic (grand mal) 
 Atonic 
 TABLE 281 Fluid and electrolyte disorders associated with intracranial pathology. 
Condition
Serum Sodium 
Concentration
Plasma 
Volume
Serum 
Osmolality
Urine Sodium 
Concentration
Urine 
Osmolality
Treatment
SIADH
Low
Normal or 
increased
Low
High
High
Fluid restriction
CSWS
Low
Decreased
Normal or high
High
Normal or high
Isotonic or hypertonic saline
DI
High
Decreased
High
Normal
Low
Hypotonic saline + vasopressin
CSWS, cerebral salt wasting; Dl, diabetes insipidus; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.
Reproduced, with permission, from Reddy U, Amin Y: Preoperative assessment of neurosurgical patients. Anaesth Intensive Care Med 2010;11:357.
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
617 
 Most patients with seizure disorders receive 
antiepileptic drugs preoperatively ( Table 28–3 ). 
Antiseizure medications should be continued 
throughout the perioperative period to maintain 
therapeutic levels. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
 In selecting anesthetic agents, drugs with epilepto-
genic potential should be avoided, most notably the 
general anesthetic enfl urane (now of only historic 
perioperatively. Seizures—particularly grand mal 
seizures—are serious complicating factors in sur-
gical patients and should be treated promptly to 
prevent musculoskeletal injury, hypoventilation, 
hypoxemia, and aspiration of gastrointestinal con-
tent. Even partial seizures can progress to grand 
mal seizures. If a seizure occurs, maintaining an 
open airway and adequate oxygenation are the 
fi rst priorities. Intravenous propofol (50–100 mg), 
phenytoin (500–1000 mg slowly), or a benzodiaz-
epine such as diazepam (5–10 mg) or midazolam 
(1–5 mg) can be used to terminate the seizure. 
 TABLE 283 Commonly used antiepileptic drugs, mechanisms of action and common side eﬀ ects. 
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Major Side Eﬀ ects
Comments
Phenytoin
Blocks voltage sensitive Na + 
channels
Dizziness, drowsiness, blurred vision, 
ataxia 
Fatigue
Nausea and vomiting
Constipation, abdominal pain, anorexia
Low therapeutic index
Zero order kinetics
Enzyme inducer
Gingival hyperplasia
Megaloblastic anaemia
Phenobarbital
Potentiates GABAergic inhibition
AMPA receptor blockade
Sedation, dizziness, confusion, 
excitement
Carbamazepine
Blocks voltage sensitive Na + 
channels
Allergic reactions
Introduced slowly
Oxycarbamazepine
Visual disturbance
Enzyme induction
Tetratogenic
Titrated to side effects
Valproic acid
Increases synthesis and 
release of GABA
Reduces GHB
Inhibits NMDA receptors
Sedation, tremor
Weight gain
Spina bifida
Thrombocytopenia
Drug of choice in elderly
Caution when combined 
with lamotrigine
Lamotrigine
Blocks voltage sensitive Na + 
channels
Allergic reactions
Non-sedative
Ethosuximide
Reduces low-threshold 
T-type Ca 2+ currents in animals
Apathy, depression and drowsiness
Nausea and vomiting
Vigabatrine
Structural GABA analogue
Irreversibly inhibits GABA-
transaminase
Visual field defects
Topiramate
Potentiates GABAergic 
inhibition
Allergic reactions
Depression
Pulmonary embolism
Gabapentin
Unknown
Reduces GABA
Somnolence, fatigue
Ataxia
Used in intractable complex 
partial seizures
 AMPA , α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid;  GABA , γ-amino butyric acid;  GHB , γ-hydroxybutyric acid;  NMDA , N-methyl-D-aspartate.
Adapted, with permission, from Veenith T, Burnstein RM. Management of patients with neurological and psychiatric disorders. Surgery 2010;28:441.
618 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
trihexyphenidyl, benztropine, and ethopropa-
zine; the irreversible monoamine oxidase (MAO) 
inhibitors selegiline and rasagiline; and the anti-
viral drug, amantadine. Moderate to severe dis-
ease is typically treated pharmacologically with 
dopaminergic agents, either levodopa (a precur-
sor of dopamine) or a dopamine-receptor agonist. 
Levodopa, which is given with a decarboxylase 
inhibitor to retard the peripheral breakdown of the 
drug (thereby increasing its central delivery and 
decreasing the dose of levodopa that is required to 
control symptoms), is the most eff ective therapy 
and is used to treat moderate to severe symptoms. 
Catechol methyltransferase inhibitors are also 
used to prevent the decarboxylation of levodopa. 
Levodopa is available in either an immediate or 
sustained-release formulation, with durations 
of action of 2–4 hr and 3–6 hr, respectively. Side 
eff ects include nausea, vomiting, dyskinesias, sud-
den sleepiness, cardiac irritability, and orthostatic 
hypotension. Dopamine receptor agonists include 
both ergot derivatives (bromocriptine, cabergoline, 
lisuride, and apomorphine) and nonergot deriva-
tives (pramipexole and ropinirole). Th e nonergot 
derivatives have been shown to be benefi cial when 
used as monotherapy in early PD; all dopamine 
receptor agonists are eff ective when given as com-
bination therapy with levodopa in the treatment of 
moderate to severe PD. Side eff ects are similar to 
those found with the use of levodopa alone, and, in 
addition, include headache, confusion, and hallu-
cinations. Pulmonary and retroperitoneal fi brosis, 
pleural eff usion and thickening, Raynaud syn-
drome, and erythromyalgia are more common side 
eff ects with the use of ergot derivatives than with 
nonergot derivatives. 
 Th e surgical treatment of PD includes both 
ablative procedures (thalamotomy and pallidot-
omy), as well as electrical stimulation of the ventral 
intermediate nucleus of the thalamus, the glo-
bus pallidus internus, or the subthalamic nucleus. 
Pallidotomy is eff ective for treating the dyskinesia 
(70% to 90%), as well as the tremor, rigidity, brady-
kinesia, and gait symptoms (30% to 50%) of the dis-
order. Th alamotomy is most eff ective in treating the 
contralateral tremor, but not for the other symp-
toms of the disease, and has been largely replaced 
interest). Th eoretically, ketamine and methohexi-
tal (in small doses) can precipitate seizure activity. 
Hypothetically, large doses of atracurium, cisatracu-
rium, or meperidine may be relatively contraindi-
cated because of the reported epileptogenic potential 
of their respective metabolites, laudanosine, and 
normeperidine. Hepatic microsomal enzyme induc-
tion should be expected from chronic antiseizure 
therapy. Enzyme induction may increase the dose 
requirement and frequency of intravenous anesthet-
ics and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers 
(NMBs) and may increase the risk for hepatotoxicity 
from halothane. 
 Degenerative & 
Demyelinating Diseases 
 PARKINSON DISEASE 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Parkinson disease (PD) is a common movement 
disorder that typically affl  icts individuals aged 
50–70 years; it has a prevalence of 3% in the 
United States and Canada. Th is neurodegenera-
tive disease is characterized by bradykinesia, rigid-
ity, postural instability, and resting (pill-rolling) 
tremor. Additional frequently occurring fi ndings 
include facial masking, hypophonia, dysphagia, 
and gait disturbances. Increasing problems with 
freezing, rigidity, and tremor eventually result in 
physical incapacitation. Early in the course of the 
disease, intellectual function is usually preserved, 
but declines in intellectual function may be severe 
as the disease progresses. PD is caused by a pro-
gressive loss of dopamine in the nigrostriatum. 
Th e severity of loss of dopamine correlates with the 
severity of bradykinesia. Concurrent with the loss of 
dopamine, the activity of the gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) nuclei in the basal ganglia increases, 
leading to an inhibition of thalamic and brainstem 
nuclei. Th alamic inhibition, in turn, suppresses the 
motor system in the cortex, resulting in the charac-
teristic signs and symptoms. 
 Medical treatment is directed at controlling 
the symptoms. A variety of drugs may be used for 
mild disease, including the anticholinergic agents 
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
619 
correct placement of the electrodes can be aff ected. 
Awake craniotomy has been the norm for epilepsy 
surgery, and is being used increasingly for deep 
brain stimulation procedures. Two techniques are 
advocated—a true awake craniotomy with heavy 
sedation (dexmedetomidine is oft en used) and an 
approach in which the patient receives a general 
anesthetic, usually a total intravenous anesthetic 
with propofol and remifentanil and a laryngeal mask 
airway for control of the airway. Following appropri-
ate surgical exposure, the intravenous infusions are 
discontinued, and the laryngeal mask airway is 
removed. Th e patient can be reanesthetized once the 
implantation of leads is complete. 
 ALZHEIMER DISEASE 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Neurodegenerative diseases oft en lead to demen-
tia. Along with a loss of gray matter, elderly 
patients have altered pharmacokinetic and phar-
macodynamic responses to many drugs that are 
used to induce and maintain anesthesia or seda-
tion. Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common 
neurodegenerative disease, causing approximately 
40% to 80% of all cases of dementia, with a preva-
lence of approximately 20% in patients older than 
age 80 years. Th e disease is characterized by a 
slow decline in intellectual function. Progressive 
impairment of memory, judgment, and decision-
making and emotional lability are hallmarks of the 
disease. Late in the course of the disease, severe 
extrapyramidal signs, apraxias, and aphasia are 
oft en present. Although some degree of brain atro-
phy is normal with advancing age, patients with 
AD usually show marked cortical atrophy with 
ventricular enlargement; the pathological hall-
marks of AD seen at necropsy include neurofi -
brillary tangles that contain the phosphorylated 
microtubular protein tau and neuritic plaques 
composed of the peptide β-amyloid. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Anesthetic management of patients with moder-
ate to severe AD is oft en complicated by disori-
entation and uncooperativeness. New onset of 
by the use of thalamic stimulation. Th e effi  cacy of 
deep brain stimulation of the thalamus is related 
to the eff ect on tremor; it has little to no eff ect on 
the other symptoms of PD. Subthalamic stimula-
tion improves all of the primary symptoms of PD 
and decreases the amount of medication necessary 
for symptom relief. Bilateral stimulation has greater 
effi  cacy than unilateral stimulation. Some decrease 
in cognitive function may occur with this treat-
ment, and, therefore, it should be used with caution 
in patients with cognitive impairment. Th e eff ects 
of globus pallidus internus stimulation are simi-
lar to those of pallidotomy with improvements in 
dyskinesia. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Medications for PD should be continued periopera-
tively, including the morning of surgery. Th e half-
life of levodopa is short. Abrupt withdrawal of 
levodopa can cause worsening of muscle rigidity and 
may interfere with ventilation. Phenothiazines, 
butyrophenones (droperidol), and metoclopramide 
can exacerbate symptoms as a consequence of their 
antidopaminergic activity and should be avoided. 
Anticholinergics 
(atropine) 
or 
antihistamines 
(diphenhydramine) may be used for acute exacerba-
tion of symptoms. Diphenhydramine may be used 
for premedication and intraoperative sedation in 
patients with tremor.  Induction of anesthesia 
in patients receiving long-term levodopa ther-
apy may result in either marked hypotension or 
hypertension. Relative hypovolemia, catecholamine 
depletion, autonomic instability, and sensitization to 
catecholamines are probably contributory. Arterial 
blood pressure should be monitored carefully. 
Hypotension should be treated with small doses of a 
direct-acting vasopressor, such as phenylephrine, 
rather than ephedrine. Th e response to NMBs is 
generally normal, however, hyperkalemia may rarely 
follow succinylcholine. As mentioned previously, 
patients who fail medical treatment are candidates 
for surgical intervention—for example, an ablative 
therapy, such as a thalamotomy or pallidotomy or 
implantation of a deep brain stimulator of the sub-
thalamic nucleus, the ventral intermediate nucleus, 
or the globus pallidus internus. Because general 
anesthesia alters the threshold for stimulation, 
1
620 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
depend on the sites aff ected, but frequently include 
sensory disturbances (paresthesias), visual prob-
lems (optic neuritis and diplopia), and motor weak-
ness. Symptoms develop over the course of days and 
remit over weeks to months. Early diagnosis of 
exacerbations can oft en be confi rmed by analysis of 
cerebrospinal fl uid and magnetic resonance imag-
ing. Remyelination is limited and oft en fails to 
occur. Moreover, axonal loss can develop. Changes 
in neurological function seem to be related to 
changes in axonal conduction. Conduction can 
occur across demyelinated axons, but seems to be 
aff ected by multiple factors, particularly tempera-
ture.  Increases in body temperature cause 
exacerbation of symptoms. 
 Th e treatment of MS may be primarily symp-
tomatic or used in an attempt to arrest the disease 
process. Diazepam, dantrolene, or baclofen, and, in 
refractory cases, an intrathecal delivery system for 
baclofen are used to control spasticity; bethanechol 
and other anticholinergics are useful for urinary 
retention. Painful dysesthesia may respond to car-
bamazepine, phenytoin, or antidepressants. Glu-
cocorticoids may decrease the severity and duration 
of acute attacks. Corticosteroid-resistant relapses 
may respond to fi ve to seven courses of plasma 
exchange off ered on alternate days. Interferon has 
also been used to treat MS. Immunosuppression 
with azathioprine or cyclophosphamide may also 
be attempted to halt disease progression. Mito-
xantrone is used for relapsing and progressive MS. 
Th e systemic eff ects of these therapies on coagu-
lation and immunologic and cardiac function 
should be reviewed preoperatively. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th e eff ect of stress, anesthesia, and surgery on the 
course of MS is controversial. Overall, the eff ect 
of anesthesia is unpredictable. Elective surgery 
should be avoided during relapse, regardless of the 
anesthetic technique employed. Th e preoperative 
consent record should document counseling of the 
patient to the eff ect that the stress of surgery and 
anesthesia might worsen the symptoms. Spinal 
anesthesia has been associated with  exacerbation of 
the disease; however, the entire surgery/delivery/
2
temporary cognitive impairment is frequent in 
elderly patients and oft en persists for 1–3 days 
following surgery. Such patients require repeated 
reassurance and explanation. Legally incompe-
tent patients cannot provide informed consent for 
anesthesia or surgery. Premedication is usually not 
given, and only small doses are used. Centrally 
acting anticholinergics, such as atropine and sco-
polamine, may contribute to postoperative con-
fusion. Glycopyrrolate, which does not cross the 
blood–brain barrier, may be the preferred agent 
when an anticholinergic is required. 
 Laboratory studies have shown that anesthetic 
agents are increasingly associated with neuronal 
injury and cell death Th e outcome implications of 
general anesthesia in both the elderly and small 
children are currently the subject of much inves-
tigation and debate. Apoptotic neurodegenera-
tion has been linked to the use of GABA receptor 
modulators and  N -methyl- d -aspartic acid recep-
tor antagonists, of which both mechanisms are 
used by common general anesthetics. Moreover, 
increased β-amyloid production is associated with 
both anesthetic exposure and AD. Consequently, 
there are concerns that anesthetic exposure may 
worsen dementia in the patient with AD; however, 
defi nitive conclusions regarding the risk of anes-
thetic toxicity in the patient with AD are not yet 
available. 
 MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized by revers-
ible demyelination at random and multiple sites in 
the brain and spinal cord; chronic infl ammation, 
however, eventually produces scarring (gliosis). Th e 
disease may be an autoimmune disorder that is ini-
tiated by a viral infection. It primarily aff ects patients 
between 20 and 40 years of age, with a 2:1 female 
predominance, and typically follows an unpredict-
able course of frequent attacks and remissions. With 
time, remissions become less complete, and the dis-
ease progresses to incapacitation; almost 50% of 
patients will require help with walking within 
15 years of diagnosis. Clinical manifestations 
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
621 
from mechanical ventilation postoperatively is not 
uncommon in patients with moderate to advanced 
disease. 
 GUILLAINBARRÉ SYNDROME 
 Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), a relatively com-
mon disorder aff ecting one to four individuals per 
100,000 population, is characterized by a sudden 
onset of ascending motor paralysis, arefl exia, and 
variable paresthesias. Subtypes of GBS include acute 
infl ammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (about 
75% of cases), acute motor axonal neuropathy (with 
antibodies against gangliosides), and acute motor 
sensory axonal neuropathy. Bulbar involvement, 
including respiratory muscle paralysis, is a frequent 
complication. Pathologically, the disease seems to be 
an immunologic reaction against the myelin sheath 
of peripheral nerves, particularly lower motor neu-
rons. In most instances, the syndrome seems to fol-
low viral respiratory or gastrointestinal infections; 
the disorder can also present as a paraneoplastic 
syndrome associated with Hodgkin’s disease or as 
a complication of human immunodefi ciency virus 
infection. Some patients respond to plasmapheresis. 
Th e prognosis is relatively good, with most patients 
recovering completely; unfortunately, however, 
approximately 10% of patients die of complications, 
and another 10% are left  with long-term neurologic 
sequelae. 
 Anesthetic management is complicated by 
lability of the autonomic nervous system in addi-
tion to concerns about respiratory insuffi  ciency. 
Exaggerated hypotensive and hypertensive responses 
during anesthesia may be seen. As with other lower 
motor neuron disorders, succinylcholine should not 
be used because of the risk of hyperkalemia. Th e use 
of regional anesthesia in these patients remains con-
troversial, as it might worsen symptoms. As with all 
decisions, the risks and benefi ts of regional versus 
general anesthesia must be weighed on an individual 
basis. As damaged nerves are more susceptible to a 
second injury (the “double crush” eff ect), perfor-
mance of neuraxial techniques in patients with pre-
existent neurologic dysfunction should be carefully 
considered. 
anesthetic process may likewise lead to exacerba-
tions. Peripheral nerve blocks are less of a concern 
because MS is a disease of the central nervous 
system; however, patients may also have periph-
eral neuropathies. Epidural and other regional 
techniques seem to have no adverse eff ect on the 
course of the disease. No specifi c interactions with 
general anesthetics are recognized. Patients with 
advanced disease may have a labile cardiovascular 
system due to autonomic dysfunction. In the set-
ting of paresis or paralysis, succinylcholine should 
be avoided because of hyperkalemia. Regardless of 
the anesthetic technique employed, increases in 
body temperature should be avoided. Irrespective 
of anesthetic technique, patients may experience 
a worsening of symptoms perioperatively and 
should be counseled accordingly. 
 AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL 
SCLEROSIS 
 Motor neuron disease is another common neurode-
generative disease, with amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis (ALS) being the most prevalent. Th e cause of ALS 
is unknown, although small numbers of patients 
with the familial form of the disease have a defect 
in the superoxide dismutase-1 gene. ALS is a rap-
idly progressive disorder of both upper and lower 
motor neurons. Clinically, patients present in the 
fi ft h or sixth decade of life with muscular weakness, 
atrophy, fasciculation, and spasticity. Th e disease 
may initially be asymmetric, but over the course of 
2–3 years becomes generalized, involving all skeletal 
and bulbar muscles. Progressive respiratory muscle 
weakness makes the patient susceptible to aspira-
tion and eventually leads to death from ventilatory 
failure. Although the heart is unaff ected, autonomic 
dysfunction can be seen. Th ere is no specifi c treat-
ment for ALS. 
 Th e primary emphasis in management is judi-
cious respiratory care. As with other patients with 
lower motor neuron disease, succinylcholine is con-
traindicated because of the risk of hyperkalemia. 
Adequacy of ventilation should be carefully assessed 
both intraoperatively and postoperatively; an awake 
extubation is desirable. Diffi  culty in weaning patients 
622 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
and cardiac depressant eff ects of most general 
anesthetic agents combined with positive airway 
pressure can be equally problematic. Continuous 
intraarterial blood pressure monitoring is use-
ful. Hypotension should be treated with fl uids 
and direct-acting vasopressors (in preference to 
indirect-acting agents). Enhanced sensitivity to 
vasopressors due to denervation sensitivity may 
be observed. Blood loss also is usually poorly tol-
erated. Body temperature should be monitored 
closely. Patients with anhidrosis are particularly 
susceptible to hyperpyrexia. 
 SYRINGOMYELIA 
 Syringomyelia results in progressive cavitation 
of the spinal cord. In many cases, obstruction of 
cerebrospinal fl uid outfl ow from the fourth ven-
tricle seems to be contributory. Many patients 
have craniovertebral abnormalities, particularly 
the Arnold–Chiari malformation. Increased pres-
sure in the central canal of the spinal cord pro-
duces enlargement or diverticulation to the point 
of cavitation. Syringomyelia typically aff ects the 
cervical spine, producing sensory and motor defi -
cits in the upper extremities, and, frequently, tho-
racic scoliosis. Extension upward into the medulla 
(syringobulbia) leads to cranial nerve defi cits. 
Syringo-peritoneal shunting and other decompres-
sive procedures have variable success in arresting 
the disease. 
 Anesthetic evaluation should focus on defi n-
ing existing neurologic defi cits and any pulmonary 
impairment due to scoliosis. Autonomic instabil-
ity should be expected in patients with extensive 
lesions. Succinylcholine should be avoided when 
muscle wasting is present because of the risk of 
hyperkalemia. Adequacy of ventilation and rever-
sal of nondepolarizing NMBs should be achieved 
prior to extubation. Neuraxial techniques in the 
setting of elevated intracranial pressure are con-
traindicated. Case reports of epidural anesthet-
ics having been performed for labor analgesia in 
patients with Arnold Chiari malformations, with 
and without syringomyelia, can be found in the 
literature. Risks of cerebral herniation, worsening 
 AUTONOMIC DYSFUNCTION 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Autonomic dysfunction, or dysautonomia, may be 
due to generalized or segmental disorders of the 
central or peripheral nervous system. Symptoms can 
be generalized, segmental, or focal. Th ese disorders 
may be congenital, familial, or acquired. Common 
manifestations include impotence; bladder and gas-
trointestinal dysfunction; abnormal regulation of 
body fl uids; decreased sweating, lacrimation, and 
salivation; and orthostatic hypotension. Th e lat-
ter can be the most serious manifestation of the 
disorder. 
 Acquired autonomic dysfunction can be iso-
lated (pure autonomic failure), part of a more gener-
alized degenerative process (Shy–Drager syndrome, 
PD, olivopontocerebellar atrophy), part of a seg-
mental neurological process (MS, syringomyelia, 
refl ex sympathetic dystrophy, or spinal cord injury), 
or a manifestation of disorders aff ecting peripheral 
nerves (GBS, diabetes, chronic alcoholism, amyloi-
dosis, or porphyria). 
 Congenital or familial dysautonomia occurs most 
frequently in Ashkenazi Jewish children and is usu-
ally referred to as Riley–Day syndrome. Autonomic 
dysfunction is prominent and is associated with gen-
eralized diminished sensation and emotional lability. 
Moreover, patients are predisposed to dysautonomic 
crises triggered by stress and characterized by 
marked hypertension, tachycardia, abdominal pain, 
diaphoresis, and vomiting. Intravenous diazepam 
is eff ective in resolving such episodes. Hereditary 
dysautonomia associated with a defi ciency of dopa-
mine β-hydroxylase is described. Administration of 
α-dihydroxyphenylserine improves symptoms in 
these patients. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th e major risk of anesthesia in patients with 
autonomic dysfunction is severe hypotension, 
compromising cerebral and coronary blood fl ow. 
Marked hypertension can be equally deleterious. 
Most patients are chronically hypovolemic. Th e 
vasodilatory eff ects of spinal and epidural anesthe-
sia are poorly tolerated. Similarly, the vasodilatory 
3
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
623 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Acute Transection 
 Anesthetic management depends on the age of the 
injury. In the early care of acute injuries, the empha-
sis should be on preventing further  spinal cord 
damage during patient movement, airway manipu-
lation, and positioning. High-dose corticosteroid 
therapy (methylprednisolone) can be used for the 
fi rst 24 hr following injury to improve neurologic 
outcome. Airway management of the patient with 
unstable cervical spine is discussed in Chapter 19. 
Patients with high transections oft en have impaired 
airway refl exes and are further predisposed to 
hypoxemia because of a decrease in functional 
residual capacity and atelectasis. Spinal shock can 
lead to hypotension and bradycardia prior to any 
anesthetic administration. Direct arterial pressure 
monitoring is helpful. An intravenous fl uid bolus 
and the use of ketamine for anesthesia may help to 
prevent further decreases in blood pressure; vaso-
pressors may also be required. Succinylcholine can 
be used safely in the fi rst 24 hr, but should not be 
used thereaft er because of the risk of hyperkalemia. 
Th e latter can occur within the fi rst week following 
injury and is due to excessive release of potassium 
secondary to the proliferation of acetylcholine 
receptors outside of the neuromuscular synaptic 
cleft . 
 B. Chronic Transection 
 Anesthetic management of patients with nonacute 
transections is complicated by the possibility of 
autonomic hyperrefl exia and the risk of hyperkale-
mia.  Autonomic hyperrefl exia should be 
expected in patients with lesions above T6 and 
can be precipitated by surgical manipulations. 
Regional anesthesia and deep general anesthesia 
are eff ective in preventing hyperrefl exia . Many cli-
nicians, however, are reluctant to administer spinal 
and epidural anesthesia in these patients because of 
the diffi  culties encountered in determining anes-
thetic level, exaggerated hypotension, and technical 
problems resulting from deformities. Severe hyper-
tension can result in pulmonary edema, myocardial 
ischemia, or cerebral hemorrhage and should be 
treated promptly. Direct arterial vasodilators should 
4
nerve injury, and infection must be weighed against 
potential benefi ts. 
 Spinal Cord Injury 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Most spinal cord injuries are traumatic and may arise 
from partial or complete transection. Th e majority 
of injuries are due to fracture and dislocation of the 
vertebral column. Th e mechanism is usually either 
compression and fl exion at the thoracic spine or 
extension at the cervical spine. Clinical manifesta-
tions depend on the level of the injury. Injuries above 
C3–5 (diaphragmatic innervation) require patients to 
receive ventilatory support to stay alive. Transections 
above T1 result in quadriplegia, whereas those above 
L4 result in paraplegia. Th e most common sites of 
injury are C5–6 and T12–L1. Acute spinal cord tran-
section produces loss of sensation, fl accid paralysis, 
and loss of spinal refl exes below the level of injury. 
Th ese fi ndings characterize a period of spinal shock 
that typically lasts 1–3 weeks. 
 Over the course of the next few weeks, spi-
nal refl exes gradually return, together with muscle 
spasms and signs of sympathetic overactivity. Injury 
in the low thoracic or lumbar spine may result in 
cauda equina (conus medullaris) syndrome. Th e 
latter usually consists of incomplete injury to nerve 
roots rather than the spinal cord. 
 Overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system 
is common with transections at T5 or above, but is 
unusual with injuries below T10. Interruption of 
normal descending inhibitory impulses in the cord 
results in autonomic hyperrefl exia. Cutaneous or 
visceral stimulation below the level of injury can 
induce intense autonomic refl exes: sympathetic dis-
charge produces hypertension and vasoconstriction 
below the transection and a baroreceptor-mediated 
refl ex bradycardia and vasodilation above the tran-
section. Cardiac arrhythmias are common. 
 Emergent surgical management is undertaken 
whenever there is reversible compression of the 
spinal cord due to dislocation of a vertebral body 
or bony fragment. Operative treatment is also indi-
cated for spinal instability to prevent further injury. 
624 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
are used because they are less sedating and tend 
to have fewer side eff ects. Other agents are gener-
ally more sedating and include amitriptyline imip-
ramine, protriptyline, amoxapine, doxepin, and 
 trimipramine. Clomipramine is used in the treatment 
of obsessive–compulsive disorders. Most tricyclic 
antidepressants also have signifi cant anticholinergic 
(antimuscarinic) actions: dry mouth, blurred vision, 
prolonged gastric emptying, and urinary retention. 
Quinidine-like cardiac eff ects include tachycardia, 
T-wave fl attening or inversion, and prolongation of 
the PR, QRS, and QT intervals. Amitriptyline has 
the most marked anticholinergic eff ects, whereas 
doxepin has the fewest cardiac eff ects. 
 St. John’s wort is being used with increased fre-
quency as an over-the-counter therapy for depres-
sion. Because it induces hepatic enzymes, blood 
levels of other drugs may decrease, sometimes with 
serious complications. During the preoperative eval-
uation, the use of all over-the-counter medications 
should be reviewed. 
 Antidepressant drugs are generally continued 
perioperatively. Increased anesthetic requirements, 
presumably from enhanced brain catecholamine 
activity, have been reported with these agents. 
Potentiation of centrally acting anticholinergic 
agents (atropine and scopolamine) may increase the 
likelihood of postoperative confusion and delirium. 
 Th e most important interaction between anes-
thetic agents and tricyclic antidepressants is an 
exaggerated response to both indirect-acting vaso-
pressors and sympathetic stimulation. Pancuronium, 
ketamine, meperidine, and epinephrine-containing 
local anesthetic solutions should be avoided. 
Chronic therapy with tricyclic antidepressants is 
reported to deplete cardiac catecholamines, theo-
retically potentiating the cardiac depressant eff ects 
of anesthetics. If hypotension occurs, small doses of 
a direct-acting vasopressor should be used instead of 
an indirect-acting agent. Amitriptyline’s anticholin-
ergic action may occasionally contribute to postop-
erative delirium. 
 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
MAO  inhibitors block the oxidative deamination of 
naturally occurring amines. At least two MAO iso-
enzymes (types A and B) with diff erential substrate 
5
be readily available. Nondepolarizing muscle relax-
ants may be used. Body temperature should be 
 monitored carefully, particularly in patients with 
transections above T1, because chronic vasodilation 
and loss of normal refl ex cutaneous vasoconstriction 
predispose to hypothermia. 
 Encephalitis 
 Various forms of encephalitis can present secondary 
to infectious or autoimmune mechanisms. Patients 
with encephalitis are managed with the normal care 
given any patient with potentially increased intra-
cranial pressure at risk of cerebral hypoperfusion. 
 Psychiatric Disorders 
 DEPRESSION 
 Depression is a very common mood disorder char-
acterized by sadness and pessimism. Its cause is 
multifactorial, but pharmacological treatment is 
based on the presumption that its manifestations 
are due to a brain defi ciency of dopamine, norepi-
nephrine, and serotonin or altered receptor activi-
ties. Up to 50% of patients with major depression 
hypersecrete cortisol and have abnormal circadian 
secretion. Current pharmacological therapy utilizes 
drugs that increase brain levels of these neurotrans-
mitters: tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), MAO inhibitors, and 
atypical antidepressants. Th e mechanisms of action 
of these drugs result in some potentially serious 
anesthetic interactions. Electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT) is increasingly used for refractory severe 
cases and may be continued prophylactically aft er 
the patient’s mood recovers. Th e use of general anes-
thesia for ECT is largely responsible for its safety and 
widespread acceptance. 
 Tricyclic Antidepressants 
 Tricyclic antidepressants may be used for the treat-
ment of depression and chronic pain syndromes. 
All tricyclic antidepressants work at nerve synapses 
by blocking neuronal reuptake of catecholamines, 
 serotonin, or both. Desipramine and nortriptyline 
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
625 
norepinephrine- dopamine  disinhibitors. Patients 
taking St. John’s wort are at increased risk of sero-
tonin syndrome, as are those taking drugs with 
similar eff ects (eg, MAO  inhibitors, meperidine). 
Serotonin syndrome manifestations include agita-
tion, hypertension, hyperthermia, tremor, acidosis, 
and autonomic instability. Treatment is supportive, 
along with the  administration of a 5-HT antagonist 
(eg, cyprohepatadine). 
 BIPOLAR DISEASE 
 Mania is a mood disorder characterized by elation, 
hyperactivity, and fl ight of ideas. Manic episodes may 
alternate with depression in patients with a bipo-
lar (formerly manic–depressive) disorder. Mania is 
thought to be related to excessive norepinephrine 
activity in the brain. Lithium which interferes with 
Na + ion transport with eff ects on many signaling path-
ways in the brain aff ecting neurotransmitter release, 
and lamotrigine, which inhibits sodium channels and 
modulates release of excitatory amino acids, are the 
drugs of choice for treating acute manic episodes and 
preventing their recurrence, as well as suppressing 
episodes of depression. Concomitant administration 
of an antipsychotic (haloperidol) or a benzodiazepine 
(lorazepam) is usually necessary during acute mania. 
Alternative treatments include valproic acid, carbam-
azepine, and aripiprazole as well as ECT. 
 Th e mechanism of action of lithium is poorly 
understood. It has a narrow therapeutic range, with 
a desirable blood concentration between 0.8 and 
1.0 mEq/L. Side eff ects include reversible T-wave 
changes, mild leukocytosis, and, on rare occasions, 
hypothyroidism or a vasopressin-resistant diabetes 
insipidus-like syndrome. Toxic blood concentra-
tions produce confusion, sedation, muscle weakness, 
tremor, and slurred speech. Still higher concentra-
tions result in widening of the QRS complex, atrio-
ventricular block, hypotension, and seizures. 
 Although lithium is reported to decrease mini-
mum alveolar concentration and prolong the dura-
tion of some NMBs, clinically these eff ects seem to 
be minor. Nonetheless, this is yet another reason why 
neuromuscular function should be monitored when 
NMBs are used. Blood levels should be checked 
perioperatively. Sodium depletion (secondary to 
selectivities have been identifi ed. MAO-A is selec-
tive for serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine, 
whereas MAO-B is selective for dopamine and 
phenylethylamine. Nonselective MAO inhibitors 
include phenelzine isocarboxazid, and tranylcy-
promine. Selective MAO-B inhibitors are useful 
in the treatment of PD. Additionally, unlike older 
nonreversible MAO inhibitors, reversible, MAO-A 
inhibitors have been developed. Side eff ects include 
orthostatic hypotension, agitation, tremor, seizures, 
muscle spasms, urinary retention, paresthesias, and 
jaundice. Th e most serious sequela is a hypertensive 
crisis that occurs following ingestion of tyramine-
containing foods (cheeses and red wines), because 
tyramine is used to generate norepinephrine. 
 Th e practice of discontinuing MAO inhibi-
tors at least 2 weeks prior to elective surgery is not 
recommended. Phenelzine can decrease plasma 
cholinesterase activity and prolong the duration of 
succinylcholine. Opioids should generally be used 
with caution in patients receiving MAO inhibitors, 
as rare but serious reactions to opioids have been 
reported. Most serious reactions are associated with 
meperidine, resulting in hyperthermia, seizures, 
and coma. Meperidine should not be administered 
to patients receiving MAO inhibitors. As with tri-
cyclic antidepressants, exaggerated responses to 
vasopressors and sympathetic stimulation should 
be expected. If a vasopressor is necessary, a direct- 
acting agent in small doses should be employed. 
Drugs that enhance sympathetic activity, such as 
ketamine, pancuronium, and epinephrine (in local 
anesthetic solutions), should be avoided. 
 Atypical Antidepressants and Selective 
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
 SSRIs include fl uoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, 
which some clinicians consider fi rst-line agents of 
choice for depression. A surprisingly large  fraction of 
patients undergoing elective  surgery will be receiving 
one of these agents. Th ese agents have little or no anti-
cholinergic activity and do not generally aff ect cardiac 
conduction. Th eir principal side eff ects are head-
ache, agitation, and insomnia. Other agents include 
the norepinephrine/ dopamine reuptake inhibi-
tors, the serotonin/ norepinephrine reuptake inhib-
itors, selective serotonin reuptake enhancers, and 
626 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
metoclopramide can also precipitate the disorder. 
Th e mechanism is related to dopamine blockade in 
the basal ganglia and hypothalamus and impairment 
of thermoregulation. In its most severe form, the pre-
sentation is similar to that of malignant hyperther-
mia. Muscle rigidity, hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, 
autonomic instability, and altered consciousness 
are seen. Creatine kinase levels are oft en high. Th e 
mortality rate approaches 20% to 30%, with deaths 
occurring primarily as a result of renal failure or 
arrhythmias. Treatment with dantrolene seems to 
be eff ective; bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, 
may also be eff ective. Diff erential diagnoses include 
malignant hyperthermia and serotonin syndrome. 
 SUBSTANCE ABUSE 
 Behavioral disorders from abuse of psychotropic 
(mind-altering) substances may involve a socially 
acceptable drug (alcohol), a medically prescribed 
drug (eg, diazepam), or an illegal substance (eg, 
cocaine). Characteristically, with chronic abuse, 
patients develop tolerance to the drug and varying 
degrees of psychological and physical dependence. 
Physical dependence is most oft en seen with opioids, 
barbiturates, alcohol, and benzodiazepines. Life-
threatening complications primarily due to sympa-
thetic overactivity can develop during abstention. 
 Knowledge of a patient’s substance abuse pre-
operatively may prevent adverse drug interactions, 
predict tolerance to anesthetic agents, and facilitate 
the recognition of drug withdrawal. Th e history of 
substance abuse may be volunteered by the patient 
(usually only on direct questioning) or deliberately 
hidden. 
 Anesthetic requirements for substance abusers 
vary, depending on whether the drug exposure is 
acute or chronic (see  Table 28–4 ). Elective proce-
dures should be postponed for acutely intoxicated 
patients and those with signs of withdrawal. When 
surgery is deemed necessary in patients with physical 
dependence, perioperative doses of the abused sub-
stance should be provided, or specifi c agents should 
be given to prevent withdrawal. In the case of opioid 
dependence, any opioid can be used, whereas for 
alcohol, a benzodiazepine is usually substituted due 
to the reluctance of hospital pharmacies to dispense 
loop or thiazide diuretics) decreases renal excre-
tion of lithium and can lead to lithium toxicity. Fluid 
restriction and overdiuresis should be avoided. 
Lithium dilution cardiac output measurements are 
contraindicated in patients on lithium therapy. 
 SCHIZOPHRENIA 
 Patients with schizophrenia display disordered 
thinking, withdrawal, paranoid delusions, and 
auditory hallucinations. Th is disorder is thought to 
be related to an excess of dopaminergic activity in 
the brain. 
 Th e most commonly used antipsychotics 
include phenothiazines, thioxanthenes, phenylbu-
tylpiperadines, dihydroindolones, dibenzapines, 
benzisoxazoles, and butyrophenones. Th ere are 
numerous trade names for these drugs. Older anti-
psychotic medications had strong dopamine antago-
nistic eff ects, leading to extrapyramidal side eff ects 
(eg, muscle rigidity and progression to tardive dyski-
nesia). Other agents have less dopamine antagonism 
and occupy the D2 dopamine receptor to a lesser 
degree, thereby reducing extrapyramidal eff ects. Th e 
antipsychotic eff ect of these agents seems to be due 
to dopamine antagonist activity. Most are sedating 
and mildly anxiolytic. Mild α-adrenergic block-
ade and anticholinergic activity are also observed. 
Side eff ects include orthostatic hypotension, acute 
dystonic reactions, and parkinsonism-like mani-
festations. Risperidone and clozapine have little 
extrapyramidal activity, but the latter is associated 
with a signifi cant incidence of granulocytopenia. 
T-wave fl attening, ST segment depression, and pro-
longation of the PR and QT intervals may be seen, 
increasing the risk of les torsades des pointes. 
 Continuing antipsychotic medication periop-
eratively is desirable. Reduced anesthetic require-
ments may be observed in some patients, and some 
patients may experience perioperative hypotension. 
 NEUROLEPTIC MALIGNANT 
SYNDROME 
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare complica-
tion of antipsychotic therapy that may occur hours 
or weeks aft er drug administration. Meperidine and 
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
627 
increased 
opioid 
postoperative 
requirements. 
Multimodal approaches to pain control are useful 
perioperatively, and patients should be started on 
maintenance methadone as soon as possible. 
Consultation with pain management and addic-
tion specialists is oft en indicated. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Anesthesia for Electroconvulsive 
Therapy 
 A 64-year-old man with depression refractory to 
drug therapy is scheduled for electroconvulsive 
therapy (ECT) . 
 How is ECT administered? 
 The electroconvulsive shock is applied to one 
or both cerebral hemispheres to induce a seizure. 
Variables include stimulus pattern, amplitude, 
and duration. The goal is to produce a therapeu-
tic generalized seizure 30–60 sec in duration. 
Electrical stimuli are usually administered until a 
therapeutic seizure is induced. A good therapeu-
tic eﬀ ect is generally not achieved until a total 
of 400–700 seizure seconds have been induced. 
Because only one treatment is given per day, 
patients are usually scheduled for a series of treat-
ments, generally two or three a week. Progressive 
memory loss often occurs with an increasing num-
ber of treatments, particularly when electrodes are 
applied bilaterally . 
 Why is anesthesia necessary? 
 When the eﬃ  cacy of ECT was discovered, 
enthusiasm was tempered in the medical com-
munity because drugs were not used to control 
the violent seizures caused by the procedure, thus 
engendering a relatively high incidence of mus-
culoskeletal injuries. Moreover, when an NMB was 
used alone, patients sometimes recalled being par-
alyzed and awake just prior to the shock. The rou-
tine use of general anesthesia to ensure amnesia 
and neuromuscular blockade to prevent injuries 
has renewed interest in ECT. The current mortal-
ity rate for ECT is estimated to be one death per 
10,000 treatments . 
alcohol-containing beverages to patients. Alcoholic 
patients should receive B vitamin/folate supplemen-
tation to prevent Korsakoff ’s syndrome. Tolerance to 
most anesthetic agents is oft en seen, but is not always 
predictable. For general anesthesia, a technique pri-
marily relying on a volatile inhalation agent may be 
preferable so that anesthetic depth can be readily 
adjusted according to individual need. Awareness 
monitoring should be likewise considered. Opioids 
with mixed agonist–antagonist activity should be 
avoided in opioid-dependent patients because such 
agents can precipitate acute withdrawal. Clonidine 
is a useful adjuvant in the treatment of postoperative 
withdrawal syndromes. 
 Patients routinely present acutely intoxicated for 
emergency surgery following trauma related to sub-
stance abuse. Patients have oft en consumed more than 
one class of intoxicating agent. Acute cocaine intoxi-
cation may produce hypertension secondary to the 
increase in central neurotransmitters, such as norepi-
nephrine and dopamine. Hypertension and arrhyth-
mias can occur perioperatively. Chronic abusers 
deplete their sympathomimetic neurotransmitters, 
potentially developing hypotension. Amphetamine 
abusers have similar anesthetic concerns, as amphet-
amines also aff ect the sympathetic nervous system. 
 Patients on chronic prescribed opioid therapy, or 
those taking medications illicitly, have substantially 
 TABLE 284 Eﬀ ect of acute and chronic 
substance abuse on anesthetic requirements.  1  
Substance
Acute
Chronic
Opioids
↓
↑
Barbiturates
↓
↑
Alcohol
↓
↑
Marijuana
↓
0
Benzodiazepines
↓
↑
Amphetamines
↑  2  
↓
Cocaine
 ↑  2  
0
Phencyclidine
 ↓ 
 ? 
  1  ↓, decreases; ↑, increases; 0, no eﬀ ect; ?, unknown.
  2  Associated with marked sympathetic stimulation.
628 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
because it also increases the incidence of delayed 
awakening, nausea, and ataxia and is also associ-
ated with hallucinations during emergence. Use of 
etomidate also prolongs recovery. Short-acting opi-
oids, such as alfentanil, are not given alone because 
they do not consistently produce amnesia. However, 
alfentanil (10–25 mg/kg) can be a useful adjunct 
when very small doses of methohexital (10–20 mg) 
are required in patients with a high seizure thresh-
old. In very small doses, methohexital may actually 
enhance seizure activity. Increases in seizure thresh-
old are often observed with each subsequent ECT . 
 Neuromuscular blockade is required from the 
time of electrical stimulation until the end of the 
seizure. A short-acting agent, such as succinyl-
choline (0.25–0.5 mg/kg), is most often selected. 
Controlled mask ventilation, using a self- inﬂ ating 
bag device or an anesthesia circle system, is 
required until spontaneous respirations resume . 
 Can seizure duration be increased without 
increasing the electrical stimulus? 
 Hyperventilation can increase seizure dura-
tion and is routinely employed in some centers. 
Intravenous caﬀ eine, 125–250 mg (given slowly), 
has also been reported to increase seizure duration . 
 What monitors should be used during ECT? 
 Monitoring should be similar to what is appro-
priate with the use of any other general anesthetic. 
Seizure activity is sometimes monitored by an 
unprocessed electroencephalogram. It can also be 
monitored in an isolated limb: a tourniquet is inﬂ ated 
around one arm prior to injection of succinylcholine, 
preventing entry of the NMB and allowing observa-
tion of convulsive motor activity in that arm . 
 How can the adverse hemodynamic eﬀ ects of 
the seizure be controlled in patients with limited 
cardiovascular reserve? 
 Exaggerated parasympathetic eﬀ ects should 
be treated with atropine. In fact, premedication 
with glycopyrrolate is desirable both to prevent 
the profuse secretions associated with seizures and 
to attenuate bradycardia. Nitroglycerin, nifedipine, 
and α- and β-adrenergic blockers have all been 
employed successfully to control sympathetic 
 What are the physiological eﬀ ects of ECT-
induced seizures? 
 Seizure activity is characteristically associated 
with an initial parasympathetic discharge fol-
lowed by a more sustained sympathetic discharge. 
The initial phase is characterized by bradycardia 
and increased secretions. Marked bradycardia 
(<30 beats/min) and even transient asystole (up 
to 6 s) are occasionally seen. The hypertension and 
tachycardia that follow are typically sustained for 
several minutes. Transient autonomic imbalance 
can produce arrhythmias and T-wave abnormali-
ties on the electrocardiogram. Cerebral blood ﬂ ow 
and ICP, intragastric pressure, and intraocular pres-
sure all transiently increase . 
 Are there any contraindications to ECT? 
 Contraindications are a recent myocardial 
infarction (usually <3 months), a recent stroke (usu-
ally <1 month), an intracranial mass, or increased 
ICP from any cause. More relative contraindications 
include angina, poorly controlled heart failure, sig-
niﬁ cant pulmonary disease, bone fractures, severe 
osteoporosis, pregnancy, glaucoma, and retinal 
detachment . 
 What are the important considerations in 
selecting anesthetic agents? 
 Amnesia is required only for the brief period 
(1–5 min) from when the NMB is given to when a 
therapeutic seizure has been successfully induced. 
The seizure itself usually results in a brief period 
of anterograde amnesia, somnolence, and often 
confusion. Consequently, only a short-acting 
induction agent is necessary. Moreover, because 
most induction agents (barbiturates, etomidate, 
benzodiazepines, and propofol) have anticonvul-
sant properties, small doses must be used. Seizure 
threshold is increased and  seizure duration is 
decreased by all of these agents . 
 Following adequate preoxygenation, metho-
hexital, 0.5–1 mg/kg, is most commonly employed. 
Propofol, 1–1.5 mg/kg, may be used, but higher doses 
reduce seizure duration. Benzodiazepines raise the 
seizure threshold and decrease duration. Ketamine 
increases seizure duration, but is generally not used 
 
CHAPTER 28 Anesthesia for Patients with Neurologic & Psychiatric Diseases   
629 
 Kumar R, Taylor C: Cervical spine disease and 
anaesthesia. Neurosurg Anaesth 2011;12:225. 
 Landau R, Giraud R, Delrue V, et al: Spinal anesthesia 
for cesarean delivery in a woman with a surgically 
corrected type 1 Arnold Chiari malformation. Anesth 
Analg 2003;97:253. 
 Lieb K, Selim M: Preoperative evaluation of patients with 
neurological disease. Semin Neurol 2008;28:603. 
 MRC Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST) 
Collaborative Group: Prevention of disabling and 
fatal strokes by successful carotid endarterectomy 
in patients without recent neurological symptoms: 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004;363:1491. 
 Nussbaum RL, Ellis CE: Alzheimer’s disease and 
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1356. 
 Pryzbylkowski P, Dunkman J, Liu R, et al: 
Anti-N-methyl–d-aspartate receptor encephalitis 
and its anesthetic implications. Anesth Analg 
2011;113:1188. 
 Reide P, Yentis S: Anaesthesia for the obstetric patient 
with nonobstetric systemic disease. Best Pract Res 
Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2010;24:313. 
 Reddy U, Amin Y: Preoperative assessment of 
neurosurgical patients. Anaesth Intensive Care Med 
2010;11:357. 
 Richards KJC, Cohen AT: Guillain–Barré syndrome. 
Br J Anaesth 2003;3:46. 
 Roach G, Kanchuger M, Mora Mangano C, et al: Adverse 
cerebral outcomes aft er coronary bypass surgery. 
N Eng J Med 1996;335:1857. 
 Sarang A, Dinsmore J: Anaesthesia for awake 
craniotomy—evolution of a technique that facilitates 
awake neurological testing. Br J Anaesth 2003;90:161. 
 Taheri S, Gasparovic C, Husia B, et al: Blood-brain 
barrier permeability abnormalities in vascular 
cognitive impairment. Stroke 2011;42:2158. 
 Veenith T, Burnstein RM: Management of patients with 
neurological and psychiatric disorders. Surgery 
2010;28:441. 
manifestations. High doses of β-adrenergic block-
ers (esmolol, 200 mg), however, are reported to 
decrease seizure duration . 
 What if the patient has a pacemaker? 
 Patients with pacemakers may safely undergo 
electroconvulsive treatments, but a magnet should 
be readily available to convert the pacemaker to a 
ﬁ xed mode, if necessary . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Aronson S, Fontes M: Hypertension: a new look at an old 
problem. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:59. 
 Culley D, Xie Z, Crosby G: General anesthetic induced 
neurotoxicity: an emerging problem for the young 
and old. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007;20:408. 
 Gregory T, Appleby I: Anaesthesia for interventional 
neuroradiology. Anaesth Intensive Care Med 
2010;11:366. 
 Grocott H, White W, Morris R, et al: Genetic 
polymorphisms and the risk of stroke aft er cardiac 
surgery. Stroke 2005;36:1854. 
 Grunze H, Kasper S, Goodwin G, et al: Th e World 
Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry 
(WFSBP). Guidelines for the biological treatment of 
bipolar disorders, Part II: Treatment of mania. 
World J Biol Psychiatr 2003;4:5. 
 Hebl J, Horlocker T, Kopp S, et al: Neuraxial blockade 
in patients with preexisting spinal stenosis, lumbar 
disk disease, or prior spine surgery: effi  cacy 
and neurologic complications. Anesth Analg 
2010;111:1511. 
 Horlocker TT: Complications of regional anesthesia 
and acute pain management. Anesthesiol Clin 
2011;29:257. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 631
 Renal Physiology 
& Anesthesia 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
The combined blood ﬂ ow through both 
kidneys normally accounts for 20–25% of 
total cardiac output. 
Autoregulation of renal blood ﬂ ow 
normally occurs between mean arterial 
blood pressures of 80 and 180 mm Hg and 
is principally due to intrinsic myogenic 
responses of the aﬀ erent glomerular 
arterioles to blood pressure changes. 
Renal synthesis of vasodilating 
prostaglandins (PGD 2 , PGE 2 , and PGI 2 ) is an 
important protective mechanism during 
periods of systemic hypotension and renal 
ischemia.  
Dopamine and fenoldopam dilate aﬀ erent 
and eﬀ erent arterioles via D 1 -receptor 
activation. Fenoldopam and low-dose 
dopamine infusion can at least partially 
reverse norepinephrine-induced renal 
vasoconstriction. 
Reversible decreases in renal blood ﬂ ow, 
glomerular ﬁ ltration rate, urinary ﬂ ow, 
and sodium excretion occur during both 
regional and general anesthesia. Acute 
kidney injury is less likely if an adequate 
intravascular volume and a normal blood 
pressure are maintained. 
1
2
3
4
5
The endocrine response to surgery and 
anesthesia is at least partly responsible 
for transient ﬂ uid retention seen 
postoperatively in many patients. 
Compound A, a breakdown product of 
sevoﬂ urane, has been shown to cause 
renal damage in laboratory animals. Its 
accumulation in the breathing circuit is 
favored by low ﬂ ow rates. No clinical study 
has detected signiﬁ cant renal injury in 
humans during sevoﬂ urane anesthesia; 
nonetheless, some regulatory authorities 
recommend fresh gas ﬂ ow of at least 
2 L/min with sevoﬂ urane to prevent this 
theoretical problem. 
The pneumoperitoneum produced 
during laparoscopy causes an abdominal 
compartment syndrome–like state. The 
increase in intraabdominal pressure 
typically produces oliguria (or anuria) that 
is generally proportional to the insuﬄ  ation 
pressures. Mechanisms include central 
venous compression (renal vein and vena 
cava); renal parenchymal compression; 
decreased cardiac output; and increases 
in plasma levels of renin, aldosterone, and 
antidiuretic hormone. 
6
7
8
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
29
632 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Bowman’s capsule, providing a large surface area 
for the fi ltration of blood. Blood fl ow is provided 
by a single aff erent arteriole and is drained by a sin-
gle eff erent arteriole (see below). Endothelial cells 
of the glomeruli are separated from the epithelial 
cells of Bowman’s capsule only by their fused base-
ment membranes. Th e endothelial cells are perfo-
rated with relatively large fenestrae (70–100 nm), 
but the epithelial cells interdigitate tightly with 
one another, leaving relatively small fi ltration slits 
(about 25 nm). Th e two cell types with their base-
ment membranes provide an eff ective fi ltration bar-
rier to cells and large-molecular-weight substances. 
Th is barrier has multiple anionic sites that give it 
a net negative charge, favoring fi ltration of cations 
relative to anions. A third cell type, called  intraglo-
merular mesangial cells , is located between the base-
ment membrane and epithelial cells near adjacent 
capillaries. Th ese contractile cells regulate glomeru-
lar blood fl ow and also exhibit phagocytic activity. 
Th ey secrete various substances, absorb immune 
complexes, and contain contractile proteins that 
respond to vasoactive substance. Mesangial cells 
contract, reducing glomerular fi ltration, in response 
to angiotensin II, vasopressin, norepinephrine, his-
tamine, endothelins, thromboxane A 2 , leukotrienes 
(C 4 and D 4 ), prostaglandin F 2 , and platelet-acti-
vating factor. Th ey relax, thereby increasing glo-
merular fi ltration, in response to atrial natriuretic 
peptide (ANP), prostaglandin E 2 , and dopaminer-
gic agonists. 
 Glomerular fi ltration pressure (about 60 mm 
Hg) is normally approximately 60% of mean arte-
rial pressure and is opposed by both plasma oncotic 
pressure (about 25 mm Hg) and renal interstitial 
pressure (about 10 mm Hg). Aff erent and eff erent 
arteriolar tone are both important in determin-
ing glomerular fi ltration pressure: fi ltration pres-
sure is directly proportional to eff erent arteriolar 
tone but inversely proportional to aff erent tone. 
Approximately 20% of plasma is normally fi ltered as 
blood passes through the glomerulus. 
 The Proximal Tubule 
 Of the ultrafi ltrate formed in Bowman’s capsule 
65–75% is normally reabsorbed isotonically (pro-
portional amounts of water and sodium) in the 
 Th e kidneys play a vital role in regulating the volume 
and composition of body fl uids, eliminating toxins, 
and elaborating hormones, including renin, eryth-
ropoietin, and the active form of vitamin D. Factors 
directly and indirectly related to operative proce-
dures and to anesthetic management frequently 
have a physiologically signifi cant impact on renal 
physiology and renal function, and may lead to peri-
operative fl uid overload, hypovolemia, renal insuf-
fi ciency, and kidney failure, which are major causes 
of perioperative morbidity and mortality. 
 Diuretics are frequently used in the periopera-
tive period. Diuretics are commonly administered 
on a chronic basis to patients with cardiovascular 
disease, including hypertension and chronic heart 
failure, and to patients with liver and kidney disease. 
Diuretics may be used intraoperatively, particu-
larly during neurosurgical, cardiac, major vascular, 
ophthalmic, and urological procedures. Familiarity 
with the various types of diuretics, their mecha-
nisms of action, side eff ects, and potential anesthetic 
interactions, is therefore essential. 
 The Nephron 
 Each kidney is made up of approximately 1 million 
functional units called nephrons. Anatomically, a 
nephron consists of a tortuous tubule with at least 
six specialized segments. At its proximal end (the 
 renal corpuscle , composed of a glomerulus and 
a Bowman’s capsule), an ultrafi ltrate of blood is 
formed, and as this fl uid passes through the neph-
ron, its volume and composition are modifi ed by 
both the reabsorption and the secretion of solutes. 
Th e fi nal product is eliminated as urine. 
 Nephrons are classifi ed as  cortical or  juxta-
medullary (see below), and the renal corpuscles of 
all nephrons are located in the renal cortex. Th e six 
major anatomical and functional divisions of the 
nephron are the renal corpuscle, the proximal con-
voluted tubule, the loop of Henle, the distal renal 
tubule, the collecting tubule, and the juxtaglomeru-
lar apparatus ( Figure 29–1 and  Table 29–1 ). 
 The Renal Corpuscle 
 Each renal corpuscle contains a glomerulus, which 
is composed of tuft s of capillaries that jut into 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
633 
of proximal tubular cells at their capillary side by 
membrane-bound Na + –K + -adenosine triphospha-
tase (Na + –K + -ATPase) ( Figure 29–3 ). Th e result-
ing low intracellular concentration of Na +  allows 
passive movement of Na + down its gradient from 
tubular fl uid into epithelial cells. Angiotensin II and 
norepinephrine enhance Na + reabsorption in the 
proximal renal tubules ( Figure 29–2 ). To be reab-
sorbed, most substances must fi rst traverse the 
tubular (apical) side of the cell membrane, and then 
cross the basolateral cell membrane into the renal 
interstitium before entering peritubular capillaries. 
Th e major function of the proximal tubule is Na + 
reabsorption. Sodium is actively transported out 
Distal
convoluted tubule
Connecting segment
Afferent and efferent arterioles
Cortical collecting tubule
Straight portion of proximal tubule
Cortex
Medulla
Medullary
collecting
tubule
Loop of Henle,
thin ascending limb
Loop of Henle,
thick ascending limb
Loop of Henle,
thin descending limb
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Bowman’s
capsule
Glomerulus
Macula
densa
Renal
corpuscle
 FIGURE 291  Major anatomic divisions of the nephron.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF:  Review of Medical 
Physiology , 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2012.) 
634 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
early proximal tubule. In contrast, dopamine and 
fenoldopam decrease the proximal reabsorption of 
sodium via D 1 -receptor activation. 
 Sodium reabsorption is coupled with the 
reabsorption of other solutes and the secretion of 
H + ( Figure 29–3 ). Specifi c carrier proteins use the 
low concentration of Na + inside cells to transport 
phosphate, glucose, and amino acids. Th e net loss of 
intracellular positive charges, the result of Na + –K + -
ATPase activity (exchanging 3Na + for 2K + ), favors 
the absorption of other cations (K + , Ca 2+ , and Mg 2+ ). 
Th us, the Na + –K + -ATPase at the basolateral side 
of the renal cells provides the energy for the reab-
sorption of most solutes. Sodium reabsorption at 
the luminal membrane is also coupled with coun-
tertransport (secretion) of H + . Th e latter mecha-
nism is responsible for reabsorption of 90% of the 
fi ltered bicarbonate ions (see  Figure 50–3 ). Unlike 
other solutes, chloride can traverse the tight junc-
tions between adjacent tubular epithelial cells, and 
accordingly, is passively resorbed via its concentra-
tion gradient. Active chloride reabsorption may 
also take place as a result of a K + –Cl – cotransporter 
that extrudes both ions at the capillary side of the 
cell membrane ( Figure 29–3 ). Water moves pas-
sively out the proximal tubule along osmotic gra-
dients. Apical membranes of epithelial cells contain 
specialized water channels, composed of a mem-
brane protein called aquaporin-1, that facilitate 
water movement. 
 Th e proximal tubules are capable of secreting 
organic cations and anions. Organic cations such as 
creatinine, cimetidine, and quinidine may share the 
same pump mechanism and thus can compete for 
excretion with one another. Organic anions such as 
urate, ketoacids, penicillins, cephalosporins, diuret-
ics, salicylates, and most radiocontrast dyes also 
share common secretory mechanisms. Both pumps 
probably play a major role in the elimination of many 
circulating toxins. Low-molecular-weight proteins, 
which are fi ltered by glomeruli, are normally reab-
sorbed by proximal tubular cells, to be metabolized 
intracellularly. 
 The Loop of Henle 
 Th e loop of Henle consists of  descending and 
 ascending portions. Th ey are responsible for 
 TABLE 291 Functional divisions of a 
nephron.  1  
Segment
Function
Renal corpuscle 
(glomerulus, 
Bowman’s capsule)
Ultrafiltration of blood
Proximal tubule
 Reabsorption
 Sodium  2  chloride 
 Water 
 Bicarbonate 
 Glucose, protein, amino acids 
 Potassium, magnesium, calcium 
 Phosphates,  3  uric acid, urea 
 Secretion
 Organic anions 
 Organic cations 
 Ammonia production 
Loop of Henle
 Reabsorption
 Sodium, chloride 
 Water 
 Potassium, calcium, magnesium 
 Countercurrent multiplier 
Distal tubule
 Reabsorption
 Sodium  4  chloride 
 Water 
 Potassium 
 Calcium  5  
 Bicarbonate 
 Secretion
 Hydrogen ion 4  
 Potassium  4  
 Calcium 
Collecting tubule
 Reabsorption
 Sodium  4 , 6  chloride 
 Water  6 , 7  
 Potassium 
 Bicarbonate 
 Secretion
 Potassium  4  
 Hydrogen ion 4  
 Ammonia production 
Juxtaglomerular 
apparatus
Secretion of renin
  1  Adapted from Rose BD:  Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte 
Disorders,  3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, 1989.
  2  Partially augmented by angiotensin II.
  3  Inhibited by parathyroid hormone.
  4  At least partly aldosterone mediated.
  5  Augmented by parathyroid hormone.
  6  Inhibited by atrial natriuretic peptide.
  7  Antidiuretic hormone mediated.
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
635 
that project deeply into the renal medulla. Cortical 
nephrons outnumber juxtamedullary nephrons by 
approximately 7:1. 
 Only 25–35% of the ultrafi ltrate formed in 
Bowman’s capsule normally reaches the loop of 
Henle. Once there, 15–20% of the fi ltered sodium 
load is normally reabsorbed in the loop of Henle. 
With the notable exception of the ascending thick 
segments, solute and water reabsorption in the loop 
of Henle is passive and follows concentration and 
osmotic gradients, respectively. In the ascending 
thick segment, however, Na + and Cl − are reabsorbed 
in excess of water; moreover, Na + reabsorption in 
this part of the nephron is directly coupled to both 
K + and Cl − reabsorption ( Figure 29–4 ), and [Cl − ] 
in tubular fl uid appears to be the rate-limiting 
factor. Active Na + reabsorption still results from 
maintaining a hypertonic medullary interstitium 
and also indirectly provide the collecting tubules 
with the ability to concentrate urine. Th e thin 
descending segment is a continuation of the proxi-
mal tubule and descends from the renal cortex into 
the renal medulla. In the medulla, the descending 
portion acutely turns back upon itself and rises 
back up toward the cortex as the ascending por-
tion. Th e ascending portion consists of a function-
ally distinct, thin ascending limb, a medullary thick 
ascending limb, and a cortical thick ascending limb 
( Figure 29–1 ).  Cortical nephrons have relatively 
short loops of Henle which extend only into the 
more superfi cial regions of the renal medulla and 
oft en lack a thin ascending limb.  Juxtamedullary 
nephrons, which have renal corpuscles located 
near the renal medulla, possess loops of Henle 
GLOMERULUS
STRAIGHT
PROXIMAL
CONVOLUTED
TUBULE
65–75%
DISTAL
CONVOLUTED
TUBULE
5%
LOOP OF
HENLE
thick ascending
limb
15–20%
COLLECTING
TUBULE
5–7%
URINE
5%
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
 FIGURE 292  Sodium reabsorption in the nephron. Numbers represent the percentage of the ﬁ ltered sodium reabsorbed 
at each site. (Reproduced, with permission, from Cogan MG:  Fluid and Electrolytes: Physiology and Pathophysiology. Appleton & Lange, 1991.) 
636 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
reabsorption, and parathyroid hormone may aug-
ment calcium reabsorption at this location. 
 The Distal Tubule 
 Th e distal tubule receives hypotonic fl uid from the 
loop of Henle and is normally responsible for only 
minor modifi cations of tubular fl uid. In contrast to 
more proximal portions, the distal nephron has very 
tight junctions between tubular cells and is relatively 
impermeable to water and sodium. It can there-
fore maintain the gradients generated by the loop 
of Henle. Sodium reabsorption in the distal tubule 
normally accounts for only about 5% of the fi ltered 
sodium load. As in other parts of the nephron, the 
energy is derived from Na + –K + -ATPase activity on 
the capillary side, but on the luminal side Na + is 
reabsorbed by an Na + –Cl − carrier. Sodium reabsorp-
tion in this segment is directly proportional to Na + 
Na + –K + -ATPase activity on the capillary side of epi-
thelial cells. 
 Unlike the descending limb and the thin 
ascending limb, the thick parts of the ascending limb 
are impermeable to water. As a result, tubular fl uid 
fl owing out of the loop of Henle is hypotonic (100–
200 mOsm/L) and the interstitium surrounding the 
loop of Henle is therefore hypertonic. A  countercur-
rent multiplier mechanism is established such that 
both the tubular fl uid and medullary interstitium 
become increasingly hypertonic with increasing 
depth into the medulla ( Figure 29–5 ). Urea con-
centrations also increase within the medulla and 
contribute to the hypertonicity. Th e countercurrent 
mechanism includes the loop of Henle, the cortical 
and medullary collecting tubules, and their respec-
tive capillaries (vasarecta). 
 Th e thick ascending loop of Henle is also 
an important site for calcium and magnesium 
Na+
K+, Ca2+,
or Mg2+
3Na+
ATP
ase
H+
Na+
Cl–
Cl–,
phosphate,
glucose,
amino acids
Renal
tubular
cell
Cl–
2K+
K+
Proximal
renal
tubule
Peritubular
capillary
capillary
Peritubular
capillary
 FIGURE 293  Reabsorption of solutes in proximal 
tubules. Note that Na + –K + -ATPase supplies the energy 
for reabsorption of most solutes by maintaining a low 
intracellular concentration of sodium. 
ATP
ase
3Na+
Na+
2Cl–
Cl–
K+
K+
2K+
Thick
ascending
loop of
Henle
Peritubular
Peritubular
capillary
capillary
Peritubular
capillary
 FIGURE 294  Sodium and chloride reabsorption in 
the thick ascending loop of Henle. All four sites on the 
luminal carrier protein must be occupied for transport 
to occur. The rate-limiting factor appears to be chloride 
concentration in tubular ﬂ uid. 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
637 
Na + reabsorption, and (2) intercalated cells (I cells), 
which are responsible for acid–base regulation. 
Because P cells reabsorb Na + via an electrogenic 
pump, either Cl − must also be reabsorbed or K + must 
be secreted to maintain electroneutrality. Increased 
intracellular [K + ] favors K + secretion. Aldosterone 
enhances Na + –K + -ATPase activity in this part of the 
nephron by increasing the number of open K + and 
Na + channels in the luminal membrane. Aldosterone 
also enhances the H + -secreting ATPase on the lumi-
nal border of I cells ( Figure 29–6 ). I cells addition-
ally have a luminal K + –H + -ATPase pump, which 
reabsorbs K + and secretes H + , and some I cells are 
capable of secreting bicarbonate ion in response to 
large alkaline loads. 
 B. Medullary Collecting Tubule 
 Th e medullary collecting tubule courses down from 
the cortex through the hypertonic medulla before 
delivery. Th e distal tubule is the major site of para-
thyroid hormone–and vitamin D–mediated calcium 
reabsorption. 
 Th e latter portion of the distal tubule is referred 
to as the  connecting segment . Although it is also 
involved in hormone-mediated calcium reabsorp-
tion, unlike more proximal portions, it participates 
in aldosterone-mediated Na + reabsorption. 
 The Collecting Tubule 
 Th e collecting tubule can be divided into cortical 
and medullary portions. Together, they normally 
account for the reabsorption of 5–7% of the fi ltered 
sodium load. 
 A. Cortical Collecting Tubule 
 Th is part of the nephron consists of two cell types: 
(1) principal cells (P cells), which primarily secrete 
potassium and participate in aldosterone-stimulated 
 FIGURE 295  The countercurrent multiplier 
mechanism. This mechanism is dependent on diﬀ erential 
permeability and transport characteristics between the 
descending and ascending limbs. The descending limb 
and the thin ascending limb are permeable to water, Na + , 
Cl − , and urea. The thick ascending limb is impermeable 
to water and urea, actively reabsorbs Na + and Cl – , and 
therefore can generate an osmotic gradient. This ﬁ gure 
depicts from “time zero,” a progressive 200-mOsm/kg 
gradient between the descending and ascending limbs. 
Note that as urine ﬂ ows, the gradient remains unchanged 
but the osmolality progressively increases at the bottom 
of the loop. (Reproduced, with permission, from Pitts RF:  Physiology 
of the Kidney and Body Fluids, 3rd ed. Year Book, 1974.) 
Descending
limb
Ascending
limb
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
285
385
385
385
385
385
385
385
385
185
185
185
185
185
185
185
185
285
285
285
285
385
385
385
385
185
185
185
185
385
385
385
385
335
335
335
335
485
485
485
485
135
135
135
135
285
285
285
285
285
285
335
335
335
335
485
485
135
135
285
285
285
285
485
485
310
310
410
410
410
410
585
585
110
110
210
210
210
210
385
385
285
310
310
410
410
410
410
585
110
210
210
210
210
385
385
585
297
360
360
410
410
498
498
685
97
160
160
210
210
298
298
485
↑
↑
↑
↑
↓
↓
↓
↓
638 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
secreted are excreted in the form of titratable acids 
(phosphates) and ammonium ions (see  Chapter 50 ). 
 C. Role of the Collecting Tubule in 
Maintaining a Hypertonic Medulla 
 Diff erences in permeability to urea in the corti-
cal and medullary collecting tubules account for 
up to half the hypertonicity of the renal medulla. 
Cortical collecting tubules are freely permeable to 
urea, whereas medullary collecting tubules are nor-
mally impermeable. In the presence of ADH, the 
innermost part of the medullary collecting tubules 
becomes even more permeable to urea. Th us, when 
ADH is secreted, water moves out of the collecting 
tubules and the urea becomes highly concentrated. 
Urea can then diff use out deeply into the medullary 
interstitium, increasing its tonicity. 
 The Juxtaglomerular Apparatus 
 Th is small organ within each nephron consists of a 
specialized segment of the aff erent arteriole, con-
taining juxtaglomerular cells within its wall, and 
the end of the thick, ascending cortical segment of 
the loop of Henle, the macula densa ( Figure 29–7 ). 
Juxtaglomerular cells contain the enzyme renin and 
are innervated by the sympathetic nervous system. 
Release of renin depends on β 1 -adrenergic sympa-
thetic stimulation, changes in aff erent arteriolar wall 
joining collecting tubules from other nephrons to 
form a single ureter in each kidney. Th is part of the 
collecting tubule is the principal site of action for 
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also called arginine 
vasopressin (AVP). ADH stimulates the expression 
of a water channel protein, aquaporin-2, in the cell 
membrane. Th e permeability of the luminal mem-
brane to water is entirely dependent on the presence 
of ADH (see  Chapter 49 ). Dehydration increases 
ADH secretion, rendering the luminal membrane 
permeable to water. As a result, water is osmotically 
drawn out of the tubular fl uid passing through the 
medulla, resulting in production of concentrated 
urine (up to 1400 mOsm/L). Conversely, adequate 
hydration suppresses ADH secretion, allowing 
fl uid in the collecting tubules to pass through the 
medulla relatively unchanged and to remain hypo-
tonic (100–200 mOsm/L). Th is part of the nephron 
is responsible for acidifying urine; the hydrogen ions 
Carbonic
anhydrase
ATP
ase
ATP
ase
+
+
K+
H+
H+
HCO3
–
CO2
H2O
Cortical
collecting
tubule
Peritubular
capillary
Peritubular
capillary
 FIGURE 296  Secretion of hydrogen ions and 
reabsorption of bicarbonate and potassium in the cortical 
collecting tubule. 
Glomerulus
Renal
interstitium
Renal
nerves
Afferent
arteriole
Juxtaglomerular cells
Macula densa
Efferent
arteriole
Distal tubular
lumen
 FIGURE 297  The juxtaglomerular apparatus. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF:  Review of Medical 
Physiology, 20th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2001.) 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
639
Th e renal artery then divides at the renal pelvis 
into interlobar arteries, which in turn give rise to 
arcuate arteries at the junction between the renal 
cortex and medulla ( Figure 29–8 ). Arcuate arter-
ies further divide into interlobular branches that 
eventually supply each nephron via a single aff er-
ent arteriole. Blood from each glomerular capillary 
tuft  is drained via a single eff erent arteriole and 
then travels alongside adjacent renal tubules in a 
second  peritubular system of capillaries. In contrast 
to the glomerular capillaries, which favor fi ltration, 
peritubular capillaries are primarily “reabsorptive.” 
Venules draining the second capillary plexus fi nally 
return blood to the inferior vena cava via a single 
renal vein on each side. 
 RENAL BLOOD FLOW & 
GLOMERULAR FILTRATION 
 Clearance 
 Th e concept of clearance is frequently used in mea-
surements of RBF and the glomerular fi ltration rate 
(GFR). Th e renal clearance of a substance is defi ned 
as the volume of blood that is completely cleared of 
that substance per unit of time (usually, per minute). 
 Renal Blood Flow 
 Renal plasma fl ow (RPF) is most commonly mea-
sured by  p -aminohippurate (PAH) clearance. PAH 
at low plasma concentrations can be assumed to 
be completely cleared from plasma by fi ltration 
and secretion in one passage through the kidneys. 
Consequently, 
RPF = Clearance of PAH = [PAH]
[PAH]
× Urine flow
U
P
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
 where [PAH] U = urinary concentration of PAH and 
[PAH] P = plasma PAH concentration. 
 If the hematocrit (measured as a decimal rather 
than as a percent) is known, then 
 
RBF
RPF
(1
Hematocrit)
=
−
 RPF and RBF are normally about 660 and 1200 
mL/min, respectively. 
pressure (see  Chapter 49 ), and changes in chloride 
fl ow past the macula densa. Renin released into 
the bloodstream catalyzes the conversion of angio-
tensinogen, a protein synthesized by the liver, to 
angiotensin I. Th is inert decapeptide is then rapidly 
converted, primarily in the lungs, by angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) to form the octapeptide 
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II plays a major role 
in blood pressure regulation (see  Chapter 15 ) and 
aldosterone secretion (see  Chapter 49 ). Proximal 
renal tubular cells have converting enzyme as well 
as angiotensin II receptors. Moreover, intrarenal 
formation of angiotensin II enhances sodium reab-
sorption in proximal tubules. Some extrarenal pro-
duction of renin and angiotensin II also takes place 
in the vascular endothelium, the adrenal glands, and 
the brain. 
 The Renal Circulation 
 Renal function is intimately related to renal blood 
fl ow (RBF). In fact, the kidneys are the only organs 
for which oxygen consumption is determined by 
blood fl ow; the reverse is true in other organs. 
 Th e combined blood fl ow through both kid-
neys normally accounts for 20–25% of total cardiac 
output. Approximately 80% of RBF normally goes to 
cortical nephrons, and only 10–15% goes to juxta-
medullary nephrons. Th e renal cortex extracts rela-
tively little oxygen, having an oxygen tension of 
about 50 mm Hg, because of the relatively high 
blood fl ow with a mostly fi ltration function. In con-
trast, the renal medulla maintains high metabolic 
activity because of solute reabsorption and requires 
low blood fl ow to maintain high osmotic gradients. 
Th e medulla has an oxygen tension of only about 
15 mm Hg and is relatively vulnerable to ischemia. 
 Redistribution of RBF away from cortical neph-
rons with short loops of Henle to larger juxtamedul-
lary nephrons with long loops occurs under certain 
conditions. Sympathetic stimulation, increased 
levels of catecholamines and angiotensin II, and 
heart failure can cause redistribution of RBF to the 
medulla and is associated with sodium retention. 
 In most individuals, each kidney is supplied 
by a single renal artery arising from the aorta. 
1
640 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 
Creatinine clearance =
[Creatinine]P
([Creatinine]U × Urinary flow rate)
 where [creatinine] U = creatinine concentration in 
urine and [creatinine] P = creatinine concentration 
in plasma. 
 Th e ratio of GFR to RPF is called the  fi ltration 
fraction (FF) and is normally 20%. GFR is dependent 
on the relative tones of both the aff erent and eff erent 
arterioles (see above). Aff erent arteriolar dilation or 
eff erent arteriolar vasoconstriction can increase the 
FF and maintain GFR, even when RPF decreases. 
Aff erent arteriolar tone appears to be responsible for 
maintaining a relatively constant GFR over a wide 
range of blood pressures. 
 Glomerular Filtration Rate 
 Th e GFR, the volume of fl uid fi ltered from the glo-
merular capillaries into Bowman’s capsule per unit 
time, is normally about 20% of RPF. Clearance of 
inulin, a fructose polysaccharide that is completely 
fi ltered but is neither secreted nor reabsorbed, is a 
good measure of GFR. Normal values for GFR are 
about 120 ± 25 mL/min in men and 95 ± 20 mL/
min in women. Although less accurate than measur-
ing inulin clearance, creatinine clearance is a much 
more practical measurement of GFR (see below). 
Creatinine clearance tends to overestimate GFR 
because some creatinine is normally secreted by 
renal tubules. Creatinine is a product of phospho-
creatine breakdown in muscle. Creatinine clearance 
is calculated as follows: 
Cortex
Medulla
Papilla
Pelvis
Renal
artery
Ureter
Interlobular
artery
Interlobular
artery
Arcuate
artery
Glomeruli
 FIGURE 298  The renal circulation. (Reproduced, with permission, from Leaf A, Cotran RS:  Renal Pathophysiology. Oxford University 
Press, 1976.) 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
641
increase renin release and angiotensin II formation. 
Relative preservation of GFR during increased aldo-
sterone or catecholamine secretion appears at least 
partly to be mediated by angiotensin-induced pros-
taglandin synthesis because it can be blocked by 
inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis such as nonste-
roidal antiinfl ammatory drugs (NSAIDs). 
 Renal synthesis of vasodilating prostaglandins 
(PGD 2 , PGE 2 , and PGI 2 ) is an important protective 
mechanism during periods of systemic hypotension 
and renal ischemia. 
 ANP is released from atrial myocytes in 
response to atrial distention. ANP is a direct smooth 
muscle dilator and antagonizes the vasoconstric-
tive action of norepinephrine and angiotensin II. It 
preferentially dilates the aff erent glomerular arteri-
ole, constricts the eff erent glomerular arteriole, and 
relaxes mesangial cells, eff ectively increasing GFR 
(see  Chapter 49 ). ANP also inhibits both the release 
of renin and angiotensin-induced secretion of aldo-
sterone, and antagonizes the action of aldosterone in 
the distal and collecting tubules. 
 D. Neuronal and Paracrine Regulation 
 Sympathetic outfl ow from the spinal cord at the level 
of T4–L1 reaches the kidneys via the celiac and renal 
plexuses. Sympathetic nerves innervate the juxtaglo-
merular apparatus (β 1 ) as well as the renal vasculature 
(α 1 ). Th is innervation is largely responsible for stress-
induced reductions in RBF (below). α 1 -Adrenergic 
receptors enhance sodium reabsorption in proximal 
tubules, whereas α 2  receptors decrease such reabsorp-
tion and promote water excretion.  Dopamine 
and fenoldopam dilate aff erent and eff erent 
arterioles via D 1 -receptor activation. Unlike dopa-
mine, fenoldopam is selective for the D 1 -receptor. 
Fenoldopam and low-dose dopamine infusion can at 
least partially reverse norepinephrine-induced renal 
vasoconstriction. Activation of D 2 -receptors on pre-
synaptic postganglionic sympathetic neurons can 
also vasodilate arterioles through inhibition of nor-
epinephrine secretion (negative feedback). Dopamine 
is formed extraneuronally in the proximal tubule 
cells from circulating L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine 
(L-dopa). Dopamine is released into the tubule where 
it can bind dopaminergic receptors to reduce proxi-
mal reabsorption of Na + . 
3
4
 Control Mechanisms 
 Regulation of RBF represents a complex interplay 
between intrinsic autoregulation, tubuloglomerular 
balance, and hormonal and neuronal infl uences. 
 A. Intrinsic Regulation 
 Autoregulation of RBF normally occurs 
between mean arterial blood pressures of 80 
and 180 mm Hg and is principally due to intrinsic 
myogenic responses of the aff erent glomerular arte-
rioles to blood pressure changes. Within these lim-
its, RBF (and GFR) can be kept relatively constant by 
aff erent arteriolar vasoconstriction or vasodilation. 
Outside the autoregulation limits, RBF becomes 
pressure dependent. Glomerular fi ltration generally 
ceases when mean systemic arterial pressure is less 
than 40–50 mm Hg. 
 B. Tubuloglomerular Balance and Feedback 
Tubuloglomerular feedback plays an important role 
in maintaining constant GFR over a wide range of 
perfusion pressures. Increased tubular fl ow tends to 
result in reduced GFR; conversely, decreased tubular 
fl ow tends to result in increased GFR. Although the 
mechanism is poorly understood, the macula densa 
appears to be responsible for tubuloglomerular feed-
back by inducing refl ex changes in aff erent arteriolar 
tone and possibly glomerular capillary permeability. 
Angiotensin II probably plays a permissive role in 
this mechanism. Local release of adenosine, which 
occurs in response to volume expansion, may inhibit 
renin release and dilate the aff erent arteriole. 
 C. Hormonal Regulation 
 Increases in aff erent glomerular arteriolar pressure 
stimulate renin release and formation of angiotensin 
II. Angiotensin II causes generalized arterial vaso-
constriction and secondarily reduces RBF. Both 
aff erent and eff erent glomerular arterioles are con-
stricted, but because the eff erent arteriole is smaller, 
its resistance becomes greater than that of the aff er-
ent arteriole; GFR therefore tends to be relatively 
preserved. Very high levels of angiotensin II con-
strict both arterioles and can markedly decrease 
GFR. Adrenal catecholamines (epinephrine and 
norepinephrine) directly and preferentially increase 
aff erent arteriolar tone but usually do not cause 
marked decreases in GFR because these agents also 
2
642 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
impairment, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular dis-
ease, hypovolemia, and use of potentially nephro-
toxic medication by elderly patients. Th e risk index 
in  Table 29–3 identifi es preoperative predictors of 
AKI following general surgery. 
 Clinical studies attempting to defi ne the eff ects 
of anesthetic agents on renal function are compli-
cated and diffi  cult. However, several conclusions can 
be stated: 
 1. 
 Reversible decreases in RBF, GFR, urinary 
fl ow, and sodium excretion occur during 
both regional and general anesthesia. 
5
 Eﬀ ects of Anesthesia & 
Surgery on Renal Function 
 Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common periopera-
tive problem. It occurs in 1–5% of all hospitalized 
patients and is a major contributor to increased hos-
pital length of stay, markedly increasing morbidity, 
mortality, and cost of care. Patients may develop 
AKI and kidney failure secondary to intrinsic kid-
ney disease ( Table 29–2 ). Risk factors for AKI in 
the perioperative setting include preexisting renal 
 TABLE 292 Causes of acute kidney injury secondary to intrinsic kidney disease.  1  
Vascular Eﬀ ects
Renal Parenchymal Eﬀ ects
 Hemodynamic effects 
  Acute kidney failure (eg, in elderly patients and 
those taking nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs [NSAIDs]) 
  Contrast agent–induced (producing renal 
vasoconstriction and avid sodium retention) 
 Hepatorenal syndrome 
  Cirrhosis (producing intense renal 
vasoconstriction and sodium retention) 
 Impaired renal perfusion and autoregulation 
  Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, 
NSAIDs
  plus 
  Atherosclerotic renal vascular disease or 
hypovolemia 
 Abdominal compartment syndrome 
 Postoperative abdominal exploration 
 Tense ascites 
 Atheroembolism (“cholesterol embolism”) 
 Angiography 
  Anticoagulation 
 Thrombolysis 
 Renal embolism 
 Endocarditis 
 Cardiac thrombus 
 Renal vein thrombosis 
 Malignancy 
 Preexisting nephritis syndrome 
 Glomerular diseases 
  Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (systemic vasculitis, 
Goodpasture’s disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
other forms of glomerulonephritis) 
 Hemolytic uremic syndrome 
 Cryoglobulinemia 
 Malignant hypertension 
 Untreated primary (“essential”) hypertension 
 Chronic glomerulonephritis 
 Acute tubular necrosis 
 Surgery (general, cardiac, vascular) Obstetric complications 
 Sepsis 
 Acute heart failure 
 Burns 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Post–crush injury 
 Drug overdose 
 Status epilepticus 
 Osmotic damage to proximal tubular cells 
 Sucrose-containing intravenous immunoglobulin solutions 
 Acute pyelonephritis 
  Infection (eg, in patients with diabetes and partial obstruction 
from papillary necrosis) 
 Myeloma 
 Cast nephropathy 
 Light-chain deposition disease 
 Amyloidosis 
 Sepsis 
 Interstitial nephropathy 
  Drug-induced (aminoglycosides, amphotericin, and many 
other agents) 
 Acute interstitial nephritis 
 Urate nephropathy 
 Chemotherapy for acute leukemia or lymphoma 
 Hypercalcemia 
 Sarcoidosis 
 Milk-alkali syndrome 
 1  Data from Armitage AJ, Tomson C: Acute renal failure. Medicine (UK ed. Abingdon) 2003;31:43.
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
643
pooling of blood and decreased systemic vascular 
resistance, decreased heart rate, and decreased car-
diac output. Decreases in blood pressure below the 
limits of autoregulation reduce RBF, GFR, urinary 
fl ow, and sodium excretion, and this adverse impact 
on renal function can be reversed by administration 
of pressor agents and intravenous fl uids. 
 Neurologic 
 Increased sympathetic tone commonly occurs in 
the perioperative period as a result of anxiety, pain, 
light anesthesia, and surgical stimulation. Heightened 
sympathetic activity increases renal vascular resis-
tance and activates several hormonal systems (see 
below), reducing RBF, GFR, and urine output. 
 Endocrine 
 Endocrine changes during sedation and general 
anesthesia are a component of the stress response 
induced by factors that may include anxiety, 
pain, surgical stimulation, circulatory depression, 
hypoxia, acidosis, and hypothermia. Increases 
in 
epinephrine 
and 
norepinephrine, 
renin, 
angioten sin II, aldosterone, ADH, adrenocortico-
tropic hormone, and cortisol are common. Cate-
cholamines, ADH, and angiotensin II all reduce RBF 
by inducing renal arterial constriction. Aldosterone 
enhances sodium reabsorption in the distal tubule 
and collecting tubule, resulting in sodium retention 
and expansion of the extracellular fl uid compart-
ment. Nonosmotic release of ADH also favors water 
retention and may result in hyponatremia.  Th e 
endocrine response to surgery and anesthesia 
is at least partly responsible for transient fl uid 
retention seen postoperatively in many patients. 
 DIRECT ANESTHETIC EFFECTS 
 Th e direct eff ects of anesthetics on renal function 
are minor compared with the secondary eff ects 
described above. 
 Volatile Agents 
 Halothane, sevofl urane, desfl urane, and isofl urane 
decrease renal vascular resistance.  As previ-
ously noted, compound A, a breakdown prod-
uct of sevofl urane, has been shown to cause renal 
6
7
 2. 
Such changes are usually less pronounced 
during regional anesthesia. 
 3. 
Most of these changes are indirect and are 
mediated by autonomic and hormonal 
responses to surgery and anesthesia. 
 4. 
AKI is less likely when an adequate 
intravascular volume and a normal blood 
pressure are maintained. 
 5. 
Th ere is no evidence that currently utilized 
vapor anesthetic agents cause AKI in patients. 
However, several studies have reported 
that compound A, a breakdown product 
of sevofl urane, produces renal toxicity 
when administered at low fl ow rates in 
laboratory animals. 
 INDIRECT EFFECTS 
 Cardiovascular 
 Most inhalation and intravenous anesthetics pro-
duce concentration-dependent cardiac depression or 
vasodilation; therefore they are capable of decreas-
ing systemic blood pressure. Depending on the level 
of sympathetic blockade, spinal or epidural anes-
thesia may cause a drop in systemic blood pressure 
secondary to decreased cardiac output as a result of 
decreased sympathetic tone. Th is leads to increased 
 TABLE 293 Acute kidney injury risk index 
for patients undergoing general surgery.  1 , 2  
 Risk Factor 
 • Age ≥56 y 
 • Male sex 
 • Active congestive heart failure 
 • Ascites 
 • Hypertension 
 • Emergency surgery 
 • Intraperitoneal surgery 
 • Renal insufficiency—mild or moderate  3  
 • Diabetes mellitus—oral or insulin therapy 
 1  Reproduced, with permission, from Kheterpal S, Tremper KK, Heung 
M, et al: Development and validation of an acute kidney injury risk 
index for patients undergoing general surgery. Results from a national 
data set. Anesthesiology 2009;110:505.
 2  Risk Index classiﬁ cation is based on the number of risk factors present: 
class I (0–2 risk factors), class II (3 risk factors), class III (4 risk factors), 
class IV (5 risk factors), class V (≥6 risk factors).
 3  Preoperative serum creatinine >1.2 mg/dL.
644 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
renal function or confer protection against AKI, and 
N -acetylcysteine has not been shown to be protec-
tive in the perioperative setting except in patients 
who receive radiocontrast dyes. 
 DIRECT SURGICAL EFFECTS 
 In addition to the physiological changes associated 
with the neuroendocrine stress response to surgery, 
certain surgical procedures can signifi cantly alter 
renal physiology.  Th e pneumoperitoneum 
produced during laparoscopy creates an 
abdominal compartment syndrome–like state. Th e 
increase in intraabdominal pressure typically pro-
duces oliguria (or anuria) that is generally propor-
tional to the insuffl  ation pressures. Mechanisms 
include central venous compression (renal vein and 
vena cava); renal parenchymal compression; 
decreased cardiac output; and increases in plasma 
levels of renin, aldosterone, and ADH. Abdominal 
compartment syndrome can also be produced by 
8
damage in laboratory animals. Its accumulation in 
the breathing circuit is favored by low fl ow rates. No 
clinical study has detected signifi cant renal injury in 
humans during sevofl urane anesthesia; nonetheless, 
some regulatory authorities recommend fresh gas 
fl ow of at least 2 L/min with sevofl urane to prevent 
this theoretical problem. 
 Intravenous Agents 
 Opioids and propofol exhibit minor, if any, eff ects 
on the kidney when used alone. Ketamine mini-
mally aff ects renal function and may, relative to 
other anesthetic agents, preserve renal function 
during hemorrhagic hypovolemia. Agents with 
α-adrenergic blocking activity may prevent cate-
cholamine-induced redistribution of RBF. Drugs 
with antidopaminergic activity—such as metoclo-
pramide, phenothiazines, and droperidol—may 
impair the renal response to dopamine. Inhibition of 
prostaglandin synthesis by NSAIDs such as ketoro-
lac prevents renal production of vasodilatory pros-
taglandins in patients with high levels of angiotensin 
II and norepinephrine; attenuation of prostaglandin 
synthesis in this setting may result in AKI. ACE 
inhibitors block the protective eff ects of angioten-
sin II and may result in reductions in GFR during 
anesthesia. 
 Other Drugs 
 Many medications, including radiocontrast agents, 
used in the perioperative period can adversely aff ect 
renal function, particularly in the setting of preex-
isting renal dysfunction ( Table 29–4 ). Mechanisms 
of injury include vasoconstriction, direct tubular 
injury, drug-induced immunological and infl amma-
tory responses, and renal microvascular or tubular 
obstruction. In addition to intravenous hydration, 
pretreatment with  N -acetylcysteine (600 mg orally 
every 12 h in four doses beginning prior to contrast 
administration) has been shown to decrease the risk 
of radiocontrast agent–induced AKI in patients with 
preexisting renal dysfunction.  N -Acetylcysteine’s 
protective action may be due to its free radical 
scavenging or sulfh ydryl donor (reducing) prop-
erties. Fenoldopam, mannitol, loop diuretics, and 
low-dose dopamine infusion do not help maintain 
 TABLE 294 Drugs and toxins associated 
with acute kidney injury.  1 
Type of Injury
Drug or Toxin
Decreased renal 
perfusion
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors, radiocontrast 
agents, amphotericin B, cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus
Direct tubular 
injury
Aminoglycosides, radiocontrast 
agents, amphotericin B, methotrexate, 
cisplatin, foscarnet, pentamidine, 
heavy metals, myoglobin, 
hemoglobin, intravenous 
immunoglobulin, HIV protease 
inhibitors
Intratubular 
obstruction
Radiocontrast agents, methotrexate, 
acyclovir, sulfonamides, ethylene 
glycol, uric acid, cocaine, lovastatin
Immunological–
Inflammatory
Penicillin, cephalosporins, allopurinol, 
NSAIDs, sulfonamides, diuretics, 
rifampin, ciprofloxacin, cimetidine, 
proton pump inhibitors, tetracycline, 
phenytoin
  1  Reproduced, with permission, from Anderson RJ, Barry DW: Clinical 
and laboratory diagnosis of acute renal failure. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol 2004;18:1.
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
645 
to its diuretic eff ect, mannitol appears to increase 
RBF. Th e latter can wash out some of the medullary 
hypertonicity and interfere with renal concentrat-
ing ability. Mannitol appears to activate the intrare-
nal synthesis of vasodilating prostaglandins. It also 
appears to be a free radical scavenger. 
 Uses 
 A. Prophylaxis Against Acute Kidney 
Injury in High-Risk Patients 
 Many clinicians continue to administer mannitol 
for renal protection and, less frequently, to convert 
oliguric acute kidney failure to nonoliguric kidney 
failure, with the goal of lowering associated mor-
bidity and mortality. However, there is no evidence 
that such use of mannitol provides renal protec-
tion, lessens the severity of AKI, or lessens the 
morbidity or mortality associated with AKI when 
compared with correction of hypovolemia and 
preservation of adequate renal perfusion alone. In 
addition, high-dose mannitol can be nephrotoxic, 
especially in patients with renal insuffi  ciency. 
 B. Evaluation of Acute Oliguria 
 Mannitol will augment urinary output in the set-
ting of hypovolemia but will have little eff ect in the 
presence of severe glomerular or tubular injury. 
However, the optimal initial approach to evaluation 
of acute oliguria is to correct hypovolemia and opti-
mize cardiac output and renal perfusion. 
 C. Acute Reduction of Intracranial 
Pressure & Cerebral Edema 
 See  Chapter 27 . 
 D. Acute Reduction of Intraocular 
Pressure in the Perioperative Period 
 See  Chapter 36 . 
 Intravenous Dosage 
 Th e intravenous dose for mannitol is 0.25–1 g/kg. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Mannitol solutions are hypertonic and acutely raise 
plasma and extracellular osmolality. A rapid intra-
cellular to extracellular shift  of water can transiently 
increase intravascular volume and precipitate 
severe intraabdominal tissue edema, with a similar 
adverse impact on renal function via the same 
mechanisms (see  Chapter 39 ). 
 Other surgical procedures that can signifi -
cantly impair renal function include cardiopulmo-
nary bypass (see  Chapter 22 ), cross-clamping of the 
aorta (see  Chapter 22 ), and dissection near the renal 
arteries (see  Chapter 31 ). Th e potential eff ects of 
neurosurgical procedures on ADH physiology are 
discussed in  Chapters 27 and  49 . 
 Diuretics 
 Diuretics increase urinary output by decreasing 
the reabsorption of Na + and water. Although clas-
sifi ed according to their mechanism of action, many 
diuretics have more than one such mechanism; 
hence this classifi cation system is imperfect. Only 
major mechanisms will be reviewed here. 
 Th e majority of diuretics exert their action on 
the luminal cell membrane from within the renal 
tubules. Because nearly all diuretics are highly 
protein bound, relatively little of the free drug 
enters the tubules by fi ltration. Most diuretics 
must therefore be secreted by the proximal tubule 
(usually via the organic anion pump) to exert their 
action. Impaired delivery into the renal tubules 
accounts for resistance to diuretics in patients with 
impaired renal function. 
 OSMOTIC DIURETICS 
MANNITOL 
 Osmotically active diuretics are fi ltered at the glom-
erulus and undergo limited or no reabsorption in 
the proximal tubule. Th eir presence in the proximal 
tubule limits the passive water reabsorption that nor-
mally follows active sodium reabsorption. Although 
their major eff ect is to increase water excretion, in 
large doses, osmotically active diuretics also increase 
electrolyte (sodium and potassium) excretion. Th e 
same mechanism also impairs water and solute reab-
sorption in the loop of Henle. 
 Mannitol is the most commonly used osmotic 
diuretic. It is a six-carbon sugar that normally 
undergoes little or no reabsorption. In addition 
646 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Uses 
 A. Edematous States (Sodium Overload) 
 Th ese disorders include heart failure, cirrhosis, the 
nephrotic syndrome, and renal insuffi  ciency. When 
given intravenously, these agents can rapidly reverse 
cardiac and pulmonary manifestations of fl uid 
overload. 
 B. Hypertension 
 Loop diuretics may be used as adjuncts to other 
hypotensive agents, particularly when thiazides 
(below) alone are ineff ective. 
 C. Evaluation of Acute Oliguria 
 Th e response to a small dose (10–20 mg) of furo-
semide may be useful in diff erentiating between 
oliguria resulting from hypovolemia and oliguria 
resulting from redistribution of RBF to juxtamed-
ullary nephrons. Little or no response is seen with 
hypovolemia, whereas resumption of normal uri-
nary output occurs with the latter. However, the 
optimal initial approach to evaluation of acute oli-
guria is to correct hypovolemia and optimize cardiac 
output and renal perfusion. 
 D. Conversion of Oliguric Kidney 
Failure to Nonoliguric Failure 
 As with mannitol, discussed earlier, many clinicians 
continue to administer loop diuretics for renal pro-
tection and to convert oliguric acute kidney failure 
to nonoliguric kidney failure, despite lack of evi-
dence that such use provides renal protection, less-
ens the severity of AKI, or lessens the morbidity or 
mortality associated with AKI, when compared with 
correction of hypovolemia and preservation of ade-
quate renal perfusion alone. 
 E. Treatment of Hypercalcemia 
 See  Chapter 49 . 
 F. Rapid Correction of Hyponatremia 
 See  Chapter 49 . 
 Intravenous Dosages 
 Th e intravenous doses are furosemide, 10–100 mg; 
bumetanide, 0.5–1 mg; ethacrynic acid, 50–100 mg; 
and torsemide 10–100 mg. 
cardiac decompensation and pulmonary edema 
in patients with limited cardiac reserve. Transient 
hyponatremia and reductions in hemoglobin con-
centration are also common and represent acute 
hemodilution resulting from rapid movement of 
water out of cells; a modest, transient increase 
in plasma potassium concentration may also be 
observed. It is also important to note that the ini-
tial hyponatremia does not represent hypoosmo-
lality but refl ects the presence of mannitol (see 
 Chapter 49 ). If fl uid and electrolyte losses are not 
replaced following diuresis, mannitol administra-
tion can result in hypovolemia, hypokalemia, and 
hypernatremia. Th e hypernatremia occurs because 
water is lost in excess of sodium. As noted above, 
high-dose mannitol can be nephrotoxic, especially 
in patients with renal insuffi  ciency. 
 LOOP DIURETICS 
 Th e loop diuretics include furosemide (Lasix), 
bumetanide (Bumex), ethacrynic acid (Edecrin), 
and torsemide (Demadex). All loop diuretics inhibit 
Na + and Cl − reabsorption in the thick ascending 
limb. Sodium reabsorption at that site requires 
that all four sites on the Na + –K + –2Cl −  luminal car-
rier protein be occupied. Loop diuretics compete 
with Cl − for its binding site on the carrier protein 
(see  Figure 29–4 ). With a maximal eff ect, they can 
promote excretion of 15–20% of the fi ltered sodium 
load. Both urinary concentrating and urinary dilut-
ing capacities are impaired. Th e large amounts of 
Na + and Cl − presented to the distal nephron over-
whelm its limited reabsorptive capability. Th e result-
ing urine remains hypotonic, probably due to rapid 
urinary fl ow rates that prevent equilibration with 
the hypertonic renal medulla or due to interference 
with the action of ADH on the collecting tubules. A 
marked increase in diuresis may occur when a loop 
diuretic is combined with a thiazide diuretic, espe-
cially metolazone. 
 Loop diuretics also increase urinary calcium 
and magnesium excretion. Ethacrynic acid is the 
only loop diuretic that is not a sulfonamide deriv-
ative, and thus may be the diuretic of choice in 
patients allergic to sulfonamide drugs. Torsemide 
may have an antihypertensive action independent of 
its diuretic eff ect. 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
647 
 Uses 
 A. Hypertension 
 Th iazide and thiazide-like diuretics are oft en selected 
as fi rst-line agents in the treatment of hyperten-
sion (see  Chapter 21 ), and they have been shown to 
improve long-term outcomes in this disorder. 
 B. Edematous Disorders 
(Sodium Overload) 
 Th ese drugs are used to treat mild to moderate 
edema and congestive heart failure related to mild to 
moderate sodium overload. 
 C. Hypercalciuria 
 Th iazide and thiazide-like diuretics are oft en used to 
decrease calcium excretion in patients with hyper-
calciuria who form renal stones. 
 D. Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus 
 Th e effi  cacy of these agents in this disorder refl ects 
their ability to impair diluting capacity and increase 
urine osmolality (see  Chapter 49 ). 
 Intravenous Dosages 
 Th ese agents are only given orally. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Although thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics deliver 
less sodium to the collecting tubules than loop 
diuretics, the increase in sodium excretion is enough 
to enhance K + secretion and frequently results in 
hypokalemia. Enhanced H + secretion can also occur, 
resulting in metabolic alkalosis. Impairment of 
renal diluting capacity may produce hyponatremia. 
Hyperuricemia, hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia, and 
hyperlipidemia may also be seen. 
 POTASSIUMSPARING 
DIURETICS 
 Th ese are weak diuretic agents and characteristically 
do not increase potassium excretion. Potassium-
sparing diuretics inhibit Na + reabsorption in the col-
lecting tubules and therefore can maximally excrete 
only 1–2% of the fi ltered Na +  load. Th ey are usually 
used in conjunction with more potent diuretics for 
their potassium-sparing eff ect. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Increased delivery of Na + to the distal and collect-
ing tubules increases K + and H + secretion at those 
sites and can result in hypokalemia and metabolic 
alkalosis. Marked Na +  losses will also lead to hypo-
volemia and prerenal azotemia; secondary hyper-
aldosteronism oft en accentuates the hypokalemia 
and metabolic alkalosis. Urinary calcium and 
magnesium loss promoted by loop diuretics may 
result in hypocalcemia or hypomagnesemia, or 
both. Hypercalciuria can result in stone formation. 
Hyperuricemia may result from increased urate 
reabsorption and from competitive inhibition of 
urate secretion in the proximal tubule. Reversible 
and irreversible hearing loss has been reported 
with loop diuretics, especially furosemide and 
ethacrynic acid. 
 THIAZIDE & THIAZIDELIKE 
DIURETICS 
 Th is group of agents includes thiazides, containing 
a benzothiadiazine molecular structure, and also 
thiazide-like drugs with similar actions but without 
the benzothiadiazine structure, including chlortha-
lidone (Th alitone), quinethazone (Hydromox), 
metolazone (Zaroxolyn), and indapamide (Lozol). 
Th ese diuretics act at the distal tubule, including 
the connecting segment, and inhibition of sodium 
reabsorption at this site impairs diluting but not 
concentrating ability. Th ey compete for the Cl − 
site on the luminal Na + –Cl − carrier protein. When 
given alone, thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics 
increase Na + excretion to only 3–5% of the fi ltered 
load because of enhanced compensatory Na + reab-
sorption in the collecting tubules. Th ey also possess 
carbonic anhydrase–inhibiting activity in the prox-
imal tubule, which is usually masked by sodium 
reabsorption in the loop of Henle and which is 
probably responsible for the marked diuresis oft en 
seen when they are combined with loop diuret-
ics. In contrast to their eff ects on sodium excre-
tion, thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics augment 
Ca 2+ reabsorption in the distal tubule. Indapamide 
has some vasodilating properties and is the only 
thiazide or thiazide-like diuretic with signifi cant 
hepatic excretion. 
648 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
diuretics in congestive heart failure patients with 
marked potassium wasting. 
 Intravenous Dosages 
 Th ese agents are only given orally. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Amiloride and triamterene can cause hyperkalemia 
and metabolic acidosis similar to that seen with spi-
ronolactone (see above). Both can also cause nau-
sea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Amiloride is generally 
associated with fewer side eff ects, but paresthesias, 
depression, muscle weakness, and cramping may 
occasionally be seen. Triamterene on rare occasions 
has resulted in renal stones and is potentially neph-
rotoxic, particularly when combined with nonste-
roidal antiinfl ammatory agents. 
 CARBONIC ANHYDRASE 
INHIBITORS 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as acetazol-
amide (Diamox) interfere with Na + reabsorption 
and H +  secretion in proximal tubules. Th ey are weak 
diuretics because the former eff ect is limited by the 
reabsorptive capacities of more distal segments of 
nephrons. Nonetheless, these agents signifi cantly 
interfere with H +  secretion in the proximal tubule 
and impair HCO 3 − reabsorption. 
 Uses 
 A. Correction of Metabolic 
Alkalosis in Edematous Patients 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors oft en potentiate the 
eff ects of other diuretics. 
 B. Alkalinization of Urine 
 Alkalinization enhances urinary excretion of weakly 
acidic compounds such as uric acid. 
 C. Reduction of Intraocular Pressure 
 Inhibition of carbonic anhydrase in the ciliary pro-
cesses reduces the formation of aqueous humor and, 
secondarily, intraocular pressure. Carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors, including oral or intravenous acet-
azolamide, oral methazolamide (Neptazane), and 
 ophthalmic topical brinzolamide (Azopt) and dorzol-
amide (Trusopt) are oft en used to treat glaucoma. 
 1. Aldosterone Antagonists 
(Spironolactone & Eplerenone) 
 Spironolactone (Aldactone) and eplerenone are direct 
aldosterone receptor antagonists in collecting tubules. 
Th ey inhibit aldosterone-mediated Na + reabsorption 
and K +  secretion. Both agents have been shown to 
improve survival in patients with chronic heart fail-
ure. Aldosterone may produce gynecomastia in male 
patients due to its antiandrogenic properties. 
 Uses 
 Th ese agents may be used as adjuvants in the treat-
ment of refractory edematous states associated with 
secondary hyperaldosteronism (see  Chapter 49 ). 
Spironolactone is particularly eff ective in patients 
with ascites related to advanced liver disease. Th ey 
have become part of the standard medical manage-
ment of chronic heart failure. 
 Intravenous Dosage 
 Th ese agents are only given orally. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Th ese agents can result in hyperkalemia in patients 
with high potassium intake or renal insuffi  ciency 
and in those receiving β blockers or ACE inhibitors. 
Metabolic acidosis may also be seen. Eplerenone 
lacks spironolactone’s side eff ects of gynecomastia 
and sexual dysfunction. 
 2. Noncompetitive 
Potassium-Sparing Diuretics 
 Triamterene (Dyrenium) and amiloride (Midamor) 
are not dependent on aldosterone activity in the 
collecting tubule. Th ey inhibit Na + reabsorption 
and K + secretion by decreasing the number of open 
sodium channels in the luminal membrane of col-
lecting tubules. Amiloride may also inhibit Na + –K + -
ATPase activity in the collecting tubule. 
 Uses 
 In patients with hypertension, these agents are 
oft en combined with a thiazide or similar diuretic 
to minimize hypokalemia produced by the other 
agent. Th ey have been added to more potent loop 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
649 
 What issues should be addressed? 
 The following questions should be answered: 
 1.  Is there a problem with the urinary catheter 
and drainage system? 
 2.  Are hemodynamic parameters compatible 
with adequate renal function? 
 3.  Could the decrease in urinary output be 
directly related to surgical manipulations? 
 How can the urinary catheter and drainage 
system be evaluated intraoperatively? 
 Incorrect catheter placement is not uncom-
mon and should be suspected if there has been a 
total absence of urine ﬂ ow since the time of cath-
eter insertion. The catheter may be inadvertently 
placed and inﬂ ated in the urethra in men or the 
vagina in women. Catheter displacement, kinking, 
obstruction, or disconnection from the reservoir 
tubing can all present with features similar to this 
case, with complete or near-complete cessation 
of urinary ﬂ ow. The diagnosis of such mechanical 
problems requires retracing and inspecting the 
path of urine (often under the surgical drapes) 
from the catheter to the collection reservoir. 
Obstruction of the catheter can be conﬁ rmed by an 
inability to irrigate the bladder with saline through 
the catheter. 
 What hemodynamic parameters 
should be evaluated? 
 Decreased urinary output during surgery is 
most commonly the result of hormonal and hemo-
dynamic changes. In many instances, a decrease in 
intravascular volume (hypovolemia), cardiac out-
put, or mean arterial blood pressure is responsible. 
Redistribution of renal blood ﬂ ow from the renal 
cortex to the medulla may also play a role. 
 Intravascular volume depletion can rapidly 
develop when intravenous ﬂ uid replacement does 
not match intraoperative blood loss and insensible 
ﬂ uid loss. Oliguria requires careful assessment of 
intravascular volume to exclude hypovolemia. An 
increase in urinary output following an intrave-
nous ﬂ uid bolus is highly suggestive of hypovole-
mia. In contrast, oliguria in patients with a history 
of congestive heart failure may require inotropes, 
 Intravenous Dosage 
 For acetazolamide, the intravenous dose is 250–
500 mg. 
 Side Eﬀ ects 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors generally produce 
only a mild hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis 
because of an apparently limited eff ect on the distal 
nephron. Large doses of acetazolamide have been 
reported to cause drowsiness, paresthesias, and con-
fusion. Alkalinization of the urine can interfere with 
the excretion of amine drugs, such as quinidine. 
Acetazolamide is frequently used for prophylaxis 
against mountain sickness. 
 OTHER “DIURETICS” 
 Th ese agents may increase GFR by elevating cardiac 
output or arterial blood pressure, thereby  increasing 
RBF. Drugs in this category are not primarily classi-
fi ed as diuretics because of their other major actions. 
Th ey include methylxanthines (theophylline),  cardiac 
glycosides (digitalis), fenoldopam (Corlopam), ino-
tropes (dopamine, dobutamine), and intravenous 
crystalloid and colloid infusions. Methylxanthines 
also appear to decrease sodium reabsorption in both 
the proximal and distal renal tubules. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Intraoperative Oliguria 
 A 58-year-old woman is undergoing radical hys-
terectomy under general anesthesia. She was in 
good health prior to the diagnosis of uterine car-
cinoma. An indwelling urinary catheter is placed 
following induction of general anesthesia. Total 
urinary output was 60 mL for the ﬁ rst 2 h of sur-
gery. After the third hour of surgery, only 5 mL of 
urine is noted in the drainage reservoir. 
 Should the anesthesia provider be concerned? 
 Decreases in urinary output during anesthe-
sia are very common. Although decreases may be 
expected owing to the physiological eﬀ ects of sur-
gery and anesthesia, a urinary output of less than 
20 mL/h in adults generally requires evaluation. 
650 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
(Trendelenburg) position commonly impedes 
emptying of the bladder. Excessive pressure on the 
bladder will often produce hematuria. 
 When mechanical problems with the urinary 
catheter drainage system and hemodynamic fac-
tors are excluded (see above), a surgical explana-
tion should be sought. The surgeon should be 
notiﬁ ed so that the position of the retractors can 
be checked, the ureters identiﬁ ed, and their path 
retraced in the operative area. Intravenous meth-
ylene blue or indigo carmine dyes (excreted in 
urine) are useful in identifying the site of an unin-
tentional cystotomy or the end of a severed ureter. 
Note that the appearance of dye in the urinary 
drainage reservoir does not exclude unilateral liga-
tion of one ureter. Methylene blue and, to a much 
lesser extent, indigo carmine, can transiently give 
falsely low pulse oximeter readings (see  Chapter 6 ). 
Excessive insuﬄ  ation pressure during laparoscopic 
procedures can result in abdominal compartment 
syndrome, reducing renal blood ﬂ ow. 
 What was the outcome? 
 After the integrity of the urinary catheter and 
drainage system was checked, 2 L of lactated 
Ringer’s solution along with 250 mL of 5% albu-
min and 10 mg of furosemide were administered 
intravenously, but failed to increase urinary out-
put. Indigo carmine was given intravenously, and 
the proximal end of a severed left ureter was sub-
sequently identiﬁ ed. A urologist was called and the 
ureter was reanastomosed. 
vasodilators, or diuretics. Intravascular volume sta-
tus is often diﬃ  cult to optimize, and goal-directed 
hemodynamic and ﬂ uid therapy utilizing arterial 
pulse contour analysis (eg, LIDCO Rapid, Vigileo 
FloTrak), esophageal Doppler, or transesophageal 
echocardiography should be considered when 
accurate determination of hemodynamic and ﬂ uid 
volume status is critically important, as in patients 
with underlying heart, kidney, or advanced liver 
disease (see  Chapter 5 ). In addition to providing 
more accurate assessment of the patient’s volume 
and hemodynamic status than that obtained with 
central venous pressure monitoring, these modali-
ties avoid the risks associated with central venous 
access procedures and with pulmonary artery 
catheter placement and use. 
 When mean arterial blood pressure drops 
below the lower limit of renal autoregulation 
(80 mm Hg), urinary ﬂ ow may become blood pres-
sure dependent. The latter may be particularly true 
in patients with chronic systemic hypertension, 
in whom renal autoregulation occurs at higher 
mean arterial blood pressures. Reductions in anes-
thetic depth, intravenous ﬂ uid boluses, or the 
administration of a vasopressor or inotrope may 
increase blood pressure and urinary output in such 
instances. 
 Otherwise normal patients may exhibit 
decreased urinary output in spite of normal intra-
vascular volume, cardiac output, and mean arte-
rial blood pressure. A small dose of a loop diuretic 
(eg, furosemide, 5–10 mg) usually restores normal 
urinary ﬂ ow in such instances—although such 
therapy does not convey protection against acute 
kidney injury. 
 How can surgical manipulations 
inﬂ uence urinary output? 
 In addition to the neuroendocrine response to 
surgery, mechanical factors related to the surgery 
itself can alter urinary output. This is particularly 
true during pelvic surgery, when compression of 
the bladder by retractors, unintentional cystotomy, 
and ligation or severing of one or both ureters 
can dramatically aﬀ ect urinary output. Retractor 
compression 
combined 
with 
a 
head-down 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Bellomo R: Acute renal failure. Semin Respir Crit Care 
Med 2011;32:639. 
 Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA, et al: Acute renal 
failure—defi nition, outcome measures, animal 
models, fl uid therapy and information technology 
needs: Th e Second International Consensus 
Conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative 
(ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004;8:R204. 
 Brienza N, Giglio MT, Marucci M, Fiore T: Does 
perioperative hemodynamic optimization protect 
renal function in surgical patients? A meta-analytic 
study. Crit Care Med. 2009;37:2079. 
 
CHAPTER 29 Renal Physiology & Anesthesia  
651 
 Mandelbaum T, Scott DJ, Lee J, et al: Outcome of 
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury using 
the Acute Injury Network criteria. Crit Care Med 
2011;39:2659. 
 McCullough PA: Radiocontrast-induced acute kidney 
injury. Nephron Physiol 2008;109:61. 
 Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV,  et al: Acute Kidney Injury 
Network: Report of an initiative to improve outcomes 
in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;11:R31. 
 Mohmand H, Goldfarb S: Renal dysfunction associated 
with intra-abdominal hypertension and the abdominal 
compartment syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol 2011;22:615. 
 Noor S, Usami A: Postoperative renal failure. Clin 
Geriatric Med 2008;24:721. 
 Ricci Z, Cruz DN, Ronco C: Classifi cation and staging 
of acute kidney injury: Beyond the RIFLE and AKIN 
criteria. Nature Rev Nephrol 2011;7:201. 
 Story DA: Postoperative mortality and complications. 
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2011;25:319. 
 Walbaum D, Kluth D: Clinical assessment of renal 
disease. Medicine (UK ed. Abingdon) 2007; 35:353. 
 Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM: Strategies for the prevention 
of contrast-induced acute kidney injury. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens 2010;19:539-549. 
 Craig RG, Hunter JM: Recent developments in 
the perioperative management of adult patients 
with chronic kidney disease. Br J Anaesth. 2008;
101:296. 
 Devarajan P: Biomarkers for the early detection of acute 
kidney injury. Curr Opin Pediatr 2011;23:194. 
 Ford DJ, Cullis B, Denton M: Dopaminergic and pressor 
agents in acute renal failure. In: Wilcox CS (editor): 
 Th erapy in Nephrology & Hypertension,  3rd ed. 
Saunders, 2008;13. 
 Goldstein SL, Chawla LS: Renal angina. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol 2010;5:943. 
 House AA, Haapio M, Lassus J, et al: Pharmacological 
management of cardiorenal syndromes. Int J Nephrol 
2011;2011:630. 
 Kheterpal S, Tremper KK, Heung M, et al: Development 
and validation of an acute kidney injury risk 
index for patients undergoing general surgery. 
Results from a national data set. Anesthesiology 
2009;110:505. 
 Kim IB, Prowle J, Baldwin I, et al: Incidence, risk 
factors and outcome associations of intra-abdominal 
hypertension in critically ill patients. Anaesth 
Intensive Care 2012;40:79. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 653
30
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Kidney Disease 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The utility of serum creatinine measurement 
as an indicator of glomerular ﬁ ltration 
rate (GFR) is limited in critical illness: the 
rate of creatinine production, and its 
volume of distribution, may be abnormal 
in the critically ill patient, and the serum 
creatinine concentration often does not 
accurately reﬂ ect GFR in the physiological 
disequilibrium of acute kidney injury (AKI). 
 Creatinine clearance measurement is the 
most accurate method available for clinically 
assessing overall renal function. 
 The accumulation of morphine and 
meperidine metabolites has been reported 
to prolong respiratory depression in patients 
with kidney failure. 
 Succinylcholine can be safely used in 
patients with kidney failure in the absence 
of hyperkalemia at the time of induction. 
 Extracellular ﬂ uid overload from sodium 
retention, in association with increased 
cardiac demand imposed by anemia and 
hypertension, makes patients with end-
stage renal disease particularly prone to 
congestive heart failure and pulmonary 
edema. 
 Delayed gastric emptying secondary to 
autonomic neuropathy may predispose 
patients to aspiration perioperatively. 
 Controlled ventilation should be considered 
for patients with kidney failure. Inadequate 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
spontaneous or assisted ventilation with 
progressive hypercarbia under anesthesia 
can result in respiratory acidosis that may 
exacerbate preexisting acidemia, lead to 
potentially severe circulatory depression, 
and dangerously increase serum potassium 
concentration. 
 Correct anesthetic management of patients 
with renal insuﬃ  ciency is as critical as 
management of those with frank kidney 
failure, especially during procedures 
associated with a relatively high incidence 
of postoperative kidney failure, such as 
cardiac and aortic reconstructive surgery. 
 Intravascular volume depletion, sepsis, 
obstructive jaundice, crush injuries, and 
renal toxins such as radiocontrast agents, 
certain antibiotics, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors, and NSAIDs are major 
risk factors for acute deterioration in renal 
function.  
 Renal protection with adequate hydration 
and maintenance of renal blood ﬂ ow is 
indicated for patients at high risk for AKI 
and kidney failure undergoing cardiac, 
major aortic reconstructive, and other 
surgical procedures associated with 
signiﬁ cant physiological trespass. The use of 
mannitol, low-dose dopamine infusion, loop 
diuretics, or fenoldopam for renal protection 
is controversial and without conclusive 
proof of eﬃ  cacy. 
8
9
10
654 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
factors for perioperative AKI include preexisting 
kidney  disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, 
liver disease, sepsis, trauma, hypovolemia, multiple 
myeloma, and age greater than 55 years. Th e risk 
of perioperative AKI is also increased by exposure 
to nephrotoxic agents such as nonsteroidal antiin-
fl ammatory drugs (NSAIDs), radiocontrast agents, 
and antibiotics (see  Table 29–4 ).When addressing 
abnormalities in renal function, the clinician must 
possess a thorough understanding of the diff erential 
diagnosis of AKI ( Figure 30–1 ). 
 Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common problem, 
with an incidence of up to 5% in all hospitalized 
patients and up to 8% in critically ill patients. Post-
operative AKI may occur in 1% or more of general 
surgery patients, and up to 30% of patients un-
dergoing cardiothoracic and vascular procedures. 
Perioperative AKI greatly increases hospitalization 
costs, mortality rate, and perioperative morbid-
ity, including fl uid and electrolyte derangements, 
major cardiovascular events, infection and sepsis, 
and gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Preoperative risk 
 FIGURE 301  Diﬀ erential diagnosis of acute kidney injury. ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAID, nonsteroidal 
antiinﬂ ammatory drug.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Lameire N, Van Biesen W, Vanholder R: Acute renal failure. Lancet 2005;29:417.) 
Prerenal
Acute kidney injury
Intrinsic renal
Postrenal
Nephrotoxic
Ischemic
Obstruction of collecting 
system or extrarenal drainage
• Bladder-outlet obstruction
• Bilateral ureteral obstruction
Exogenous
• Antibiotics (gentamicin)
• Radio contrast agents
• Cisplatin
Endogenous
• Intratubular pigments
    (hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria)
• Intratubular proteins (myeloma)
• Intratubular crystals (uric acid, oxalate)
Absolute decrease in
effective blood volume
• Hemorrhage
• Volume depletion
Relative decrease in 
blood volume (ineffective 
arterial volume)
• Congestive heart failure
• Decompensated
liver cirrhosis
Arterial occlusion or 
stenosis of renal artery
Hemodynamic form
• NSAIDs
• ACE inhibitor or 
angiotensin-II 
 
Vascular
• Vasculitis,
  malignant
  hypertension
Acute 
glomerulonephritis
• Postinfectious 
glomeronephritis
disease caused by 
antibody to glomerular 
basement membrane
Acute interstitial 
nephritis
• Drug-associated
Acute tubular 
necrosis
receptor antagonists in 
renal-artery stenosis or  
congesitve heart failure
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease 
655 
 Evaluating Renal Function 
 Renal impairment can be due to glomerular dys-
function, tubular dysfunction, or obstruction of the 
urinary tract. Because abnormalities of glomerular 
function cause the greatest derangements and are 
most readily detectable, the most useful laboratory 
tests utilized currently are those related to assess-
ment of glomerular fi ltration rate (GFR). Accurate 
clinical assessment of renal function is oft en diffi  cult 
and relies heavily on laboratory determinations such 
as the creatinine clearance ( Table 30–1 ). Two sys-
tems for classifi cation of AKI are helpful in defi ning 
and staging the degree of renal dysfunction; these 
are the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative RIFLE cri-
teria ( Figure 30–2 ) and the Acute Kidney Injury 
Network (AKIN) staging system ( Table 30–2 ). A 
great deal of research is currently evaluating plasma 
and urine biomarkers associated with AKI, such as 
cystatin C, neutrophil gelatinase–associated lipo-
calin, interleukin-18, and kidney injury molecule-1. 
It is likely that biomarkers will play a prominent role 
in the near future for diagnosis, staging, and prog-
nostic assessment of AKI. 
 TABLE 301 Severity of kidney injury 
according to glomerular function. 
Creatinine 
Clearance (mL/min)
Normal
100–120
Decreased renal reserve
60–100
Mild renal impairment
40–60
Moderate renal insufficiency
25–40
Kidney failure
<25
End-stage renal disease  1  
<10
  1  This term applies to patients with chronic kidney failure.
 FIGURE 302  RIFLE 
criteria for acute kidney injury. 
ARF, acute renal failure; GFR, 
glomerular ﬁ ltration rate; 
SCreat, serum creatinine 
concentration; UO, urine 
output.  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Bellomo R, Ronco C, 
Kellum JA, et al: Acute renal failure—
deﬁ nition, outcome measures, 
animal models, ﬂ uid therapy and 
information technology needs: The 
Second International Consensus 
Conference of the Acute Dialysis 
Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit 
Care 2004;8:R204.) 
Risk
Injury
Loss
ESRD
Failure
High
sensitivity
Urine output criteria
GFR criteria
High
specificity
Persistent ARF = complete loss 
of kidney function >4 w
UO <0.5 mL/kg/h
× 6 h
UO <0.5 mL/kg/h
× 12 h
UO <0.3 mL/kg/h
× 24 h or
Anuria × 12 h
Increased SCreat × 1.5
or GFR decrease >25%
Increased SCreat × 2
or GFR decrease >50%
Increased SCreat × 3
GFR decrease 75%
or SCreat ≥4 mg/dL
Acute rise ≥0.5 mg/dL
End-Stage Renal Disease
(>3 mo)
Oliguria
 BLOOD UREA NITROGEN 
 Th e primary source of urea in the body is the liver. 
During protein catabolism, ammonia is produced 
from the deamination of amino acids. Hepatic con-
version of ammonia to urea prevents the buildup of 
toxic ammonia levels: 
 2NH3 + CO2 → H2N − CO − NH2 + H2O 
656 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 TABLE 302 Acute kidney injury network (AKIN) staging system for acute kidney injury.  1  
Stage
Serum Creatinine Criteria
Urine Output Criteria
1
Increase in serum creatinine of ≥0.3 mg/dL (≥26.4 µmol/L) or increase to 
≥150–200% (1.5- to 2-fold) from baseline
Less than 0.5 mL/kg/h for more than 6 h
2
Increase in serum creatinine ≥200–300% (>2- to 3-fold) from baseline
Less than 0.5 mL/kg/h for more than 12 h
3
Increase in serum creatinine to >300% (>3-fold) from baseline (or serum 
creatinine of ≥4.0 mg/dL [≥354 µmol/L] with an acute increase of at least 
0.5 mg/dL [44 µmol/L])
Less than 0.3 mL/kg/h for 24 h or anuria 
for 12 h
 1  Reproduced, with permission, from Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, et al: Acute Kidney Injury Network: Report of an initiative to improve outcomes in 
acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;11:R31.
 Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is therefore directly 
related to protein catabolism and inversely related to 
glomerular fi ltration. As a result, BUN is not a reli-
able indicator of the GFR unless protein catabolism 
is normal and constant. Moreover, 40–50% of the 
urea fi ltrate is normally reabsorbed passively by the 
renal tubules; hypovolemia increases this fraction. 
 Th e normal BUN concentration is 10–20 mg/dL. 
Lower values can be seen with starvation or liver 
 disease; elevations usually result from decreases in 
GFR or increases in protein catabolism. Th e latter 
may be due to a high catabolic state (trauma or sep-
sis), degradation of blood either in the gastrointesti-
nal tract or in a large hematoma, or a high-protein 
diet. BUN concentrations greater than 50 mg/dL 
are generally associated with impairment of renal 
function. 
 SERUM CREATININE 
 Creatine is a product of muscle metabolism that is 
nonenzymatically converted to creatinine. Creati-
nine production in most people is relatively constant 
and related to muscle mass, averaging 20–25 mg/kg 
in men and 15–20 mg/kg in women. Creatinine is 
then fi ltered (and to a minor extent secreted) but not 
reabsorbed in the kidneys. Serum creatinine con-
centration is therefore directly related to body mus-
cle mass but inversely related to glomerular fi ltration 
( Figure 30–3 ). Because body muscle mass is usually 
relatively constant, serum creatinine measurements 
are generally reliable indices of GFR in the healthy 
patient.  However, the utility of a single serum 
creatinine measurement as an indicator of 
1
 FIGURE 303  The relationship between the serum 
creatinine concentration and the glomerular ﬁ ltration rate. 
Serum creatinine (mg/dL)
0
15
30
60
90
120
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Glomerular filtration rate
(mL/min)
GFR is limited in critical illness: the rate of creati-
nine production, and its volume of distribution, may 
be abnormal in the critically ill patient, and a single 
serum creatinine measurement oft en will not accu-
rately refl ect GFR in the physiological disequilib-
rium of AKI. 
 Th e normal serum creatinine concentration is 
0.8–1.3 mg/dL in men and 0.6–1 mg/dL in women. 
Note from  Figure 30–3 that each doubling of the 
serum creatinine represents a 50% reduction in 
GFR. Large meat meals, cimetidine therapy, and 
increases in acetoacetate (as during ketoacido-
sis) can increase serum creatinine measurements 
without a change in GFR. Meat meals increase the 
creatinine load, and high acetoacetate concentra-
tions interfere with the most common laboratory 
method for measuring creatinine. Cimetidine 
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease
657
 BLOOD UREA NITROGEN:
CREATININE RATIO 
 Low renal tubular fl ow rates enhance urea reab-
sorption but do not aff ect creatinine handling. As a 
result, the BUN to serum creatinine ratio increases 
above 10:1. Decreases in tubular fl ow can be caused 
by decreased renal perfusion or obstruction of the 
urinary tract.  BUN: creatinine ratios greater than 
15:1 are therefore seen in volume depletion and 
in edematous disorders associated with decreased 
tubular fl ow (eg, congestive heart failure, cirrho-
sis, nephrotic syndrome) as well as in obstructive 
uropathies . Increases in protein catabolism can also 
increase this ratio. 
 URINALYSIS 
 Urinalysis continues to be routinely performed for 
evaluating renal function. Although its utility for 
that purpose is justifi ably questionable, urinaly-
sis can be helpful in identifying some disorders of 
renal tubular dysfunction as well as some nonrenal 
disturbances. A routine urinalysis typically includes 
pH; specifi c gravity; detection and quantifi cation of 
glucose, protein, and bilirubin content; and micro-
scopic examination of the urinary sediment. Urinary 
pH is helpful only when arterial pH is also known. 
A urinary pH greater than 7.0 in the presence of 
systemic acidosis is suggestive of renal tubular aci-
dosis (see  Chapter 50 ). Specifi c gravity is related 
to urinary osmolality; 1.010 usually corresponds 
to 290 mOsm/kg. A specifi c gravity greater than 
1.018 aft er an overnight fast is indicative of adequate 
renal concentrating ability. A lower specifi c gravity 
in the presence of hyperosmolality in plasma is con-
sistent with diabetes insipidus. 
 Glycosuria is the result of either a low tubu-
lar threshold for glucose (normally 180 mg/dL) or 
hyperglycemia. Proteinuria detected by routine uri-
nalysis should be evaluated by means of 24-h urine 
collection. Urinary protein excretions greater than 
150 mg/d are signifi cant. Elevated levels of bilirubin 
in the urine are seen with biliary obstruction. 
 Microscopic analysis of the urinary sedi-
ment detects the presence of red or white blood 
cells, bacteria, casts, and crystals. Red cells may be 
appears to inhibit creatinine secretion by the renal 
tubules. 
 GFR declines with increasing age in most indi-
viduals (5% per decade aft er age 20), but because 
muscle mass also declines, the serum creatinine 
remains relatively normal; creatinine production 
may decrease to 10 mg/kg. Th us, in elderly patients, 
small increases in serum creatinine may represent 
large changes in GFR. Using age and lean body 
weight (in kilograms), GFR can be estimated by the 
following formula for men: 
[(140 − age) × lean body weight]
(72 × plasma creatinine)
Creatinine clearance =
 
 For women, this equation must be multiplied by 
0.85 to compensate for a smaller muscle mass. 
 Th e serum creatinine concentration requires 
48–72 h to equilibrate at a new level following acute 
changes in GFR. 
 CREATININE CLEARANCE 
 Creatinine clearance measurement is the most 
accurate method available for clinically assess-
ing overall renal function (actually, GFR). Although 
measurements are usually performed over 24 h, 2-h 
creatinine clearance determinations are reasonably 
accurate and easier to perform. Mild impairment of 
renal function generally results in creatinine clear-
ances of 40–60 mL/min. Clearances between 25 and 
40 mL/min produce moderate renal dysfunction 
and nearly always cause symptoms. Creatinine clear-
ances less than 25 mL/min are indicative of overt 
kidney failure. 
 Progressive kidney disease enhances creati-
nine secretion in the proximal tubule. As a result, 
with declining renal function the creatinine clear-
ance progressively overestimates the true GFR. 
Moreover, relative preservation of GFR may occur 
early in the course of progressive kidney disease 
due to compensatory hyperfi ltration in the remain-
ing nephrons and increases in glomerular fi ltra-
tion pressure. It is therefore important to look for 
other signs of deteriorating renal function such as 
hypertension, proteinuria, or other abnormalities 
in urine sediment. 
2
658 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Ketamine 
 Ketamine pharmacokinetics are minimally altered 
by kidney disease. Some active hepatic metabolites 
are dependent on renal excretion and can potentially 
accumulate in kidney failure. 
 Benzodiazepines 
 Benzodiazepines undergo hepatic metabolism and 
conjugation prior to elimination in urine. Because 
most are highly protein bound, increased sensitiv-
ity may be seen in patients with hypoalbuminemia. 
Diazepam and midazolam should be administered 
cautiously in the presence of renal impairment 
because of a potential for the accumulation of active 
metabolites. 
 Opioids 
 Most opioids currently in use in anesthetic man-
agement (morphine, meperidine, fentanyl, sufent-
anil, and alfentanil) are inactivated by the liver; 
some of these metabolites are then excreted in 
urine. Remifentanil pharmacokinetics are unaf-
fected by renal function due to rapid ester hydro-
lysis in blood. With the exception of morphine 
and meperidine, signifi cant accumulation of 
active metabolites generally does not occur with 
these agents.  Th e accumulation of morphine 
(morphine-6-glucuronide) and meperidine 
(normeperidine) metabolites has been reported to 
prolong respiratory depression in patients with 
kidney failure, and increased levels of normeperi-
dine has been associated with seizures. Th e phar-
macokinetics of the most commonly used opioid 
agonist–antagonists (butorphanol, nalbuphine, 
and buprenorphine) are unaff ected by kidney 
failure. 
 Anticholinergic Agents 
 In doses used for premedication, atropine and glyco-
pyrrolate can generally be used safely in patients with 
renal impairment. Because up to 50% of these drugs 
and their active metabolites are normally excreted 
in urine, however, the potential for accumulation 
exists following repeated doses. Scopolamine is less 
dependent on renal excretion, but its central ner-
vous system eff ects can be enhanced by the physi-
ological alterations of renal insuffi  ciency. 
3
indicative of bleeding due to tumor, stones, infec-
tion, coagulopathy, or trauma. White cells and 
bacteria are generally associated with infection. 
Disease processes at the level of the nephron pro-
duce tubular casts. Crystals may be indicative of 
abnormalities in oxalic acid, uric acid, or cystine 
metabolism. 
 Altered Renal Function 
& the Eﬀ ects of 
Anesthetic Agents 
 Most drugs commonly employed during anesthesia 
(other than volatile anesthetics) are at least partly 
dependent on renal excretion for elimination. In 
the presence of renal impairment, dosage modifi -
cations may be required to prevent accumulation 
of the drug or its active metabolites. Moreover, the 
systemic eff ects of AKI can potentiate the phar-
macological actions of many of these agents. Th is 
latter observation may be the result of decreased 
protein binding of the drug, greater brain penetra-
tion due to some breach of the blood–brain barrier, 
or a synergistic eff ect with the toxins retained in 
kidney failure. 
 INTRAVENOUS AGENTS 
 Propofol & Etomidate 
 Th e pharmacokinetics of both propofol and etomi-
date are minimally aff ected by impaired renal func-
tion. Decreased protein binding of etomidate in 
patients with hypoalbuminemia may enhance its 
pharmacological eff ects. 
 Barbiturates 
 Patients with kidney disease oft en exhibit increased 
sensitivity to barbiturates during induction, even 
though pharmacokinetic profi les appear to be 
unchanged. Th e mechanism appears to be an 
increase in free circulating barbiturate as a result of 
decreased protein binding. Acidosis may also favor 
a more rapid entry of these agents into the brain by 
increasing the nonionized fraction of the drug (see 
 Chapter 26 ). 
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease
659
in patients with hemoglobin below 7 g/dL, in whom 
even a small increase in the dissolved oxygen content 
may represent a signifi cant percentage of the arterial 
to venous oxygen diff erence (see Chapter 23). 
 MUSCLE RELAXANTS 
 Succinylcholine 
 Succinylcholine can be safely used in patients 
with kidney failure, in the absence of hyper-
kalemia at the time of induction. When the serum 
potassium is known to be increased or is in doubt, 
a nondepolarizing muscle relaxant should be sub-
stituted. Although decreased plasma cholinesterase 
levels have been reported in uremic patients follow-
ing dialysis, signifi cant prolongation of neuromus-
cular blockade is rarely seen. 
 Cisatracurium & Atracurium 
 Cisatracurium and atracurium are degraded by 
plasma ester hydrolysis and nonenzymatic Hofmann 
elimination. Th ese agents are oft en the drugs of 
choice for muscle relaxation in patients with kid-
ney failure, especially in clinical situations where 
neuromuscular function monitoring is diffi  cult or 
impossible. 
 Vecuronium & Rocuronium 
 Th e elimination of vecuronium is primarily hepatic, 
but up to 20% of the drug is eliminated in urine. Th e 
eff ects of large doses of vecuronium (>0.1 mg/kg) 
are only modestly prolonged in patients with renal 
insuffi  ciency. Rocuronium primarily undergoes 
hepatic elimination, but prolongation in patients 
with severe kidney disease has been reported. In 
general, with appropriate neuromuscular monitor-
ing, these two agents can be used with few problems 
in patients with severe kidney disease. 
 Curare (d-Tubocurarine) 
 Elimination of d-tubocurarine is dependent on 
both renal and biliary excretion; 40–60% of a dose 
of curare is normally excreted in urine. Increasingly 
prolonged eff ects are observed following repeated 
doses in patients with renal insuffi  ciency. Smaller 
4
 Phenothiazines, H 2 
Blockers, & Related Agents 
 Most phenothiazines, such as promethazine, are 
metabolized to inactive compounds by the liver. 
Droperidol may be partly dependent on the kidneys 
for excretion. Although their pharmacokinetic pro-
fi les are not appreciably altered by renal impairment, 
potentiation of the central depressant eff ects of phe-
nothiazines by the physiological milieu of renal 
insuffi  ciency can occur. 
 All H 2 -receptor blockers are dependent on 
renal excretion, and their dose must be reduced 
for patients with renal insuffi  ciency. Proton pump 
inhibitor dosage does not need to be reduced for 
patients with renal insuffi  ciency. Metoclopramide is 
partly excreted unchanged in urine and will accu-
mulate in kidney failure. Although up to 50% of dol-
asetron is excreted in urine, no dosage adjustments 
are recommended for any of the 5-HT 3 blockers in 
patients with renal insuffi  ciency. 
 INHALATION AGENTS 
 Volatile Agents 
 Volatile anesthetic agents are ideal for patients with 
kidney disease because of lack of dependence on 
the kidneys for elimination, ability to control blood 
pressure, and minimal direct eff ects on renal blood 
fl ow. Although patients with mild to moderate renal 
impairment do not exhibit altered uptake or distri-
bution, accelerated induction and emergence may 
be seen in severely anemic patients (hemoglobin 
<5 g/dL) with chronic kidney failure; this observa-
tion may be explained by a decrease in the blood:gas 
partition coeffi  cient or by a decrease in minimum 
alveolar concentration. Some clinicians avoid sevo-
fl urane (with <2 L/min gas fl ows) for patients with 
kidney disease who undergo lengthy procedures 
(see Chapters 8 and 29). 
 Nitrous Oxide 
 Some clinicians omit entirely or limit the use of 
nitrous oxide to 50% concentration in severely anemic 
patients with end-stage renal disease in an attempt to 
increase arterial oxygen content. Th is may be justifi ed 
660 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
perfusion; intrinsic kidney failure is usually due to 
underlying renal disease, renal ischemia, or nephro-
toxins; and postrenal failure is the result of urinary 
tract obstruction or disruption. Both prerenal and 
postrenal forms of kidney failure are readily revers-
ible in their initial stages but with time progress to 
intrinsic kidney failure. Most adult patients with 
kidney failure fi rst develop oliguria. Nonoliguric 
patients (those with urinary outputs >400 mL/d) 
continue to form urine that is qualitatively poor; 
these patients tend to have greater preservation of 
GFR. Although glomerular fi ltration and tubular 
function are impaired in both cases, abnormalities 
tend to be less severe in nonoliguric kidney failure. 
 Th e course of intrinsic acute kidney failure var-
ies widely, but the oliguria typically lasts for 2 weeks 
and is followed by a diuretic phase marked by a pro-
gressive increase in urinary output. Th is diuretic 
phase oft en results in very large urinary outputs 
and is usually absent in nonoliguric kidney failure. 
Urinary function improves over the course of several 
weeks, but may not return to normal for up to 1 year. 
Th e course of prerenal and postrenal kidney failure 
is dependent on correction of the causal condition. 
 End-Stage Renal Disease 
 Th e most common causes of end-stage renal dis-
ease (ESRD) are hypertensive nephrosclerosis, dia-
betic nephropathy, chronic glomerulonephritis, and 
doses and longer dosing intervals are therefore 
required for maintenance of optimal muscle relax-
ation. In the days before intermediate acting neuro-
muscular blockers, curare was the nondepolarizing 
paralytic of choice for patients with kidney disease. 
 Pancuronium 
 Pancuronium is primarily dependent on renal excre-
tion (60–90%). Although pancuronium is metabo-
lized by the liver into less active intermediates, its 
elimination half-life is still primarily dependent on 
renal excretion (60–80%). Neuromuscular function 
should be closely monitored if these agents are used 
in patients with abnormal renal function. 
 Reversal Agents 
 Renal excretion is the principal route of elimina-
tion for edrophonium, neostigmine, and pyridostig-
mine. Th e half-lives of these agents in patients with 
renal impairment are therefore prolonged at least as 
much as any of the above relaxants, and problems 
with inadequate reversal of neuromuscular blockade 
are usually related to other factors (see  Chapter 11 ). 
In other words, “recurarization” due to inadequate 
duration of reversal agents is unlikely. 
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Kidney Failure 
 PREOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Acute Kidney Failure 
 Th is syndrome is a rapid deterioration in renal 
function that results in retention of nitrogenous 
waste products (azotemia). Th ese substances, many 
of which behave as toxins, are byproducts of protein 
and amino acid metabolism. Impaired renal metab-
olism of circulating proteins and peptides may con-
tribute to widespread organ dysfunction. 
 Kidney failure can be classifi ed as prerenal, 
renal, and postrenal, depending on its cause(s), and 
the initial therapeutic approach varies accordingly 
(see  Figure 30–1 and  Table 30–3 ). Prerenal kid-
ney failure results from an acute decrease in renal 
 TABLE 303 Management priorities in 
patients with acute kidney failure.  1  
•  Search for and correct prerenal and postrenal causes 
•  Review medications and patient-administered 
substances and stop any potential nephrotoxins 
•  Administer medications in doses appropriate for their 
clearance 
•  Optimize cardiac output and renal blood flow 
•  Monitor fluid intake and output; measure body weight daily 
•  Search for and treat acute complications (hyperkalemia, 
hyponatremia, acidosis, hyperphosphatemia, pulmonary 
edema) 
•  Search for and aggressively treat infections and sepsis 
•  Provide early nutritional support 
•  Provide expert supportive care (management of catheter 
and skin care; pressure sore and deep venous 
thromboembolic prophylaxis; psychological support). 
 1 Reproduced, with permission, from Lameire N, Van Biesen W, 
 Vanholder R: Acute renal failure. Lancet 2005;365:417.
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease 
661 
 TABLE 304 Manifestations of uremia. 
 Neurological 
 Peripheral neuropathy 
 Autonomic neuropathy 
 Muscle twitching 
 Encephalopathy
 Asterixis 
 Myoclonus 
 Lethargy 
 Confusion 
 Seizures 
 Coma 
 Cardiovascular 
 Fluid overload 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Hypertension 
 Pericarditis 
 Arrhythmia 
 Conduction blocks 
 Vascular calcification 
 Accelerated 
atherosclerosis 
 Pulmonary 
 Hyperventilation 
 Interstitial edema 
 Alveolar edema 
 Pleural effusion 
Gastrointestinal
 Anorexia 
 Nausea and vomiting 
 Delayed gastric emptying 
 Hyperacidity 
 Mucosal ulcerations 
 Hemorrhage 
 Adynamic ileus 
 Metabolic 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Hyperkalemia 
 Hyponatremia 
 Hypermagnesemia 
 Hyperphosphatemia 
 Hypocalcemia 
 Hyperuricemia 
 Hypoalbuminemia 
 Hematological 
 Anemia 
 Platelet dysfunction 
 Leukocyte dysfunction 
 Endocrine 
 Glucose intolerance 
 Secondary 
hyperparathyroidism 
 Hypertriglyceridemia 
 Skeletal 
 Osteodystrophy 
 Periarticular calcification 
 Skin 
 Hyperpigmentation 
 Ecchymosis 
 Pruritus 
polycystic kidney disease. Th e uncorrected manifes-
tations of this syndrome ( Table 30–4 )— collectively 
referred to as  uremia —are usually seen only aft er 
the GFR decreases below 25 mL/min. Patients with 
GFR below 10 mL/min are dependent on renal 
replacement therapy (RRT) for survival. RRT may 
take the form of hemodialysis, hemofi ltration, peri-
toneal dialysis, or renal transplantation. 
 Th e generalized eff ects of uremia can usually be 
controlled by RRT. Th e majority of patients who do 
not undergo renal transplantation receive hemodialy-
sis three times per week, and there are complications 
directly related to hemodialysis itself ( Table 30–5 ). 
Hypotension, neutropenia, hypoxemia, and the dis-
equilibrium syndrome are generally transient and 
resolve within hours aft er hemodialysis. Factors 
 TABLE 305 Complications of hemodialysis. 
 Neurological 
 Disequilibrium syndrome 
 Dementia 
 Cardiovascular 
 Intravascular volume depletion 
 Hypotension 
 Arrhythmia 
 Pulmonary 
 Hypoxemia 
 Gastrointestinal 
 Ascites 
 Hematological 
 Anemia 
 Transient neutropenia 
 Residual anticoagulation 
 Hypocomplementemia 
 Metabolic 
 Hypokalemia 
 Large protein losses 
 Skeletal 
 Osteomalacia 
 Arthropathy 
 Myopathy 
 Infectious 
 Peritonitis 
 Transfusion-related hepatitis 
contributing to hypotension during dialysis include 
the vasodilating eff ects of acetate dialysate solutions, 
autonomic neuropathy, and rapid removal of fl uid. 
Th e interaction of white cells with cellophane-derived 
dialysis membranes can result in neutropenia and 
leukocyte-mediated pulmonary dysfunction leading 
to hypoxemia. Disequilibrium syndrome is character-
ized by transient neurological symptoms that appear 
to be related to a more rapid lowering of extracellular 
osmolality than intracellular osmolality. 
 Manifestations of Kidney Failure 
 A. Metabolic 
 Multiple metabolic abnormalities, including hyper-
kalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, hyper-
magnesemia, hyperuricemia, and hypoalbuminemia, 
typically develop in patients with kidney failure. 
Water and sodium retention can result in worsen-
ing hyponatremia and extracellular fl uid overload, 
respectively. Failure to excrete nonvolatile acids 
produces a high anion gap metabolic acidosis (see 
662 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
activity as well as decreased platelet adhesiveness 
and aggregation. Patients who have recently under-
gone hemodialysis may also have residual antico-
agulant eff ects from heparin. 
 C. Cardiovascular 
 Cardiac output increases in kidney failure to main-
tain oxygen delivery due to decreased blood 
oxygen-carrying capacity. Sodium retention and 
abnormalities in the renin–angiotensin system 
result in systemic arterial hypertension. Left  ven-
tricular hypertrophy is a common fi nding in ESRD. 
 Extracellular fl uid overload from sodium 
retention, in association with increased car-
diac demand imposed by anemia and hypertension, 
makes ESRD patients prone to congestive heart fail-
ure and pulmonary edema. Increased permeability 
of the alveolar–capillary membrane may also be a 
predisposing factor for pulmonary edema associ-
ated with ESRD (see below). Arrhythmias, includ-
ing conduction blocks, are common, and may be 
related to metabolic abnormalities and to deposi-
tion of calcium in the conduction system. Uremic 
pericarditis may develop in some patients, who may 
be asymptomatic, may present with chest pain, or 
may present with cardiac tamponade. Patients with 
ESRD also characteristically develop accelerated 
peripheral vascular and coronary artery atheroscle-
rotic disease. 
 Intravascular volume depletion may occur in 
high-output acute kidney failure if fl uid replacement 
is inadequate. Hypovolemia may occur secondary to 
excessive fl uid removal during dialysis. 
 D. Pulmonary 
 Without RRT or bicarbonate therapy, ESRD patients 
may be dependent on increased minute ventila-
tion as compensation for metabolic acidosis (see 
 Chapter 50 ). Pulmonary extravascular water is oft en 
increased in the form of interstitial edema, result-
ing in a widening of the alveolar to arterial oxygen 
gradient and predisposing to hypoxemia. Increased 
permeability of the alveolar–capillary membrane in 
some patients can result in pulmonary edema even 
with normal pulmonary capillary pressures. 
 E. Endocrine 
 Abnormal glucose tolerance is common in ESRD, 
usually resulting from peripheral insulin resistance 
5
 Chapter 50 ). Hypernatremia and hypokalemia are 
uncommon complications. 
 Hyperkalemia is a potentially lethal conse-
quence of kidney failure (see  Chapter 49 ). It usu-
ally occurs in patients with creatinine clearances of 
less than 5 mL/min, but it can also develop rapidly 
in patients with higher clearances in the setting of 
large potassium loads (eg, trauma, hemolysis, infec-
tions, or potassium administration). 
 Th e hypermagnesemia is generally mild unless 
magnesium intake is increased (commonly from 
magnesium-containing antacids). Hypocalcemia 
is secondary to resistance to parathyroid hormone, 
decreased intestinal calcium absorption secondary to 
decreased renal synthesis of 1,25-dihydroxycholecal-
ciferol, and hyperphosphatemia-associated calcium 
deposition into bone. Symptoms of hypocalcemia 
rarely develop unless patients are also alkalotic. 
 Patients with kidney failure also rapidly lose 
tissue protein and readily develop hypoalbumin-
emia. Anorexia, protein restriction, and dialysis are 
contributory. 
 B. Hematological 
 Anemia is nearly always present when the creatinine 
clearance is below 30 mL/min. Hemoglobin con-
centrations are generally 6–8 g/dL due to decreased 
erythropoietin production, decreased red cell pro-
duction, and decreased red cell survival. Additional 
factors may include gastrointestinal blood loss, 
hemodilution, and bone marrow suppression from 
recurrent infections. Even with transfusions, it is 
oft en diffi  cult to maintain hemoglobin concentra-
tions greater than 9 g/dL. Erythropoietin adminis-
tration may partially correct the anemia. Increased 
levels of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG), which 
facilitates the unloading of oxygen from hemoglo-
bin (see  Chapter 23 ), develop in response to the 
decrease in blood oxygen-carrying capacity. Th e 
metabolic acidosis associated with ESRD also favors 
a rightward shift  in the hemoglobin–oxygen disso-
ciation curve. In the absence of symptomatic heart 
disease, most ESRD patients tolerate anemia well. 
 Both platelet and white cell function are 
impaired in patients with kidney failure. Clinically, 
this is manifested as a prolonged bleeding time and 
increased susceptibility to infections, respectively. 
Most patients have decreased platelet factor III 
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease
663
oft en used when patients are too hemodynami-
cally unstable to tolerate intermittent hemodialysis. 
Indications for dialysis are listed in  Table 30–6 . 
 Patients with chronic kidney failure commonly 
present to the operating room for creation or revi-
sion of an arteriovenous dialysis fi stula under local 
or regional anesthesia. However, regardless of the 
intended procedure or the anesthetic employed, one 
must be certain that the patient is in optimal medi-
cal condition; potentially reversible manifestations 
of uremia (see  Table 30–4 ) should be addressed. 
Preoperative dialysis on the day of surgery or on the 
previous day is typical. 
 Th e history and physical examination should 
address both cardiac and respiratory function. Signs 
of fl uid overload or hypovolemia should be sought. 
Patients are oft en relatively hypovolemic immedi-
ately following dialysis. A comparison of the patient’s 
current weight with previous predialysis and postdi-
alysis weights may be helpful. Hemodynamic data 
and a chest radiograph, if available, are useful in con-
fi rming clinical impressions. Arterial blood gas anal-
ysis is useful in evaluating oxygenation, ventilation, 
hemoglobin level, and acid–base status in patients 
with dyspnea or tachypnea. Th e electrocardiogram 
should be examined for signs of hyperkalemia or 
hypocalcemia (see  Chapter 49 ) as well as ischemia, 
conduction block, and ventricular hypertrophy. 
Echocardiography can assess cardiac function, ven-
tricular hypertrophy, wall motion abnormalities, and 
pericardial fl uid. A friction rub may not be audible on 
auscultation of patients with a pericardial eff usion. 
 Preoperative red blood cell transfusions are usu-
ally administered only for severe anemia as guided 
by the patient’s clinical needs. A bleeding time and 
coagulation studies may be advisable, particularly 
if neuraxial anesthesia is being considered. Serum 
(indeed, type 2 diabetes mellitus is one of the most 
common causes of ESRD). Secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism in patients with chronic kidney failure 
can produce metabolic bone disease, with osteope-
nia predisposing to fractures. Abnormalities in lipid 
metabolism frequently lead to hypertriglyceride-
mia and contribute to accelerated atherosclerosis. 
Increased circulating levels of proteins and polypep-
tides normally degraded by the kidneys are oft en 
present, including parathyroid hormone, insulin, 
glucagon, growth hormone, luteinizing hormone, 
and prolactin. 
 F. Gastrointestinal 
 Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and adynamic ileus are 
commonly associated with uremia. Hypersecretion 
of gastric acid increases the incidence of peptic 
ulceration and gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which 
occurs in 10–30% of patients.  Delayed gastric 
emptying secondary to autonomic neuropathy 
may predispose patients to perioperative aspiration. 
Patients with chronic kidney failure also have an 
increased incidence of hepatitis B and C, oft en with 
associated hepatic dysfunction. 
 G. Neurological 
 Asterixis, lethargy, confusion, seizures, and coma 
are manifestations of uremic encephalopathy, and 
symptoms usually correlate with the degree of azo-
temia. Autonomic and peripheral neuropathies are 
common in patients with ESRD. Peripheral neu-
ropathies are typically sensory and involve the distal 
lower extremities. 
 Preoperative Evaluation 
 Th e systemic eff ects of kidney failure mandate a 
thorough evaluation of the patient. Most periopera-
tive patients with acute kidney failure are critically 
ill, and their kidney failure is frequently associ-
ated with trauma or postoperative complications. 
Patients with acute kidney failure also tend to be in 
a catabolic metabolic state. Optimal perioperative 
management is dependent on dialysis. Hemodialysis 
is more eff ective than peritoneal dialysis and can 
be readily accomplished via a temporary internal 
jugular, subclavian, or femoral dialysis catheter. 
Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is 
6
 TABLE 306 Indications for dialysis. 
 Fluid overload 
 Hyperkalemia 
 Severe acidosis 
 Metabolic encephalopathy 
 Pericarditis 
 Coagulopathy 
 Refractory gastrointestinal symptoms 
 Drug toxicity 
664 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
electrolyte, BUN, and creatinine measurements can 
assess the adequacy of dialysis. Glucose measure-
ments guide the potential need for perioperative 
insulin therapy. 
 Drugs with signifi cant renal elimination should 
be avoided if possible ( Table 30–7 ). Dosage adjust-
ments and measurements of blood levels (when 
available) are necessary to minimize the risk of drug 
toxicity. 
 Premedication 
 Alert patients who are stable can be given reduced 
doses of a benzodiazepine or an opioid, if needed. 
Aspiration prophylaxis with an H 2 blocker or 
proton pump inhibitor may be indicated in 
patients with nausea, vomiting, or gastrointesti-
nal bleeding. Metoclopramide, 10 mg orally or 
slowly intravenously, may be useful in accelerat-
ing gastric emptying and decreasing the risk of 
aspiration. Preoperative medications—particularly 
 TABLE 307 Drugs with a potential for 
signiﬁ cant accumulation in patients with renal 
impairment. 
 Muscle relaxants 
 Pancuronium 
 Anticholinergics 
 Atropine 
 Glycopyrrolate 
 Metoclopramide 
 H 2 -receptor antagonists 
 Cimetidine 
 Ranitidine 
 Digitalis 
 Diuretics 
 Calcium channel antagonists 
 Diltiazem 
 Nifedipine 
 β-Adrenergic blockers 
 Atenolol 
 Nadolol 
 Pindolol 
 Propranolol 
 Antihypertensives 
 Captopril 
 Clonidine 
 Enalapril 
 Hydralazine 
 Lisinopril 
 Nitroprusside (thiocyanate) 
 Antiarrhythmics 
 Bretylium 
 Disopyramide 
 Encainide (genetically 
determined) 
 Procainamide 
 Tocainide 
 Bronchodilators 
 Terbutaline 
 Psychiatric 
 Lithium 
 Antibiotics 
 Aminoglycosides 
 Cephalosporins 
 Penicillins 
 Tetracycline 
 Vancomycin 
 Anticonvulsants 
 Carbamazepine 
 Ethosuximide 
 Primidone 
antihypertensive agents—should be continued until 
the time of surgery (see  Chapter 21 ). Th e manage-
ment of diabetic patients is discussed in  Chapter 34 . 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Monitoring 
 Patients with renal insuffi  ciency and kidney fail-
ure are at increased risk of perioperative complica-
tions, and their general medical condition and the 
planned operative procedure dictate monitoring 
requirements. Because of the risk of thrombosis, 
blood pressure should not be measured by a cuff  on 
an arm with an arteriovenous fi stula. Continuous 
intraarterial blood pressure monitoring may also be 
indicated in patients with poorly controlled hyper-
tension, regardless of the procedure. 
 Induction 
 Patients with nausea, vomiting, or gastrointestinal 
bleeding should undergo rapid-sequence induc-
tion. Th e dose of the induction agent should be 
reduced for debilitated or critically ill patients, or 
for patients who have recently undergone hemodi-
alysis (because of relative hypovolemia immediately 
following hemodialysis). Propofol, 1–2 mg/kg, or 
etomidate, 0.2–0.4 mg/kg, is oft en used. An opioid, β 
blocker (esmolol), or lidocaine may be used to blunt 
the hypertensive response to airway instrumenta-
tion and intubation. Succinylcholine, 1.5 mg/kg, can 
be used to facilitate endotracheal intubation in the 
absence of hyperkalemia. Vecuronium (0.1 mg/kg) 
or cisatracurium (0.15 mg/kg), or propofol– lidocaine 
induction without a relaxant, may be considered for 
intubation in patients with hyperkalemia.  
 Anesthesia Maintenance 
 Th e ideal anesthetic maintenance technique should 
control hypertension with minimal deleterious eff ect 
on cardiac output, because increased cardiac output 
is the principal compensatory mechanism for tissue 
oxygen delivery in anemia. Volatile anesthetics, pro-
pofol, fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifent-
anil are satisfactory maintenance agents. Nitrous 
oxide should be used cautiously in patients with 
poor ventricular function and should probably not 
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease
665
clinically perceptible change in renal function. Even 
patients with creatinine clearances of 40–60 mL/min 
usually are asymptomatic. Th ese patients have only 
mild renal impairment but should still be thought 
of as having decreased renal reserve. Th e emphasis 
in the care of these patients is preservation of the 
remaining renal function, which is best accom-
plished by maintaining normovolemia and normal 
renal perfusion. 
 When creatinine clearance decreases to 
25–40 mL/min, renal impairment is moderate, and 
patients are said to have renal insuffi  ciency. Azote-
mia is always present, and hypertension and ane-
mia 
are 
common. 
 Correct 
anesthetic 
management of this group of patients is as 
critical as management of those with frank kidney 
failure, especially during procedures associated 
with a relatively high  incidence of postoperative 
kidney failure, such as cardiac and aortic recon-
structive 
surgery. 
 Intravascular 
volume 
depletion, sepsis, obstructive jaundice, crush 
injuries, and renal toxins such as radiocontrast 
agents, certain antibiotics, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors, and NSAIDs (see  Table 29–4 ) 
are additional major risk factors for acute deterio-
ration in renal function. Hypovolemia and 
decreased renal perfusion are particularly impor-
tant causative factors in the development of acute 
postoperative kidney failure. Th e emphasis in man-
agement of these patients is on prevention, because 
the mortality rate of postoperative kidney failure 
may surpass 50%. Th e combination of diabetes and 
preexisting kidney disease markedly increases the 
perioperative risk of renal function deterioration 
and of kidney failure. 
 Renal protection with adequate hydration and 
maintenance of renal blood fl ow is indicated 
for patients at high risk for kidney injury and kidney 
failure undergoing cardiac, major aortic reconstruc-
tive, and other surgical procedures associated with 
signifi cant physiological trespass. Th e use of man-
nitol, low-dose dopamine infusion, loop diuretics, 
or fenoldopam for renal protection is controversial 
and without conclusive proof of effi  cacy (see above). 
Th e value of renal protection with  N -acetylcysteine 
prior to the administration of radiocontrast agents is 
reviewed in Chapter 29. 
8
9
10
be used for patients with very low hemoglobin con-
centrations (<7 g/dL) to allow the administration of 
100% oxygen (see above). Meperidine is not an ideal 
choice because of the accumulation of its metabolite 
normeperidine. Morphine may be used, but some 
prolongation of its eff ects should be expected. 
 Controlled ventilation should be considered 
for patients with kidney failure. Inadequate 
spontaneous ventilation with progressive hypercar-
bia under anesthesia can result in respiratory acido-
sis that may exacerbate preexisting acidemia, lead 
to potentially severe circulatory depression, and 
dangerously increase serum potassium concentra-
tion (see  Chapter 50 ). On the other hand, respira-
tory alkalosis may also be detrimental because it 
shift s the hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left , 
can exacerbate preexisting hypocalcemia, and may 
reduce cerebral blood fl ow. 
 Fluid Therapy 
 Superfi cial operations involving minimal tis-
sue trauma require replacement of only insensible 
fl uid losses. Procedures associated with major fl uid 
losses require isotonic crystalloids, colloids, or both 
(see  Chapter 51 ). Lactated Ringer’s injection is best 
avoided in hyperkalemic patients when large volumes 
of fl uid may be required, because it contains potas-
sium (4 mEq/L); normal saline may be used instead. 
Glucose-free solutions should generally be used 
because of the glucose intolerance associated with 
uremia. Blood that is lost should generally be replaced 
with colloid or packed red blood cells as clinically 
indicated. Allogeneic blood transfusion may decrease 
the likelihood of rejection following renal transplan-
tation because of associated immunosuppression. 
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Mild to Moderate 
Renal Impairment 
 PREOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Th e kidney normally possesses large functional 
reserve. GFR, as determined by creatinine clearance, 
can decrease from 120 to 60 mL/min without any 
7
666 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
myocardial depression or vasodilation), from indi-
rect hormonal eff ects (sympathoadrenal activa-
tion or antidiuretic hormone secretion), or from 
impeded venous return secondary to positive-
pressure ventilation. Many of these eff ects are 
almost completely avoidable or reversible when 
adequate intravenous fl uids are given to maintain a 
normal or slightly expanded intravascular volume. 
Th e administration of large doses of predomi-
nantly α-adrenergic vasopressors (phenylephrine 
and norepinephrine) may also be detrimental to 
preservation of renal function. Small, intermittent 
doses, or brief infusions, of vasoconstrictors may 
be useful in maintaining renal blood fl ow until 
other measures (eg, transfusion) are undertaken to 
correct hypotension. 
 Fluid Therapy 
 As reviewed above, appropriate fl uid administration 
is important in managing patients with impaired 
renal function. Concern over fl uid overload is jus-
tifi ed, but problems are rarely encountered in such 
patients with normal urinary outputs if rational fl uid 
administration guidelines and appropriate moni-
toring are employed (see  Chapter 51 ). Th e adverse 
consequences of excessive fl uid overload—namely, 
pulmonary congestion or edema—are far easier to 
treat than those of AKI and kidney failure. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
A Patient with Uncontrolled 
Hypertension 
 A 59-year-old man with a recent onset of hyper-
tension is scheduled for reconstruction of a ste-
notic left renal artery. His preoperative blood 
pressure is 180/110 mm Hg. 
 What is the likely cause of this patient’s 
hypertension? 
 Renovascular hypertension is one of the few 
surgically correctable forms of hypertension. 
Others include coarctation of the aorta, pheo-
chromocytoma, Cushing’s disease, and primary 
hyperaldosteronism. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Monitoring 
 Th e American Society of Anesthesiologists’ basic 
monitoring standards are used for procedures 
involving minimal fl uid losses. For procedures asso-
ciated with signifi cant blood or fl uid loss, close mon-
itoring of hemodynamic performance and urinary 
output is useful (see  Chapter 51 ). Although mainte-
nance of urinary output does not ensure preserva-
tion of renal function, urinary outputs greater than 
0.5 mL/kg/h are preferable. Continuous intraarterial 
blood pressure monitoring is also important if rapid 
changes in blood pressure are anticipated, such as in 
patients with poorly controlled hypertension and in 
those undergoing procedures associated with abrupt 
changes in sympathetic stimulation or in cardiac 
preload or aft erload. 
 Induction 
 Selection of an induction agent is not as impor-
tant as ensuring an adequate intravascular vol-
ume prior to induction; induction of anesthesia 
in hypovolemic patients with renal insuffi  ciency 
frequently results in hypotension. Unless a vaso-
pressor is administered, such hypotension typi-
cally resolves only following intubation or surgical 
stimulation. Renal perfusion, which may already 
be compromised by preexisting hypovolemia, may 
then deteriorate further, fi rst as a result of hypo-
tension, and subsequently from sympathetically or 
pharmacologically mediated renal vasoconstric-
tion. If sustained, the decrease in renal perfusion 
may contribute to postoperative renal impairment 
or failure. Preoperative hydration usually prevents 
this sequence of events. 
 Maintenance of Anesthesia 
 All anesthetic maintenance agents are accept-
able, with the possible exception of sevofl urane 
administered with low gas fl ows over a prolonged 
time period. Intraoperative deterioration in renal 
function may result from adverse eff ects of the 
operative procedure (hemorrhage, vascular occlu-
sion, abdominal compartment syndrome, arterial 
emboli) or anesthetic (hypotension secondary to 
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease 
667 
laboratory and radiographic conﬁ rmation. A deﬁ ni-
tive diagnosis is made by renal arteriography, and 
percutaneous balloon angioplasty with stenting 
may be performed at the same time. The functional 
signiﬁ cance of the restrictive lesion(s) may be evalu-
ated by selective catheterization of both renal veins 
and subsequent measurement of plasma renin 
activity in blood from each kidney. Restenosis rates 
following angioplasty are estimated to be <15% 
after 1 year. Patients who are not candidates for 
angioplasty and stenting are referred for surgery. 
 Should this patient undergo surgical correction 
given his present blood pressure? 
 Optimal medical therapy is important in prepar-
ing these patients for operation. Relative to patients 
with well-controlled hypertension, those with 
poorly controlled hypertension have a high inci-
dence of intraoperative problems including marked 
hypertension, hypotension, myocardial ischemia, 
and arrhythmias. Ideally, arterial blood pressure 
should be well controlled prior to surgery. Patients 
should be evaluated for preexisting renal dysfunc-
tion, and metabolic disturbances such as hypoka-
lemia should be corrected. Patients should also be 
evaluated as indicated for the presence and severity 
of coexisting atherosclerotic disease, according to 
current ACC/AHA guidelines (see Chapter 21). 
 What antihypertensive agents are most useful 
for controlling blood pressure perioperatively in 
these patients? 
 β-Adrenergic blocking drugs are frequently 
utilized for blood pressure control in the peri-
operative period. They are particularly eﬀ ective 
because secretion of renin is partly mediated by β 1 -
adrenergic receptors. Although parenteral selec-
tive β 1 -blocking agents such as metoprolol and 
esmolol would be expected to be most eﬀ ective, 
nonselective agents such as propranolol appear 
equally eﬀ ective. Esmolol may be the intraop-
erative β 1 -blocking agent of choice because of its 
short half-life and titratability. 
 Direct vasodilators such as nitroprusside and 
nitroglycerin are also useful in controlling intraop-
erative hypertension. 
 Most studies suggest that renovascular hyper-
tension accounts for 2–5% of all cases of hyperten-
sion. Characteristically it manifests as a relatively 
sudden onset of hypertension in persons younger 
than 35 years or older than 55 years of age. Renal 
artery stenosis can also be responsible for the devel-
opment of accelerated or malignant hypertension 
in previously hypertensive persons of any age. 
 What is the pathophysiology of the 
hypertension? 
 Unilateral or bilateral stenosis of the renal artery 
decreases the perfusion pressure to the kidney(s) 
distal to the obstruction. Activation of the juxta-
glomerular apparatus and release of renin increase 
circulating levels of angiotensin II and aldosterone, 
resulting in peripheral vascular constriction and 
sodium retention, respectively. The resulting sys-
temic arterial hypertension is often severe. 
 In nearly two thirds of patients, the stenosis 
results from an atheromatous plaque in the proxi-
mal renal artery. These patients are typically men 
over the age of 55 years. In the remaining one third 
of patients, the stenosis is more distal and is due 
to malformations of the arterial wall, commonly 
referred to as  ﬁ bromuscular hyperplasia (or,  dys-
plasia ). This latter lesion most commonly presents 
in women younger than 35 years. Bilateral renal 
artery stenosis is present in 30–50% of patients 
with renovascular hypertension. Less common 
causes of stenosis include dissecting aneurysms, 
emboli, polyarteritis nodosa, radiation, trauma, 
extrinsic compression from retroperitoneal ﬁ brosis 
or tumors, and hypoplasia of the renal arteries. 
 What clinical manifestations other than 
hypertension may be present? 
 Signs of secondary hyperaldosteronism can be 
prominent. These include sodium retention in the 
form of edema, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokale-
mia. The latter can cause muscle weakness, poly-
uria, and even tetany. 
 How is the diagnosis made? 
 The diagnosis is suggested by the clinical pre-
sentation previously described. A midabdominal 
bruit may also be present, but the diagnosis requires 
668 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Abi Antoun T, Palevsky PM: Selection of modality of 
renal replacement therapy. Semin Dial 2009;22:108. 
 Bagshaw SM, Wald R: Renal replacement therapy: When 
to start. Contrib Nephrol (Basel) 2011;174:232. 
 Bellomo R: Acute renal failure. Semin Respir Crit Care 
Med 2011;32:639. 
 Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA, et al: Acute renal 
failure—defi nition, outcome measures, animal 
models, fl uid therapy and information technology 
needs: Th e Second International Consensus 
Conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative 
(ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004;8:R204. 
 Brienza N, Giglio MT, Marucci M: Preventing acute 
kidney injury aft er noncardiac surgery. Curr Opin 
Crit Care 2010;16:353. 
 Chronopoulos A, Cruz DN, Ronco C: Hospital-acquired 
acute kidney injury in the elderly. Nat Rev Nephrol 
2010;6:141. 
 Glassford NJ, Bellomo R: Acute kidney injury: How 
can we facilitate recovery? Curr Opin Crit Care 
2011:17:562-568. 
 Harel Z, Chan CT: Predicting and preventing acute 
kidney injury aft er cardiac surgery. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens 2008;17:624. 
 Ho KM, Morgan DRJ: Meta-analysis of  N -acetylcysteine 
to prevent acute renal failure aft er major surgery. Am 
J Kidney Dis 2009;53:33. 
 Hollmen M: Diagnostic test for early detection of acute 
kidney injury. Expert Rev Mol Diagn 2011;11:553. 
 House AA, Haapio M, Lassus J, et al: Pharmacological 
management of cardiorenal syndromes. Int J Nephrol 
2011;2011:630. 
 What postoperative considerations are 
important? 
 Although in most patients hypertension is 
ultimately cured or signiﬁ cantly improved, arte-
rial blood pressure is often quite labile in the early 
postoperative period. Close hemodynamic moni-
toring should be continued well into the postop-
erative period. Reported operative mortality rates 
range from 1% to 6%, and most deaths are associ-
ated with myocardial infarction. The latter probably 
reﬂ ects the relatively high prevalence of coronary 
artery disease in older patients with renovascular 
hypertension. 
ACE inhibitors and angiotensin converting 
enzyme receptor blockers are contraindicated in 
bilateral renal artery stenosis or in unilateral renal 
artery stenosis where there is only one functioning 
kidney because they can precipitate kidney failure. 
 What intraoperative considerations are 
important for the anesthesia provider? 
 Revascularization of a kidney is a major proce-
dure, with the potential for major blood loss, ﬂ uid 
shifts, and hemodynamic changes. One of several 
procedures may be performed, including transaor-
tic renal endarterectomy, aortorenal bypass (using 
a saphenous vein, synthetic graft, or segment of the 
hypogastric artery), a splenic to (left) renal artery 
bypass, a hepatic or gastroduodenal to (right) renal 
artery bypass, or excision of the stenotic segment 
with reanastomosis of the renal artery to the aorta. 
Rarely, nephrectomy may be performed. Regardless 
of the procedure, an extensive retroperitoneal dis-
section often necessitates relatively large volumes 
of intravenous ﬂ uid replacement. Large-bore 
intravenous access is mandatory because of the 
potential for extensive blood loss. Heparinization 
contributes to increased blood loss. Depending 
on the surgical technique, aortic cross-clamping, 
with its associated hemodynamic consequences, 
often complicates anesthetic management (see 
 Chapter 22 ). Continuous intraarterial blood pres-
sure monitoring is mandatory, and central venous 
pressure monitoring is often very helpful. Goal-
directed hemodynamic and ﬂ uid therapy utilizing 
arterial pulse contour analysis, esophageal Doppler, 
or transesophageal echocardiography should 
be considered for patients with poor ventricular 
function, and may be advisable in most patients 
to guide ﬂ uid management (see  Chapter 51 ). The 
choice of anesthetic technique is generally deter-
mined by the patient’s cardiovascular function. 
 Urinary output should be followed carefully. 
Generous hydration and maintenance of adequate 
cardiac output and blood pressure are important 
to protect both the aﬀ ected and the normal kid-
ney against acute ischemic injury. Topical cooling 
of the aﬀ ected kidney during the anastomosis may 
also be employed. 
 
CHAPTER 30 Anesthesia for Patients with Kidney Disease 
669 
abdominal compartment syndrome. J Am Soc 
Nephrol 2011;22:615. 
 Noor S, Usami A: Postoperative renal failure. Clin 
Geriatric Med 2008;24:721. 
 Ricci Z, Cruz DN, Ronco C: Classifi cation and staging 
of acute kidney injury: Beyond the RIFLE and AKIN 
criteria. Nature Rev Nephrol 2011;7:201. 
 Trainor D, Borthwick E, Ferguson A: Perioperative 
management of the hemodialysis patient. Semin Dial 
2011;24:314. 
 Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM: Strategies for the prevention 
of contrast-induced acute kidney injury. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens 2010;19:539. 
 Yilmaz R, Erdem Y: Acute kidney injury in the elderly 
population. Int Urol Nephrol 2010;42:259. 
 Kim IB, Prowle J, Baldwin I, et al: Incidence, risk 
factors and outcome associations of intra-abdominal 
hypertension in critically ill patients. Anaesth 
Intensive Care 2012;40:79. 
 Mandelbaum T, Scott DJ, Lee J, et al: Outcome of 
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury using 
the Acute Injury Network criteria. Crit Care Med 
2011;39:2659. 
 McCullough PA: Radiocontrast-induced acute kidney 
injury. Nephron Physiol 2008;109:61. 
 Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, et al: Acute Kidney Injury 
Network: Report of an initiative to improve outcomes 
in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;11:R31. 
 Mohmand H, Goldfarb S: Renal dysfunction associated 
with intra-abdominal hypertension and the 
This page intentionally left blank 
 671
31
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for 
Genitourinary Surgery 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Next to the supine position, the lithotomy 
position is the most commonly used 
position for patients undergoing urological 
and gynecological procedures. Failure to 
properly position and pad the patient can 
result in pressure sores, nerve injuries, or 
compartment syndromes . 
 The lithotomy position is associated with 
major physiological alterations. Functional 
residual capacity decreases, predisposing 
patients to atelectasis and hypoxia. 
Elevation of the legs drains blood into the 
central circulation acutely. Mean blood 
pressure often increases, but cardiac output 
does not change signiﬁ cantly. Conversely, 
rapid lowering of the legs from the 
lithotomy or Trendelenburg position acutely 
decreases venous return and can result in 
hypotension. Blood pressure measurement 
should be taken immediately after the legs 
are lowered . 
 Because of the short duration (15–20 min) 
and outpatient setting of most cystoscopies, 
general anesthesia is often chosen, 
commonly employing a laryngeal mask 
airway . 
 Both epidural and spinal blockade with 
a T10 sensory level provide excellent 
anesthesia for cystoscopy . 
1
2
3
4
 Manifestations of TURP (transurethral 
resection of the prostate) syndrome are 
primarily those of circulatory ﬂ uid overload, 
water intoxication, and, occasionally, toxicity 
from the solute in the irrigating ﬂ uid . 
 Absorption of TURP irrigation ﬂ uid is 
dependent on the duration of the resection 
and the pressure of the irrigation ﬂ uid . 
 When compared with general anesthesia, 
regional anesthesia for TURP may reduce 
the incidence of postoperative venous 
thrombosis. It is also less likely to mask 
symptoms and signs of TURP syndrome or 
bladder perforation . 
 Patients with a history of cardiac 
arrhythmias and those with a pacemaker or 
internal cardiac deﬁ brillator (ICD) may be 
at risk for developing arrhythmias induced 
by shock waves during extracorporeal 
shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL). Shock waves 
can damage the internal components of 
pacemaker and ICD devices . 
 Patients who are undergoing retroperitoneal 
lymph node dissection and who have 
received bleomycin preoperatively are at 
increased risk for developing postoperative 
pulmonary insuﬃ  ciency. These patients may 
5
6
7
8
9
—Continued next page
672 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Continued—
be particularly at risk for oxygen toxicity 
and ﬂ uid overload, and for developing 
acute respiratory distress syndrome 
postoperatively . 
 For patients undergoing renal 
transplantation, the preoperative serum 
potassium concentration should be below 
5.5 mEq/L and existing coagulopathies 
10
should be corrected. Hyperkalemia has 
been reported after release of the vascular 
clamp following completion of the arterial 
anastomosis, particularly in pediatric and 
other small patients. Release of potassium 
contained in the preservative solution 
has been implicated as the cause of this 
phenomenon . 
 Urological procedures account for 10–20% of most 
anesthetic practices. Patients undergoing genitouri-
nary procedures may be of any age, but many are 
elderly with coexisting medical illnesses, commonly 
renal dysfunction. Th e impact of anesthesia on renal 
function is discussed in Chapter 30. Th is chapter 
reviews the anesthetic management of common 
urological procedures. Use of the lithotomy and 
steep head-down (Trendelenburg) positions, the 
transurethral approach, and extracorporeal shock 
waves (lithotripsy) complicates many of these pro-
cedures. Moreover, advances in surgical technique 
and perioperative medical and surgical manage-
ment allow more patients with coexisting disease to 
be considered acceptable candidates for renal trans-
plantation and for extensive tumor debulking and 
reconstructive genitourinary procedures involving 
marked physiological trespass. 
 CYSTOSCOPY 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Cystoscopy is the most commonly performed uro-
logical procedure, and indications for this investi-
gative or therapeutic operation include hematuria, 
recurrent urinary infections, renal calculi, and 
urinary obstruction. Bladder biopsies, retrograde 
pyelograms, transurethral resection of bladder 
tumors, extraction or laser lithotripsy of renal 
stones, and placement or manipulation of ureteral 
catheters (stents) are also commonly performed 
through the cystoscope. 
 Anesthetic management varies with the age 
and gender of the patient and the purpose of the 
procedure. General anesthesia is usually necessary 
for children. Viscous lidocaine topical anesthesia 
with or without sedation is satisfactory for diag-
nostic studies in most women because of the short 
urethra. Operative cystoscopies involving biopsies, 
cauterization, or manipulation of ureteral catheters 
require regional or general anesthesia. Many men 
prefer regional or general anesthesia even for diag-
nostic cystoscopy. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 A. Lithotomy Position 
 Next to the supine position, the lithotomy 
position is the most commonly used position 
for patients undergoing urological and gynecologi-
cal procedures. Failure to properly position and pad 
the patient can result in pressure sores, nerve inju-
ries, or compartment syndromes. Two people are 
needed to safely move the patient’s legs simultane-
ously up into, or down from, the lithotomy position. 
Straps around the ankles or special holders support 
the legs in lithotomy position ( Figure 31–1 ). Th e leg 
supports should be padded wherever there is leg or 
foot contact, and straps must not impede circula-
tion. When the patient’s arms are tucked to the side, 
caution must be exercised to prevent the fi ngers 
from being caught between the mid and lower sec-
tions of the operating room table when the lower 
section is lowered and raised—many clinicians com-
pletely encase the patient’s hands and fi ngers with 
1
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery
673
with the lithotomy position involve the lumbosacral 
plexus. Brachial plexus injuries can likewise occur if 
the upper extremities are inappropriately positioned 
(eg, hyperextension at the axilla). Compartment 
syndrome of the lower extremities with rhabdomy-
olysis has been reported with prolonged time in the 
lithotomy position, aft er which lower extremity 
nerve damage is also more likely. 
 Th e lithotomy position is associated with 
major physiological alterations. Functional 
residual capacity decreases, predisposing patients 
2
protective padding to minimize this risk. Injury to 
the tibial (common peroneal) nerve, resulting in loss 
of dorsifl exion of the foot, may result if the lateral 
knee rests against the strap support. If the legs are 
allowed to rest on medially placed strap supports, 
compression of the saphenous nerve can result in 
numbness along the medial calf. Excessive fl exion of 
the thigh against the groin can injure the obturator 
and, less commonly, the femoral nerves. Extreme 
fl exion at the thigh can also stretch the sciatic nerve. 
Th e most common nerve injuries directly associated 
A
B
C
 FIGURE 311  The lithotomy position.  A: Strap stirrups.  B: Bier–Hoﬀ  stirrups.  C: Allen stirrups. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Martin JT:  Positioning in Anesthesia . W.B. Saunders, 1988.) 
674 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 TRANSURETHRAL RESECTION 
OF THE PROSTATE 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) frequently 
leads to bladder outlet obstruction in men older 
than 60 years. Although increasingly being treated 
medically, some men require surgical intervention. 
Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) is 
the most common surgical procedure performed for 
bladder outlet obstruction due to BPH, and indica-
tions for TURP in this setting include obstructive 
uropathy, bladder calculi, and recurrent episodes 
of urinary retention, urinary tract infections, and 
hematuria. Patients with adenocarcinoma of the 
prostate may also benefi t from TURP to relieve 
symptomatic urinary obstruction. 
 TURP requires regional or general anesthe-
sia, and patients should be evaluated for coexistent 
major organ dysfunction. Despite advanced age 
(over half of TURP patients are older than 70 years) 
and prevalence of signifi cant comorbidity in over 
two thirds of TURP patients, perioperative mortality 
and medical morbidity (most frequently myocardial 
infarction, pulmonary edema, and kidney failure) 
for this procedure are both less than 1%. 
 Th e most common surgical complications of 
TURP are clot retention, failure to void, uncontrolled 
hematuria requiring surgical revision, urinary tract 
infection, and chronic hematuria, although other, 
more rare, complications may include: TURP syn-
drome, bladder perforation, sepsis, hypothermia, 
and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). 
A blood type and screen (see Chapter 51) is ade-
quate for most patients, although crossmatched 
blood should be available for anemic patients and 
for patients with large glands in which extensive 
resection is contemplated. Prostatic bleeding can be 
diffi  cult to control through the cystoscope. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 TURP is performed by passing a loop through a 
special cystoscope (resectoscope). Using continuous 
irrigation and direct visualization, prostatic tissue is 
resected by applying a cutting current to the loop. 
Because of the characteristics of the prostate and the 
large amounts of irrigation fl uid oft en used, TURP 
to atelectasis and hypoxia. Th is eff ect is amplifi ed 
by steep Trendelenburg positioning (>30°), which is 
commonly utilized in combination with the lithot-
omy position. Elevation of the legs drains blood 
into the central circulation acutely and may thereby 
exacerbate congestive heart failure (or treat a rela-
tive hypovolemia). Mean blood pressure and cardiac 
output may increase. Conversely, rapid lowering of 
the legs from the lithotomy or Trendelenburg posi-
tion acutely decreases venous return and can result 
in hypotension. Vasodilation from either general or 
regional anesthesia potentiates the hypotension in 
this situation, and for this reason, blood pressure 
measurement should be taken immediately aft er the 
legs are lowered. 
 B. Choice of Anesthesia 
 1. General anesthesia — Many patients are appre-
hensive about the procedure and prefer to be asleep. 
However, any anesthetic technique suitable for out-
patients may be utilized.  Because of the short 
duration (15–20 min) and outpatient setting 
of most cystoscopies, general anesthesia is oft en 
chosen, commonly employing a laryngeal mask air-
way. Oxygen saturation should be closely monitored 
when obese or elderly patients, or those with mar-
ginal pulmonary reserve, are placed in the lithotomy 
or Trendelenburg position. 
 2. Regional anesthesia — Both epidural and 
spinal blockade provide satisfactory anes-
thesia for cystoscopy. However, when regional 
anesthesia is chosen most anesthesiologists prefer 
spinal anesthesia because onset of satisfactory sen-
sory blockade may require 15–20 min for epidural 
anesthesia compared with 5 min or less for spinal 
anesthesia. Some clinicians believe that the sen-
sory level following injection of a hyperbaric spi-
nal anesthetic solution should be well established 
(“fi xed”) before the patient is moved into the lithot-
omy position; however, studies fail to demonstrate 
that immediate elevation of the legs into lithotomy 
position following administration of hyperbaric 
spinal anesthesia either increases the dermatomal 
extent of anesthesia to a clinically signifi cant de-
gree or increases the likelihood of severe hypoten-
sion. A sensory level to T10 provides excellent an-
esthesia for essentially all cystoscopic procedures. 
3
4
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery
675
Because all these fl uids are still hypotonic, signifi -
cant absorption of water can nevertheless occur. 
Solute absorption can also occur because the irriga-
tion fl uid is under pressure, and high irrigation pres-
sures (bottle height) increase fl uid absorption. 
 Absorption of TURP irrigation fl uid is depen-
dent on the duration of the resection and the 
pressure of the irrigation fl uid. Most resections last 
45–60 min, and, on average, 20 mL/min of the irri-
gating fl uid is absorbed. Pulmonary congestion or 
fl orid pulmonary edema can readily result from 
the absorption of large amounts of irrigation fl uid, 
particularly in patients with limited cardiac reserve. 
Th e hypotonicity of these fl uids also results in acute 
hyponatremia and hypoosmolality, which can lead 
to serious neurological manifestations. Symptoms 
of hyponatremia usually do not develop until the 
serum sodium concentration decreases below 
120 mEq/L. Marked hypotonicity in plasma ([Na + ] 
<100 mEq/L) may also result in acute intravascular 
hemolysis. 
 Toxicity may also arise from absorption of the 
solutes in these fl uids. Marked hyperglycinemia has 
been reported with glycine solutions and may con-
tribute to circulatory depression and central nervous 
system toxicity. Plasma glycine concentrations in 
excess of 1000 mg/L have been recorded (normal is 
13–17 mg/L). Glycine is known to be an inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and 
has also been implicated in rare instances of tran-
sient blindness following TURP. Hyperammonemia, 
presumably from the degradation of glycine, has 
6
can be associated with a number of serious compli-
cations ( Table 31–1 ). 
 A. TURP Syndrome 
 Transurethral prostatic resection oft en opens the 
extensive network of venous sinuses in the prostate, 
potentially allowing systemic absorption of the 
irrigating fl uid. Th e absorption of large amounts of 
fl uid (2 L or more) results in a constellation of 
symptoms and signs commonly referred to as the 
TURP syndrome ( Table 31–2 ). Th is syndrome pres-
ents intraoperatively or postoperatively as headache, 
restlessness, confusion, cyanosis, dyspnea, arrhyth-
mias, hypotension, or seizures, and it can be rapidly 
fatal.  Th e manifestations are primarily those of 
circulatory fl uid overload, water intoxication, 
and, occasionally, toxicity from the solute in the irri-
gating fl uid. Th e incidence of TURP syndrome is less 
than 1%. 
 Electrolyte solutions cannot be used for irriga-
tion during TURP because they disperse the electro-
cautery current. Water provides excellent visibility 
because its hypotonicity lyses red blood cells, but 
signifi cant water absorption can readily result in 
acute water intoxication. Water irrigation is gener-
ally restricted to transurethral resection of bladder 
tumors only. For TURP, slightly hypotonic nonelec-
trolyte irrigating solutions such as glycine 1.5% 
(230 mOsm/L) or a mixture of sorbitol 2.7% and 
mannitol 0.54% (195 mOsm/L) are most commonly 
used. Less commonly used solutions include sorbitol 
3.3%, mannitol 3%, dextrose 2.5–4%, and urea 1%. 
5
 TABLE 311 Surgical complications 
associated with TURP. 1 
 Most common 
Clot retention
Failure to void
Uncontrolled acute hematuria
Urinary tract infection
Chronic hematuria
 Less common 
TURP syndrome
Bladder perforation
Hypothermia
Sepsis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
 1 TURP, transurethral resection of the prostate.
 TABLE 312 Manifestations of TURP 
syndrome. 1 
Hyponatremia
Hypoosmolality
Fluid overload
Congestive heart failure
Pulmonary edema
Hypotension
Hemolysis
Solute toxicity
Hyperglycinemia (glycine)
Hyperammonemia (glycine)
Hyperglycemia (sorbitol)
Intravascular volume expansion (mannitol)
1 TURP, transurethral resection of the prostate.
676 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Most bladder perforations are extraperitoneal and 
are signaled by poor return of the irrigating fl uid. 
Awake patients will typically complain of nausea, 
diaphoresis, and retropubic or lower abdominal 
pain. Large extraperitoneal and most intraperitoneal 
perforations are usually even more obvious, present-
ing as sudden unexplained hypotension or hyperten-
sion, and with generalized abdominal pain in awake 
patients. Regardless of the anesthetic technique 
employed, perforation should be suspected in set-
tings of sudden hypotension or hypertension, par-
ticularly with acute, vagally mediated bradycardia. 
 D. Coagulopathy 
 DIC has on rare occasion been reported following 
TURP and may result from the release of throm-
boplastins from prostate tissue into the circulation 
during the procedure. Up to 6% of patients may have 
evidence of subclinical DIC. A dilutional thrombo-
cytopenia can also develop during surgery as part 
of the TURP syndrome from absorption of irriga-
tion fl uids. Rarely, patients with metastatic carci-
noma of the prostate develop a coagulopathy from 
primary fi brinolysis due to secretion of a fi brino-
lytic enzyme. Th e diagnosis of coagulopathy may 
be suspected from diff use, uncontrollable bleeding 
but must be confi rmed by laboratory tests. Primary 
fi brinolysis should be treated with ε-aminocaproic 
acid (Amicar), 5 g followed by 1 g/h intravenously. 
Treatment of DIC in this setting may require hepa-
rin in addition to replacement of clotting factors 
and platelets, and consultation with a hematologist 
should be considered. 
 E. Septicemia 
 Th e prostate is oft en colonized with bacteria and may 
harbor chronic infection. Extensive surgical resec-
tion with the opening of venous sinuses can allow 
entry of organisms into the bloodstream. Bacteremia 
following transurethral surgery is common and can 
lead to septicemia or septic shock. Prophylactic anti-
biotic therapy (most commonly gentamicin, levo-
fl oxacin, or cefazolin) prior to TURP may decrease 
the likelihood of bacteremic and septic episodes. 
 F. Choice of Anesthesia 
 Either spinal or epidural anesthesia with a T10 sen-
sory level, or general anesthesia, provides excellent 
also been documented in a few patients with marked 
central nervous system toxicity following TURP. 
Blood ammonia levels in some patients exceeded 
500 µmol/L (normal is 5–50 µmol/L). Th e use of 
large amounts of sorbitol or dextrose irrigating 
solutions can lead to hyperglycemia, which can be 
marked in diabetic patients. Absorption of manni-
tol solutions causes intravascular volume expansion 
and exacerbates fl uid overload. 
 Treatment of TURP syndrome depends on early 
recognition and should be based on the severity of 
the symptoms. Th e absorbed water must be elimi-
nated, and hypoxemia and hypoperfusion treated. 
Most patients can be managed with fl uid restric-
tion and intravenous administration of furosemide. 
Symptomatic hyponatremia resulting in seizures or 
coma should be treated with hypertonic saline (see 
Chapter 49). Seizure activity can be terminated with 
small doses of midazolam (2–4 mg). Phenytoin, 
10–20 mg/kg intravenously (no faster than 50 mg/
min), should also be considered to provide more 
sustained anticonvulsant activity. Endotracheal intu-
bation may be considered to prevent aspiration until 
the patient’s mental status normalizes. Th e amount 
and rate of hypertonic saline solution (3% or 5%) 
needed to correct the hyponatremia to a safe level 
should be based on the patient’s serum sodium con-
centration (see Chapter 49). Th e rate of hypertonic 
saline solution administration should be suffi  ciently 
slow as to not exacerbate circulatory fl uid overload. 
 B. Hypothermia 
 Large volumes of irrigating fl uids at room tempera-
ture can be a major source of heat loss in patients. 
Irrigating solutions should be warmed to body 
temperature prior to use to prevent hypothermia. 
Postoperative shivering associated with hypother-
mia may dislodge clots and promote postoperative 
bleeding, as well as add deleterious physiological 
stress to the patient with coexisting cardiopulmo-
nary disease. 
 C. Bladder Perforation 
 Th e incidence of  bladder perforation during TURP 
is less than 1%. Perforation may result from the 
resectoscope going through the bladder wall or from 
overdistention of the bladder with irrigation fl uid. 
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery
677
procedures, including fl exible ureteroscopy with 
stone extraction, stent placement, and intracorpo-
real lithotripsy (laser or electrohydraulic), along 
with  medical expulsive therapy (MET), have become 
fi rst-line therapy. Extracorporeal shock wave litho-
tripsy (ESWL) is also utilized, primarily for 4-mm to 
2-cm intrarenal stones, and percutaneous and lapa-
roscopic nephrolithotomy for larger or impacted 
stones. MET has become the treatment of choice 
among many clinicians for acute episodes of uroli-
thiasis: for stones up to 10 mm in diameter, admin-
istration of the α blockers tamsulosin (Flomax), 
doxazosin (Cardura), or terazosin (Hytrin) or the 
calcium channel blocker nifedipine (Procardia, 
Adalat) lessens the pain of acute urolithiasis and 
increases the rate of stone expulsion over a period of 
several days to several weeks. 
 During ESWL, repetitive high-energy shocks 
(sound waves) are generated and focused on the 
stone, causing it to fragment as tensile and shear 
forces develop inside the stone and cavitation occurs 
on its surface. Water or a conducting gel couples the 
generator to the patient. Because tissue has the same 
acoustic density as water, the waves travel through 
the body without damaging tissue. However, the 
change in acoustic impedance at the tissue–stone 
interface creates shear and tear forces on the stone. 
Subsequently, the stone is fragmented enough to 
allow its passage in small pieces down the urinary 
tract. Ureteral stents are oft en placed cystoscopi-
cally prior to the procedure. Tissue destruction can 
occur if the acoustic energy is inadvertently focused 
at air–tissue interfaces such as in the lung and intes-
tine. Th e inability to position the patient so that lung 
and intestine are away from the sound wave focus 
is a contraindication to the procedure. Other con-
traindications include urinary obstruction below 
the stone, untreated infection, a bleeding diathe-
sis, and pregnancy. Th e presence of a nearby aor-
tic aneurysm or an orthopedic prosthetic device is 
considered a relative contraindication. Ecchymosis, 
bruising, or blistering of the skin over the treatment 
site is not uncommon. Rarely, a large perinephric 
hematoma can develop and may be responsible for 
a postoperative decrease in hematocrit. 
 Electrohydraulic, electromagnetic, or piezo-
electric shock wave generators may be used for 
anesthesia and good operating conditions for TURP. 
 When compared with general anesthesia, 
regional anesthesia may reduce the incidence 
of postoperative venous thrombosis. It is also less 
likely to mask symptoms and signs of TURP syn-
drome or bladder perforation. Clinical studies have 
failed to show any diff erences in blood loss, postop-
erative cognitive function, and mortality between 
regional and general anesthesia. Th e possibility of 
vertebral metastasis must be considered in patients 
with carcinoma, particularly those with back pain, 
as metastatic disease involving the lumbar spine is a 
relative contraindication to spinal or epidural anes-
thesia. Acute hyponatremia from TURP syndrome 
may delay or prevent emergence from general 
anesthesia. 
 G. Monitoring 
 Evaluation of mental status in the awake or moder-
ately sedated patient is the best monitor for detec-
tion of early signs of TURP syndrome and bladder 
perforation. Tachycardia or decrease in arterial oxy-
gen saturation may be an early sign of fl uid over-
load. Perioperative ischemic electrocardiographic 
changes have been reported in up to 18% of patients. 
Temperature monitoring is standard of care for gen-
eral anesthesia, and it should also be used in cases 
of lengthy resections under spinal or epidural anes-
thesia to detect hypothermia. Blood loss is particu-
larly diffi  cult to assess during TURP because of the 
use of irrigating solutions, so it is necessary to rely 
on clinical signs of hypovolemia (see Chapter 51). 
Blood loss averages approximately 3–5 mL/min of 
resection (usually 200–300 mL total) but is rarely 
life-threatening. Transient, postoperative decreases 
in hematocrit may simply refl ect hemodilution 
from absorption of irrigation fl uid. Less than 2% of 
patients require intraoperative blood transfusion; 
factors associated with need for transfusion include 
procedure duration longer than 90 min and resec-
tion of more than 45 g of prostate tissue. 
 LITHOTRIPSY 
 Th e treatment of kidney stones has evolved from 
primarily open surgical procedures to less invasive 
or entirely noninvasive techniques. Cystoscopic 
7
678 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
Synchronization of the shock waves with the electro-
cardiogram (ECG) R wave decreases the incidence 
of arrhythmias during ESWL. Th e shock waves are 
usually timed to be 20 ms aft er the R wave to corre-
spond with the ventricular refractory period. Studies 
suggest that asynchronous delivery of shocks may be 
safe in patients without heart disease. Shock waves 
can damage the internal components of pacemaker 
and ICD devices. Th e manufacturer should be con-
tacted as to the best method for managing the device 
(eg, reprogramming or applying a magnet). 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 Anesthetic considerations for ureteroscopy, stone 
manipulation, and laser lithotripsy are similar to 
those for cystoscopic procedures. ESWL requires 
special considerations, particularly when older lith-
otriptors requiring the patient to be immersed in 
water are used. 
 A. Eﬀ ects of Immersion During ESWL 
 Immersion into a heated water bath (36–37°C) ini-
tially results in vasodilation that can transiently lead 
to hypotension. Arterial blood pressure, however, 
subsequently rises as venous blood is redistributed 
centrally due to the hydrostatic pressure of water on 
the legs and abdomen. Systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR) rises and cardiac output oft en decreases. 
Th e sudden increase in intravascular volume and 
SVR can precipitate congestive heart failure in 
patients with marginal cardiac reserve. Moreover, 
the increase in intrathoracic blood volume reduces 
functional residual capacity 30–60% and may pre-
dispose some patients to hypoxemia. 
 B. Choice of Anesthesia 
 Pain during lithotripsy is from dissipation of a small 
amount of energy as shock waves enter the body 
through the skin. Th e pain is therefore localized 
to the skin and is proportionate to the shock wave 
intensity. Older water bath lithotripsy units require 
1000–2400 relatively high-intensity shock waves, 
which most patients cannot tolerate without either 
regional or general anesthesia. In contrast, newer 
lithotripsy units that are coupled directly to the skin 
utilize 2000–3000 lower-intensity shock waves that 
usually require only light sedation. 
ESWL. With older electrohydraulic units, the 
patient is placed in a hydraulic chair and immersed 
in a heated water bath, which conducts the shock 
waves to the patient. Modern lithotriptors gener-
ate shock waves either electromagnetically or from 
piezoelectric crystals. Th e generator is enclosed 
in a water-fi lled casing and comes in contact with 
the patient via a conducting gel on a plastic mem-
brane ( Figure 31–2 ). Newer units allow both fl uo-
roscopic and ultrasound localization. In the case 
of electromagnetic machines, the vibration of a 
metallic plate in front of an electromagnet pro-
duces the shock waves. With piezoelectric models, 
the waves are the result of changes in the external 
dimensions of ceramic crystals when electric cur-
rent is applied. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias 
and those with a pacemaker or internal car-
diac defi brillator (ICD) may be at risk for developing 
arrhythmias induced by shock waves during ESWL. 
8
 FIGURE 312  Schematic representation of a newer 
tubless lithotripsy unit. 
Stone
Cross section
of patient
Image
intensifier
Kidney
Water-filled
casing
X-ray tube
Table
Shock wave
source
(generator)
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery 
679 
muscle relaxant ensures patient immobility and con-
trol of diaphragmatic movement. 
 E. Monitored Anesthesia Care 
 Light intravenous sedation with midazolam and 
fentanyl is usually adequate for modern low-energy 
lithotripsy. Deeper sedation with low-dose propofol 
infusions with or without midazolam and opioid 
supplementation may also be used. 
 F. Monitoring 
 Standard anesthesia monitoring must be used for 
conscious or deep sedation, or for general anesthesia. 
Even with R-wave synchronized shocks, supraven-
tricular arrhythmias can occur. With immersion 
lithotripsy, ECG pads should be attached securely 
with waterproof dressing. Changes in functional 
residual capacity with immersion mandate monitor-
ing of oxygen saturation, particularly in patients at 
risk for developing hypoxemia. Th e temperature of 
the bath and the patient should be monitored to pre-
vent hypothermia or hyperthermia. 
 G. Fluid Management 
 Intravenous fl uid therapy is typically generous. 
Following an initial intravenous fl uid bolus, an addi-
tional 1000–2000 mL of lactated Ringer’s injection 
is oft en given with a small dose of furosemide to 
maintain brisk urinary fl ow and fl ush stone debris 
and blood clots. Patients with poor cardiac reserve 
require more conservative fl uid therapy. 
 NONCANCER SURGERY OF 
THE UPPER URETER & KIDNEY 
 Laparoscopic urological procedures, including par-
tial and total nephrectomy, live donor nephrectomy, 
nephrolithectomy, and pyeloplasty are increasingly 
utilized because of advantages that include relatively 
rapid recovery, shorter hospital stay, and less pain. 
Both transperitoneal and retroperitoneal approaches 
have been developed. A hand-assisted technique 
employs an additional larger incision that allows the 
surgeon to insert one hand for tactile sensation and 
facilitation of dissection. Anesthetic management is 
similar to that for any laparoscopic procedure. 
 Open procedures for kidney stones in the upper 
ureter and renal pelvis, and nephrectomies for 
 C. Regional Anesthesia 
 Continuous epidural anesthesia is commonly 
employed when ESWL utilizes older water bath 
lithotriptors. Regional anesthesia with sedation 
greatly facilitates positioning and monitoring in 
this situation, and supplemental oxygen by face 
mask or nasal cannula is also useful in avoiding 
hypoxemia. A T6 sensory level ensures adequate 
anesthesia, as renal innervation is derived from T10 
to L2. Supplementation of the block with epidural 
fentanyl (50–100 mcg) is oft en useful. When using 
the loss of resistance technique for placement of the 
epidural catheter, saline should be used instead of 
air during epidural catheter insertion; as air in the 
epidural space can dissipate shock waves and may 
promote injury to neural tissue. Foam tape should 
not be used to secure the epidural catheter as this 
type of tape has been shown to dissipate the energy 
of the shock waves when it is in their path. Spinal 
anesthesia can also be used satisfactorily but off ers 
less control over the sensory level and an uncertain 
duration of surgery; for this reason, epidural anes-
thesia is usually preferred. 
 A major disadvantage of regional anesthesia or 
sedation is the inability to control diaphragmatic 
movement. Excessive diaphragmatic excursion 
during spontaneous ventilation can move the stone 
in and out of the wave focus and may prolong the 
procedure. Th is problem can be partially solved by 
asking the patient to breathe in a more rapid but 
shallow respiratory pattern. Bradycardia due to 
high sympathetic blockade also prolongs the pro-
cedure when shock waves are coupled to the ECG, 
and small doses of glycopyrrolate are oft en admin-
istered in this situation to accelerate the ESWL 
procedure. 
 D. General Anesthesia 
 General endotracheal anesthesia allows control of 
diaphragmatic excursion during lithotripsy using 
older water bath lithotriptors. Th e procedure is 
complicated by the inherent risks associated with 
placing a supine anesthetized patient in a chair, ele-
vating and then lowering the chair into a water bath 
to shoulder depth, and then reversing the sequence 
at the end. A light general anesthetic technique in 
conjunction with a muscle relaxant is preferable. Th e 
680 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
pneumothorax may be subclinical intraoperatively 
but can be diagnosed postoperatively with a chest 
radiograph. 
 SURGERY FOR UROLOGICAL 
MALIGNANCIES 
 Demographic changes resulting in an increasingly 
elderly population, together with improved sur-
vival rates for patients with urological cancer fol-
lowing radical surgical resections, have resulted in 
an increase in the number of procedures performed 
for prostatic, bladder, testicular, and renal cancer. 
Th e desire for accelerated, less-complicated recovery 
with smaller, less painful incisions has prompted the 
development of laparoscopic pelvic and abdominal 
operations, including radical prostatectomy, cystec-
tomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, nephrectomy, 
and adrenalectomy. Robotic-assisted technology has 
increasingly been applied to these procedures over 
the past decade. 
 Many urological procedures are carried out 
with the patient in a hyperextended supine posi-
tion to facilitate exposure of the pelvis during pelvic 
lymph node dissection, retropubic prostatectomy, or 
cystectomy ( Figure 31–3 ). Th e patient is positioned 
supine with the iliac crest over the break in the 
operating table, and the table is extended such that 
the distance between the iliac crest and the costal 
margin increases maximally. Care must be taken to 
avoid putting excessive strain on the patient’s back. 
Th e operating room table is also tilted head-down 
to make the operative fi eld horizontal. In the frog-
leg position, a variation of the hyperextended supine 
position, the knees are also fl exed and the hips are 
abducted and externally rotated. 
nonmalignant disease, are oft en carried out in the 
“kidney rest position,” more accurately described 
as the lateral fl exed position. With the patient in a 
full lateral position, the dependent leg is fl exed and 
the other leg is extended. An axillary roll is placed 
beneath the dependent upper chest to minimize 
the risk of brachial plexus injury. Th e operating 
table is then extended to achieve maximal separa-
tion between the iliac crest and the costal margin on 
the operative side, and the kidney rest (a bar in the 
groove where the table bends) is elevated to raise the 
nondependent iliac crest higher and increase surgi-
cal exposure. 
 Th e lateral fl exed position is associated with 
adverse respiratory and circulatory eff ects. Functional 
residual capacity is reduced in the dependent lung 
but may increase in the nondependent lung. In the 
anesthetized patient receiving controlled ventilation, 
ventilation/perfusion mismatching occurs because 
the dependent lung receives greater blood fl ow than 
the nondependent lung, whereas the nondependent 
lung receives greater ventilation, predisposing the 
patient to atelectasis in the dependent lung and to 
shunt-induced hypoxemia. Th e arterial to end-tidal 
gradient for carbon dioxide progressively increases 
during general anesthesia in this position, indicating 
that dead space ventilation also increases in the non-
dependent lung. Moreover, elevation of the kidney 
rest can signifi cantly decrease venous return to the 
heart in some patients by compressing the inferior 
vena cava. Venous pooling in the legs potentiates 
anesthesia-induced vasodilation. 
 Because of the potential for large blood loss 
and limited access to major vascular structures in 
the lateral fl exed position, initial placement of at 
least one large-bore intravenous catheter is advis-
able. Arterial catheters are oft en utilized because 
of the need to closely monitor blood pressure and 
to frequently withdraw blood for laboratory analy-
sis. Endotracheal tube placement may be altered 
during postinduction positioning of the patient for 
operation, and thus proper endotracheal tube place-
ment must again be verifi ed following fi nal patient 
positioning prior to skin preparation and surgical 
draping. Intraoperative pneumothorax may occur 
as a result of surgical entry into the pleural space. 
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion. Th e 
 FIGURE 313  The hyperextended position. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Skinner DG, Lieskovsky G:  Diagnosis and 
Management of Genitourinary Cancer . W.B. Saunders, 1988.) 
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery 
681 
Direct arterial blood pressure monitoring may be 
utilized. Routine placement of a central venous cath-
eter for central venous pressure monitoring and as 
an additional route for administration of fl uid and 
blood products has also been advocated, although 
many large cancer treatment centers routinely utilize 
just two large-bore peripheral intravenous catheters. 
Operative blood loss varies considerably from center 
to center, with mean values less than 500 mL com-
mon. Factors infl uencing blood loss include posi-
tioning, pelvic anatomy, prostate size, duration of 
operation, and the skill of the surgeon. Blood loss 
and operative morbidity and mortality are similar 
in patients receiving general anesthesia and those 
receiving regional anesthesia. Neuraxial anesthesia 
requires a T6 sensory level, but these patients typi-
cally do not tolerate regional anesthesia without deep 
sedation because of the hyperextended supine posi-
tion. Th e combination of a prolonged Trendelenburg 
position together with administration of large 
amounts of intravenous fl uids may rarely produce 
edema of the upper airway. Th e risk of hypothermia 
should be minimized by utilizing a forced-air warm-
ing blanket and an intravenous fl uid warmer. 
 Postoperative complications include hemor-
rhage; deep venous thrombosis; pulmonary embolus; 
injuries to the obturator nerve, ureter, and rectum; 
and urinary incontinence and impotence. Extensive 
surgical dissection around the pelvic veins increases 
the risk of thromboembolic complications. Epidural 
analgesia is used in some centers following retropu-
bic prostatectomy and may improve analgesia and 
accelerate recovery. Although epidural anesthesia 
may reduce the incidence of postoperative deep 
venous thrombosis following open prostatectomy, 
this benefi cial eff ect may be negated by the routine 
use of warfarin or fractionated heparin prophylaxis 
postoperatively. Th e risk of epidural hematoma in 
the setting of anticoagulation therapy, particularly 
with fractionated heparin preparations, must be 
kept in mind when postoperative epidural analgesia 
is contemplated. Ketorolac can be used as an analge-
sic adjuvant and has been reported to decrease opi-
oid requirements, improve analgesia, and promote 
earlier return of bowel function without increasing 
transfusion requirements. A multimodal approach 
to postoperative analgesia is oft en optimal. 
 1. Prostate Cancer 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Adenocarcinoma of the prostate is the most com-
mon nonskin cancer in men and is second only to 
lung cancer as the most common cause of cancer 
deaths in men older than 55 years. Approximately 
one in six men will be diagnosed with prostate can-
cer in their lifetime. Because of the tumor’s wide 
spectrum of clinical behavior, management varies 
widely from surveillance to aggressive surgical ther-
apy. Important variables include the grade and stage 
of the malignancy, the patient’s age, and the pres-
ence of medical comorbidity. Transrectal ultrasound 
is used to evaluate tumor size and the presence or 
absence of extracapsular extension. Clinical stag-
ing is also based on the Gleason score of the biopsy, 
computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI), and bone scan. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 Patients with prostate cancer may present to the 
operating room for laparoscopic or robotic pros-
tatectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection, 
radical retropubic prostatectomy with lymph node 
dissection, salvage prostatectomy (following failure 
of radiation therapy), or bilateral orchiectomy for 
hormonal therapy. 
 A. Radical Retropubic Prostatectomy 
 Radical retropubic prostatectomy is usually per-
formed with pelvic lymph node dissection through a 
lower midline abdominal incision. It may be curative 
for localized prostate cancer or occasionally used as 
a salvage procedure aft er failure of radiation. Th e 
prostate is removed en bloc with the seminal vesi-
cles, ejaculatory ducts, and part of the bladder neck. 
A “nerve-sparing” technique may be used to help 
preserve sexual function. Following prostatectomy, 
the remaining bladder neck is anastomosed directly 
to the urethra over an indwelling urinary catheter. 
Th e surgeon may ask for intravenous administration 
of indigo carmine for visualization of the ureters, 
and this dye can be associated with hypertension or 
hypotension. 
 Radical retropubic prostatectomy may be 
accompanied by signifi cant operative blood loss. 
682 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 C. Bilateral Orchiectomy 
 Bilateral orchiectomy is usually performed for 
hormonal control of metastatic adenocarcinoma 
of the prostate. Th e procedure is relatively short 
(20–45 min) and is performed through a single 
midline scrotal incision. Although bilateral orchiec-
tomy can be performed under local anesthesia, most 
patients and many clinicians prefer general anesthe-
sia (usually administered via a laryngeal mask air-
way) or spinal anesthesia. 
 2. Bladder Cancer 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Bladder cancer occurs at an average patient age of 
65 years with a 3:1 male to female ratio. Transitional 
cell carcinoma of the bladder is second to prostate 
adenocarcinoma as the most common malignancy 
of the male genitourinary tract. Th e association of 
cigarette smoking with bladder carcinoma results 
in coexistent coronary artery and chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease in many of these patients. 
Underlying renal impairment, when present, may 
be age related or secondary to urinary tract obstruc-
tion. Staging includes cystoscopy and CT or MRI 
scans. Intravesical chemotherapy is used for super-
fi cial tumors, and transurethral resection of blad-
der tumors (TURBT) is carried out via cystoscopy 
for low-grade, noninvasive bladder tumors. Some 
patients may receive preoperative radiation to 
shrink the tumor before radical cystectomy. Urinary 
diversion is usually performed immediately follow-
ing the cystectomy. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 A. Transurethral Bladder Resection 
 TURBT diff ers from TURP in that the surgical 
resection is not necessarily carried out in the mid-
line. Bladder tumors may occur at various sites 
within the bladder. Unfortunately, laterally located 
tumors may lie in proximity to the obturator nerve. 
In such cases, if spinal anesthesia or general anes-
thesia without paralysis is administered, every use of 
the cautery resectoscope results in stimulation of the 
obturator nerve and adduction of the legs. Urologists 
rarely derive amusement from having their ear 
 B. Robot-Assisted Radical Prostatectomy 
 Laparoscopic radical prostatectomy with pelvic 
lymph node dissection diff ers from most other lap-
aroscopic procedures by the frequent use of steep 
(>30°) Trendelenburg position for surgical expo-
sure. Patient positioning, duration of procedure, 
need for abdominal distention, and desirability of 
increasing minute ventilation necessitate the use 
of general endotracheal anesthesia. Nitrous oxide 
is usually avoided to prevent bowel distention. 
Most laparoscopic prostatectomies are performed 
with robotic assistance, and the majority of radi-
cal prostatectomies in the United States are now 
performed via robot-assisted laparoscopy. When 
compared with open retropubic prostatectomy, 
laparoscopic robot-assisted prostatectomy is asso-
ciated with a longer procedure time but may have 
a lower rate of complications. It is also associated 
with less blood loss and fewer blood transfusions, 
lower postoperative pain scores and lower opioid 
requirements, less postoperative nausea and vomit-
ing, and shorter hospital length of stay. Th e steep 
Trendelenburg position can lead to head and neck 
tissue edema and to increased intraocular pres-
sure. Complications reported to be associated with 
such positioning include upper airway edema and 
postextubation respiratory distress, postoperative 
visual loss involving ischemic optic neuropathy 
or retinal detachment, and brachial plexus injury. 
Th e surgeon should be routinely advised as to the 
length of time during which steep Trendelenburg 
positioning is maintained, and some centers have 
abandoned the routine use of this positioning 
entirely. 
 Most clinicians use a single large-bore intra-
venous catheter, and an arterial catheter may be 
used if clinically indicated. Th e risk of hypother-
mia should be minimized by utilizing a forced-air 
warming blanket and an intravenous fl uid warmer. 
Adequate postoperative analgesia is provided ini-
tially by intravenous opioids with ketorolac and/
or intravenous acetaminophen, and subsequently 
by oral analgesic preparations. Postoperative epi-
dural analgesia is not warranted because of rela-
tively low postoperative pain scores and because 
patients may be discharged less than 36 h aft er 
surgery. 
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery 
683 
bowel segment is either left  in situ, such as in ure-
terosigmoidostomy, or divided with its mesenteric 
blood supply intact and attached to a cutaneous 
stoma or urethra. Moreover, the isolated bowel can 
either function as a conduit (eg, ileal conduit) or be 
reconstructed to form a continent reservoir (neo-
bladder). Conduits may be formed from ileum, 
jejunum, or colon. 
 Major anesthetic goals for urinary diver-
sion procedures include keeping the patient well 
hydrated and maintaining a brisk urinary output 
once the ureters are opened. Neuraxial anesthesia 
oft en produces unopposed parasympathetic activity 
due to sympathetic blockade, which results in a con-
tracted, hyperactive bowel that makes construction 
of a continent ileal reservoir technically diffi  cult. 
Papaverine (100–150 mg as a slow intravenous infu-
sion over 2–3 h), a large dose of an anticholinergic 
(glycopyrrolate, 1 mg), or glucagon (1 mg) may alle-
viate this problem. 
 Prolonged contact of urine with bowel mucosa 
(slow urine fl ow) may produce signifi cant meta-
bolic disturbances. Hyponatremia, hypochloremia, 
hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis can occur 
following construction of jejunal conduits. In con-
trast, colonic and ileal conduits may be associated 
with hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Th e use of 
temporary ureteral stents and maintenance of high 
urinary fl ow help alleviate this problem in the early 
postoperative period. 
 3. Testicular Cancer 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Testicular tumors are classifi ed as either semino-
mas or nonseminomas. Th e initial treatment for 
all tumors is radical (inguinal) orchiectomy. Sub-
sequent management depends on tumor histology. 
Nonseminomas include embryonal teratoma, cho-
riocarcinoma, and mixed tumors. Retroperitoneal 
lymph node dissection (RPLND) plays a major role 
in the staging and management of patients with 
nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Low-stage dis-
ease is managed with RPLND or in some instances 
by surveillance. High-stage disease is usually treated 
with chemotherapy followed by RPLND. 
struck by the patient’s knee; thus, in contrast to 
TURP, TURBT procedures are more commonly per-
formed with general anesthesia and neuromuscular 
blockade. TURBT, unlike TURP, is rarely associated 
with absorption of signifi cant amounts of irrigating 
solution. 
 B. Radical Cystectomy 
 Radical cystectomy is a major operation that is oft en 
associated with signifi cant blood loss. It is usually 
performed through a midline incision but is increas-
ingly performed as a robot-assisted laparoscopic 
procedure. All anterior pelvic organs including the 
bladder, prostate, and seminal vesicles are removed 
in males; the bladder, uterus, cervix, ovaries, and 
part of the anterior vaginal vault may be removed 
in females. Pelvic node dissection and urinary diver-
sion are also carried out. 
 Th ese procedures typically require 4–6 h and 
frequently are associated with blood transfusion. 
General endotracheal anesthesia with a muscle 
relaxant provides optimal operating conditions. 
Controlled hypotensive anesthesia may reduce intra-
operative blood loss and transfusion requirements. 
Many surgeons also believe controlled hypotension 
improves surgical visualization. Supplementation of 
general anesthesia with spinal or continuous epi-
dural anesthesia can facilitate the induced hypoten-
sion, decrease general anesthetic requirements, and 
provide highly eff ective postoperative analgesia. 
 Close monitoring of blood pressure, intravas-
cular volume, and blood loss is always appropriate. 
Direct intraarterial pressure monitoring is indicated 
in most patients, and central venous catheters are 
oft en placed. Urinary output should be monitored 
and correlated with the progress of the operation, 
as the urinary path is interrupted at an early point 
during most of these procedures. As with all lengthy 
operative procedures, the risk of hypothermia 
should be minimized by utilizing a forced-air warm-
ing blanket and an intravenous fl uid warmer. 
 C. Urinary Diversion 
 Urinary diversion is usually performed immedi-
ately following radical cystectomy. Many proce-
dures are currently used, but all entail implanting 
the ureters into a segment of bowel. Th e selected 
684 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
administration may be contributory. Anesthetic 
management should include use of the lowest 
inspired concentration of oxygen compatible with 
oxygen saturation above 90%. Positive end-expira-
tory pressure (5–10 cm H 2 O) may be helpful in opti-
mizing oxygenation. 
 Evaporative and redistributive fl uid losses 
(“third spacing”) with open RPLND can be consid-
erable as a result of the large wound and the exten-
sive surgical dissection. Fluid replacement should be 
suffi  cient to maintain urinary output greater than 
0.5 mL/kg/h; the combined use of both colloid and 
crystalloid solutions in a ratio of 1:2 or 1:3 may be 
more eff ective in preserving urinary output than 
crystalloid alone. Retraction of the inferior vena 
cava during surgery oft en results in transient arterial 
hypotension. 
 Th e postoperative pain associated with open 
RPLND incisions is severe, and aggressive postop-
erative analgesia is helpful. Continuous epidural 
analgesia, extended-release epidural morphine, or 
intrathecal morphine (or hydromorphone) should 
be considered. Because ligation of intercostal arter-
ies during left -sided dissections has rarely resulted 
in paraplegia, it may be prudent to document nor-
mal motor function postoperatively prior to insti-
tution of epidural analgesia. Th e arteria radicularis 
magna (artery of Adamkiewicz), which is supplied 
by these vessels and is responsible for most of the 
arterial blood to the lower half of the spinal cord, 
arises on the left  side in most individuals. It should 
be noted that unilateral sympathectomy following 
modifi ed RPLND usually results in the ipsilateral leg 
being warmer than the contralateral one. Patients 
who have undergone RPLND frequently complain 
of severe bladder spasm pain in the postanesthesia 
care unit and postoperatively. 
 4. Renal Cancer 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Renal cell carcinoma is frequently associated with 
paraneoplastic syndromes, such as erythrocytosis, 
hypercalcemia, hypertension, and nonmetastatic 
hepatic dysfunction. Th e classic triad of hematuria, 
fl ank pain, and palpable mass occurs in only 10% of 
 In contrast to nonseminomas, seminomas are 
very radiosensitive tumors that are primarily treated 
with retroperitoneal radiotherapy. Chemotherapy 
is used for patients who relapse aft er radiation. 
Patients with large bulky seminomas or those with 
increased α-fetoprotein levels (usually associated 
with nonseminomas) are treated primarily with che-
motherapy. Chemotherapeutic agents commonly 
include cisplatin, vincristine, vinblastine, cyclo-
phosphamide, dactinomycin, bleomycin, and etopo-
side. RPLND is usually undertaken for patients with 
residual tumor aft er chemotherapy. 
 Patients undergoing RPLND for testicular can-
cer are typically young (15–35 years old) but are 
at increased risk for morbidity from the residual 
eff ects of preoperative chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy. In addition to bone marrow suppression, 
specifi c organ toxicity may be encountered such as 
renal impairment following cisplatin, pulmonary 
fi brosis following bleomycin, and neuropathy fol-
lowing vincristine. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 A. Radical Orchiectomy 
 Inguinal orchiectomy can be carried out with 
regional or general anesthesia. Anesthetic manage-
ment may be complicated by refl ex bradycardia 
from traction on the spermatic cord. 
 B. Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection 
 Th e retroperitoneum is usually accessed through a 
midline incision, but regardless of the surgical 
approach, all lymphatic tissue between the ureters 
from the renal vessels to the iliac bifurcation is 
removed. With the standard RPLND, all sympa-
thetic fi bers are disrupted, resulting in loss of nor-
mal ejaculation and infertility. A modifi ed technique 
that may help preserve fertility limits the dissection 
below the inferior mesenteric artery to include lym-
phatic tissue only on the ipsilateral side of the tes-
ticular tumor. 
 Patients receiving bleomycin preoperatively 
may be particularly at risk for oxygen toxicity 
and fl uid overload, and for developing pulmonary 
insuffi  ciency or acute respiratory distress syn-
drome postoperatively. Excessive intravenous fl uid 
9
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery 
685 
endotracheal anesthesia is used, oft en in combina-
tion with epidural anesthesia. 
 Th e operation has the potential for extensive 
blood loss because these tumors are very vascular 
and oft en very large. Direct arterial pressure moni-
toring should be used. Central venous cannulation 
is used for pressure monitoring and rapid transfu-
sion. Transesophageal echocardiography should be 
strongly considered for all patients with extensive 
vena cava thrombus. Retraction of the inferior vena 
cava may be associated with transient arterial hypo-
tension. Only brief periods of controlled hypoten-
sion should be used to reduce blood loss because of 
its potential to impair function in the contralateral 
kidney. Refl ex renal vasoconstriction in the unaf-
fected kidney can also result in postoperative renal 
dysfunction. Fluid replacement should be suffi  cient 
to maintain urinary output greater than 0.5 mL/kg/h. 
 If combined general–epidural anesthesia is 
employed, administration of epidural local anes-
thetic may be postponed until the risk of signifi cant 
operative blood loss has passed as sympathectomy 
from epidural local anesthetic administration will 
potentiate the hypotensive eff ect of hemorrhage. 
As with all lengthy operative procedures, the risk 
of hypothermia should be minimized by utilizing 
a forced-air warming blanket and intravenous fl uid 
warming. Th e postoperative course of open nephrec-
tomy is extremely painful, and epidural analgesia is 
very useful in minimizing discomfort and accelerat-
ing acute postoperative convalescence. 
 B. Radical Nephrectomy with 
Excision of Tumor Thrombus 
 Some medical centers routinely perform compli-
cated resections of renal cancers with tumor throm-
bus extending into the inferior vena cava. Because 
of the degree of physiological trespass and potential 
for major blood loss associated with this operation, 
the anesthetic management (as for nephrectomy) 
can be challenging. A thoracoabdominal approach 
allows the use of cardiopulmonary bypass when 
necessary. 
 Th e thrombus may extend only into the inferior 
vena cava but below the liver (level I), up to the liver 
but below the diaphragm (level II), or above the dia-
phragm into the right atrium (level III). Surgery can 
patients, and the tumor oft en causes symptoms only 
aft er it has grown considerably in size. In fact, renal 
cell carcinoma is commonly discovered as an inci-
dental fi nding in the course of working up a suppos-
edly unrelated medical problem, such as in an MRI 
performed for evaluation of low back pain. Th is 
cancer has a peak incidence between the fi ft h and 
sixth decades of life, with 2:1 male to female ratio. 
Curative surgical treatment is undertaken for car-
cinomas confi ned to the kidney, but palliative sur-
gical treatment may involve more extensive tumor 
debulking. In approximately 5–10% of patients, 
the tumor extends into the renal vein and inferior 
vena cava as a thrombus. Staging includes CT or 
MRI scans and an arteriogram. Preoperative arte-
rial embolization may shrink the tumor mass and 
reduce operative blood loss. 
 Preoperative evaluation of the patient with 
renal carcinoma should focus on defi ning the degree 
of renal impairment, searching for the presence of 
coexisting systemic diseases, and planning the anes-
thetic management needs dictated by the scope of 
anticipated surgical resection. Preexisting renal 
impairment depends upon tumor size in the aff ected 
kidney as well as underlying systemic disorders such 
as hypertension and diabetes. Smoking is a well-
established risk factor for renal carcinoma, and these 
patients have a high incidence of underlying coro-
nary artery and chronic obstructive lung disease. 
Although some patients present with erythrocytosis, 
the majority are anemic. Preoperative blood trans-
fusion to increase hemoglobin concentration above 
10 g/dL should be considered when a large tumor 
mass is to be resected. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 A. Radical Nephrectomy 
 Th e operation may be carried out via an anterior 
subcostal, fl ank, or midline incision. Hand-assisted 
laparoscopic technique is oft en utilized for par-
tial or total nephrectomy associated with a smaller 
tumor mass. Many centers prefer a thoracoabdomi-
nal approach for large tumors, particularly when 
a tumor thrombus is present. Th e kidney, adrenal 
gland, and perinephric fat are removed en bloc 
with the surrounding (Gerota’s) fascia. General 
686 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 RENAL TRANSPLANTATION 
 Th e success of renal transplantation, which is largely 
due to advances in immunosuppressive therapy, 
has greatly improved the quality of life for patients 
with end-stage renal disease. With modern immu-
nosuppressive regimens, cadaveric transplants have 
achieved almost the same 80–90% 3-year graft  sur-
vival rate as living-related donor graft s. In addition, 
restrictions on candidates for renal transplantation 
have gradually decreased. Infection and cancer are 
the only remaining absolute contraindications. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Current organ preservation techniques allow ample 
time (24–48 h) for preoperative dialysis of cadaveric 
recipients. Living-related transplants are performed 
electively with simultaneous donor and recipient 
operations.  Th e recipient’s serum potassium 
concentration should be below 5.5 mEq/L, and 
existing coagulopathies should be corrected. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 Renal transplantation is carried out by placing the 
donor kidney retroperitoneally in the iliac fossa and 
anastomosing the renal vessels to the iliac vessels 
and the ureter to the bladder. Heparin is adminis-
tered prior to temporary clamping of the iliac vessels. 
Intravenous mannitol administered to the recipient 
helps establish an osmotic diuresis following reper-
fusion. Immunosuppression is initiated on the day 
of surgery with combination medications which 
may include corticosteroids, cyclosporine or tacro-
limus, azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil, anti-
thymocyte globulin, monoclonal antibodies directed 
against specifi c subsets of T lymphocytes (OKT3), 
and interleukin-2 receptor antibodies (daclizumab 
or basiliximab). Th e anesthetist should discuss in 
advance with the surgery team the timing and dos-
age of any immunosuppressive agents which will 
need to be given perioperatively. Recipient nephrec-
tomy (with a failed transplant) is performed for 
intractable hypertension or chronic infection. 
 A. Choice of Anesthesia 
 Most renal transplants are performed with general 
anesthesia, although spinal and epidural anesthesia 
10
signifi cantly prolong and improve quality of life in 
selected patients, and in some patients, metastases 
may regress aft er resection of the primary tumor. A 
preoperative ventilation-perfusion scan may detect 
preexisting pulmonary embolization of the throm-
bus. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiog-
raphy (TEE) is helpful in determining whether the 
uppermost margin of the tumor thrombus extends 
to the diaphragm, above the diaphragm, into the 
right atrium, or to the tricuspid valve. TEE can also 
be used to confi rm the absence of tumor in the vena 
cava, right atrium, and right ventricle aft er success-
ful surgery. 
 Th e presence of a large thrombus (level II or 
III) complicates anesthetic management. Invasive 
pressure monitoring and multiple large-bore intra-
venous catheters are necessary because transfusion 
requirements are commonly 10–15 units of packed 
red blood cells. Transfusion of platelets, fresh frozen 
plasma, and cryoprecipitate may also be required. 
Problems associated with massive blood transfu-
sion should be anticipated (see Chapter 51). Central 
venous catheterization should be performed cau-
tiously to prevent dislodgement and embolization 
of tumor thrombus. A high central venous pressure 
is typical in the setting of signifi cant caval throm-
bus and refl ects the degree of venous obstruction. 
Pulmonary artery catheters provide little informa-
tion that cannot be obtained from a central line or 
TEE. Intraoperative TEE is preferable to a pulmo-
nary catheter in every respect. 
 Complete obstruction of the inferior vena cava 
markedly increases operative blood loss because of 
dilated venous collaterals from the lower body that 
traverse the abdominal wall, retroperitoneum, and 
epidural space. Patients are also at signifi cant risk 
for potentially catastrophic intraoperative pulmo-
nary embolization of the tumor. Tumor emboliza-
tion may be heralded by sudden supraventricular 
arrhythmias, arterial desaturation, and profound 
systemic hypotension. TEE is invaluable in this 
situation. Cardiopulmonary bypass may be used 
when the tumor occupies more than 40% of the 
right atrium and cannot be pulled back into the 
cava. Hypothermic circulatory arrest has been used 
in some centers. Heparinization and hypothermia 
greatly increase surgical blood loss. 
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery 
687 
is extubated but still unresponsive, and vital 
signs are stable. Twenty minutes later, he is 
noted to be awake but restless. He begins to 
shiver intensely, his blood pressure decreases 
to 80/35 mm Hg, and his respirations increase 
to 40 breaths/min. The bedside monitor shows a 
sinus tachycardia of 140 beats/min and an oxy-
gen saturation of 92% . 
 What is the diﬀ erential diagnosis? 
 The diﬀ erential diagnosis of hypotension fol-
lowing TURP should always include (1) hemor-
rhage, (2) TURP syndrome, (3) bladder perforation, 
(4) myocardial infarction or ischemia, (5) septice-
mia, and (6) disseminated intravascular coagula-
tion (DIC) . 
 Other possibilities (see Chapter 56) are less 
likely in this setting but should always be consid-
ered, particularly when the patient fails to respond 
to appropriate measures (see below) . 
 Based on the history, what is the most likely 
diagnosis? 
 A diagnosis cannot be made with reasonable 
certainty at this point, and the patient requires fur-
ther evaluation. Nonetheless, the hypotension and 
shivering must be treated rapidly because of the 
history of coronary artery disease. The hypoten-
sion seriously compromises coronary perfusion, 
and the shivering markedly increases myocardial 
oxygen demand (see Chapter 21) . 
 What diagnostic aids would be helpful? 
 A quick examination of the patient is extremely 
useful in narrowing down the possibilities. 
Hemorrhage from the prostate should be appar-
ent from eﬄ  uent of the continuous bladder irriga-
tion system placed after the procedure. Relatively 
little blood in the urine makes it look pink or red; 
brisk hemorrhage is often apparent as grossly 
bloody drainage. Occasionally, the drainage may 
be scant because of clots blocking the drainage 
catheter; irrigation of the catheter is indicated in 
such cases . 
 Clinical signs of peripheral perfusion are 
invaluable. Hypovolemic patients have decreased 
are also utilized. All general anesthetic agents have 
been employed without any apparent detrimen-
tal eff ect on graft  function. Cisatracurium and 
rocuronium may be the muscle relaxants of choice, 
as they are not dependent upon renal excretion for 
elimination. Vecuronium may be used with only 
modest prolongation of its eff ects. 
 B. Monitoring 
 Central venous cannulation may be useful for 
ensuring adequate hydration while avoiding fl uid 
overload, particularly in patients with impaired 
cardiac status. Central lines are also useful portals 
for the various infusions that these patients require 
in the fi rst few days aft er transplant. Normal saline 
is commonly used. A urinary catheter is placed 
preoperatively, and a brisk urine fl ow following the 
arterial anastomosis generally indicates good graft  
function. If the graft  ischemic time was prolonged, 
an oliguric phase may precede the diuretic phase, 
in which case fl uid therapy must be appropriately 
adjusted. Administration of furosemide or addi-
tional mannitol may be indicated in such cases. 
Hyperkalemia has been reported aft er release of 
the vascular clamp following completion of the 
arterial anastomosis, particularly in pediatric and 
other small patients, and release of potassium con-
tained in the preservative solution has been impli-
cated as the cause of this phenomenon. Donor 
kidney washout of the preservative solution with 
ice-cold lactated Ringer’s solution just prior to the 
vascular anastomosis may help avoid this problem. 
Serum electrolyte concentrations should be moni-
tored closely aft er completion of the anastomosis. 
Hyperkalemia may be suspected from peaking of 
the T wave on the ECG. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Hypotension in the Recovery Room 
 A 69-year-old man with a history of an inferior 
myocardial infarction was admitted to the recov-
ery room following TURP under general anesthe-
sia. The procedure took 90 min and was reported 
to be uncomplicated. On admission, the patient 
688 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
hypoventilation or respiratory distress is present. 
Frequent blood pressure measurements should 
be obtained. If signs of ﬂ uid overload are absent, 
a diagnostic ﬂ uid challenge with 300–500 mL of 
crystalloid or 250 mL of colloid is helpful. A favor-
able response, as indicated by an increase in blood 
pressure and a decrease in heart rate, is sugges-
tive of hypovolemia and may indicate the need for 
additional ﬂ uid boluses. Obvious bleeding in the 
setting of anemia and hypotension necessitates 
blood transfusion. The absence of a quick response 
to intravenous ﬂ uid volume challenge should 
prompt further evaluation. Administration of an 
inotrope, such as dopamine, is appropriate should 
ventricular dysfunction be detected by echocar-
diography. Direct intraarterial pressure measure-
ment is invaluable in this setting . 
 If signs of ﬂ uid overload are present, intra-
venous furosemide in addition to an inotrope is 
indicated . 
 The patient’s axillary temperature is 35.5°C. 
Does the absence of obvious fever exclude 
sepsis? 
 No. Anesthesia is commonly associated with 
altered temperature regulation. Moreover, cor-
relation between axillary and core temperatures 
is quite variable (see Chapter 52). A high index of 
suspicion is therefore required to diagnose sepsis. 
Leukocytosis is common following surgery and is 
not a reliable indicator of sepsis in this setting . 
 The mechanism of shivering in patients 
recovering from anesthesia is poorly understood. 
Although shivering is common in patients who 
become hypothermic during surgery (and pre-
sumably functions to raise body temperature 
back to normal), its relation to body temperature 
is inconsistent. Anesthetics probably alter the nor-
mal behavior of hypothalamic thermoregulatory 
centers in the brain. In contrast, infectious agents, 
circulating toxins, or immune reactions cause 
the release of cytokines (interleukin-1 and tumor 
necrosis factor) that stimulate the hypothalamus to 
synthesize prostaglandin (PG) E 2 . The latter, in turn, 
activates neurons responsible for heat production, 
resulting in intense shivering . 
peripheral pulses, and their extremities are usu-
ally cool and may be cyanotic. Poor perfusion is 
consistent with hemorrhage, bladder perforation, 
DIC, and severe myocardial ischemia or infarc-
tion. A full, bounding peripheral pulse with warm 
extremities is suggestive of, but not always pres-
ent in, septicemia. Signs of ﬂ uid overload should 
be searched for, such as jugular venous disten-
tion, pulmonary crackles, and an S 3 gallop. Fluid 
overload is more consistent with TURP syndrome, 
but may also be seen in myocardial infarction or 
ischemia . 
 The abdomen should be examined for signs of 
perforation. A rigid and tender or distended abdo-
men is very suggestive of perforation and should 
prompt immediate surgical evaluation. When the 
abdomen is soft and nontender, perforation can 
reasonably be excluded . 
 Further evaluation requires laboratory mea-
surements, an ECG, a chest radiograph, and consid-
eration of a transthoracic echocardiogram. Blood 
should be immediately obtained for arterial blood 
gas analysis and measurements of hematocrit, 
hemoglobin, electrolytes, glucose, platelet count, 
and prothrombin and partial thromboplastin tests. 
If DIC is suggested by diﬀ use oozing, ﬁ brinogen 
and ﬁ brin split product measurements will conﬁ rm 
the diagnosis. A 12-lead ECG should be evaluated 
for evidence of ischemia, electrolyte abnormali-
ties, or evolving myocardial infarction. A chest 
ﬁ lm should be obtained to search for evidence of 
pulmonary congestion, aspiration, pneumothorax, 
or cardiomegaly. An echocardiogram helps deter-
mine end-diastolic volume, systolic function (par-
ticularly the presence or absence of regional wall 
motion abnormalities), and can detect valvular 
abnormalities; comparison to prior studies would 
be invaluable . 
 While laboratory measurements are being 
performed, what therapeutic and diagnostic 
measures should be undertaken? 
 Immediate measures aimed at avoiding hypox-
emia and hypoperfusion should be instituted. 
Supplemental oxygen should be administered, and 
endotracheal intubation is indicated if signiﬁ cant 
 
CHAPTER 31 Anesthesia for Genitourinary Surgery 
689 
Four hours later, dopamine was no longer needed 
and was discontinued. The patient’s subsequent 
recovery was uneventful . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 American Society of Anesthesiologists: Practice 
advisory for the prevention of perioperative 
peripheral neuropathies: An updated report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies. 
Anesthesiology 2011;114:741. 
 Awad H, Santilli S, Ohr M, et al: Th e eff ects of steep 
Trendelenburg positioning on intraocular pressure 
during robotic radical prostatectomy. Anesth Analg 
2009;109:473. 
 Bivalacqua TJ, Pierorazio PM, Su LM: Open, 
laparoscopic and robotic radical prostatectomy: 
Optimizing the surgical approach. Surg Oncol 2009;
18:233. 
 Brandina R, Berger A, Kamoi K, Gill IS: Critical appraisal 
of robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy. Curr Opin 
Urol 2009;19:290. 
 Chappell D, Jacob M: Infl uence of non-ventilatory 
options on postoperative outcome. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthiol 2010;24:267. 
 Coelho RF, Rocco B, Patel MB, et al: Retropubic, 
laparoscopic, and robot-assisted radical 
prostatectomy: A critical review of outcomes 
reported by high-volume centers. J Endourol 2010;
24:2003. 
 Conacher ID, Soomro NA, Rix D: Anaesthesia for 
laparoscopic urological surgery. Br J Anaesthesia 
2004;93;859. 
 Cousins J, Howard J, Borra P: Principles of anaesthesia 
in urological surgery. Br J Urol International 
2005;96:223. 
 D’Alonzo RC, Gan TJ, Moul JW, et al: A retrospective 
comparison of anesthetic management of robot-
assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy versus 
radical retropubic prostatectomy. J Clin Anesthesia 
2009;21:322. 
 Ficarra V, Novara G, Artibani W, et al: Retropubic, 
laparoscopic, and robot-assisted radical 
prostatectomy: A systematic review and cumulative 
analysis of comparative studies. Eur Urol 
2009;55:1037. 
 Fischer F, Engel N, Fehr JL, et al: Complications of 
robotic assisted radical prostatectomy. World J Urol 
2008;26:595. 
 How can the shivering be stopped? 
 Regardless of its cause, shivering has the unde-
sirable eﬀ ects of markedly increasing metabolic 
oxygen demand (100–200%) and CO 2 production. 
Both cardiac output and minute ventilation must 
therefore increase, and these eﬀ ects are often 
poorly tolerated by patients with limited cardiac or 
pulmonary reserve. Although the ultimate thera-
peutic goal is to correct the underlying problem, 
such as hypothermia or sepsis, additional mea-
sures are indicated in this patient. Supplemental 
oxygen therapy helps prevent hypoxemia. Unlike 
other opioid agonists, meperidine in small doses 
(25–50 mg intravenously) frequently terminates 
shivering regardless of the cause. Chlorpromazine, 
10–25 mg, and butorphanol, 1–2 mg, may also be 
eﬀ ective. These agents may have speciﬁ c actions on 
temperature regulation centers in the hypothala-
mus. Shivering associated with sepsis and immune 
reactions can also be blocked by inhibitors of pros-
taglandin synthetase (aspirin, acetaminophen, and 
nonsteroidal antiinﬂ ammatory agents) as well as 
glucocorticoids. Intravenous acetaminophen is 
generally preferred perioperatively because it does 
not aﬀ ect platelet function . 
 What was the outcome? 
 Examination of the patient reveals warm 
extremities with a good pulse, even with the low 
blood pressure. The abdomen is soft and non-
tender. The irrigation ﬂ uid from the bladder is 
only slightly pink. A diagnosis of probable sepsis 
is made. Blood cultures are obtained and antibi-
otic therapy is initiated to cover gram-negative 
organisms and enterococci, the most common 
pathogens. The patient receives empiric antibiotic 
coverage and a dopamine infusion is initiated. In 
settings of redistributive, vasodilatory shock, addi-
tional vasoconstrictors (eg, vasopressin) may be 
needed. The shivering ceases following adminis-
tration of meperidine, 25 mg intravenously. The 
blood pressure increases to 110/60 mm Hg and 
the heart rate slows to 90 beats/min following a 
1000 mL intravenous ﬂ uid bolus and initiation of 
a 5-mcg/kg/min dopamine infusion. The serum 
sodium concentration was found to be 130 mEq/L. 
690 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 Kakar PN, Das J, Roy PM, et al: Robotic invasion of 
operation theatre and associated anaesthetic issues: A 
review. Indian J Anaesth 2011;55:18. 
 Kauff man EC, Ng CK, Lee MM, et al: Critical analysis 
of complications aft er robotic-assisted radical 
cystectomy with identifi cation of preoperative 
and operative risk factors. Br J Urol International 
2010;105:520. 
 Park EY, Koo BN, Min KT, et al: Th e eff ect of 
pneumoperitoneum in the steep Trendelenburg 
position on cerebral oxygenation. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand 2009;53:895. 
 Valenza F, Chevallard G, Fossali T, et al: Management of 
mechanical ventilation during laparoscopic surgery. 
Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2010;24:227. 
 Gainsburg DM, Wax D, Reich DL, et al: Intraoperative 
management of robotic-assisted versus open 
radical prostatectomy. J Soc Laparoendoscop 
Surg 2010;14:1. 
 Hong JY, Kim JY, Choi YD, et al: Incidence of venous 
gas embolism during robotic-assisted laparoscopic 
radical prostatectomy is lower than that during 
radical retropubic prostatectomy. Br J Anaesthesia 
2010;105:777. 
 Hong JY, Yang SC, Ahn S, et al: Preoperative 
comorbidities and relationship of comorbidities with 
postoperative complications in patients undergoing 
transurethral prostate resection. J Urol 2011;185:1374. 
 Jones DR, Lee HT: Perioperative renal protection. Best 
Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2008;22:193. 
 691
32
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Hepatic Physiology 
& Anesthesia 
 Michael Ramsay, MD, FRCA 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The hepatic artery supplies 45% to 50% 
of the liver’s oxygen requirements, and the 
portal vein supplies the remaining 50% 
to 55% . 
 All coagulation factors, with the exception 
of factor VIII and von Willebrand factor, 
are produced by the liver. Vitamin K is 
a necessary cofactor in the synthesis of 
prothrombin (factor II) and factors VII, IX, 
and X . 
 Many “liver function” tests, such as serum 
transaminase measurements, reﬂ ect 
hepatocellular integrity more than hepatic 
function. Liver tests that measure hepatic 
synthetic function include serum albumin, 
prothrombin time (PT, or international 
normalized ratio), cholesterol, and 
pseudocholinesterase . 
 Albumin values less than 2.5 g/dL are 
generally indicative of chronic liver disease, 
acute stress, or severe malnutrition. 
Increased losses of albumin in the urine 
1
2
3
4
(nephrotic syndrome) or the gastrointestinal 
tract (protein-losing enteropathy) can also 
produce hypoalbuminemia . 
 The PT, which is normally 11–14 sec, 
depending on the control value, measures 
the activity of ﬁ brinogen, prothrombin, and 
factors V, VII, and X . 
 The neuroendocrine stress response 
to surgery and trauma is characterized 
by elevated circulating levels of 
catecholamines, glucagon, and cortisol. 
Mobilization of carbohydrate stores and 
proteins results in hyperglycemia and 
a negative nitrogen balance (catabolism), 
respectively . 
 All opioids can potentially cause spasm 
of the sphincter of Oddi and increase biliary 
pressure . 
 When the results of liver tests are elevated 
postoperatively, the usual cause is 
underlying liver disease or the surgical 
procedure itself . 
5
6
7
8
 FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY 
 Th e liver is the heaviest organ in the body, weighing 
approximately 1500 g in adults. It is separated by the 
falciform ligament into right and left  anatomic lobes; 
the larger right lobe has two additional smaller 
lobes at its posterior–inferior surface, the caudate 
and quadrate lobes. In contrast, surgical anatomy 
divides the liver based on its blood supply. Th us, 
the right and left  surgical lobes are defi ned by the 
point of bifurcation of the hepatic artery and portal 
vein ( porta hepatis ); the falciform ligament therefore 
divides the left  surgical lobe into medial and lateral 
segments. Surgical anatomy defi nes a total of eight 
segments. 
 Th e liver is made up of 50,000–100,000 discrete 
anatomic units called  lobules . Each lobule is com-
posed of plates of hepatocytes arranged cylindrically 
around a  centrilobular vein ( Figure 32–1 ). Four to 
692 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
inferior vena cava ( Figure 32–2 ). Th e caudate lobe is 
usually drained by its own set of veins. 
 Bile canaliculi originate between hepatocytes 
within each plate and join to form bile ducts. An 
extensive system of lymphatic channels also forms 
within the plates and is in direct communication 
with the space of Disse. 
 Th e liver is supplied by sympathetic nerve 
fi bers (T6–T11), parasympathetic fi bers (right and 
left  vagus), and fi bers from the right phrenic nerve. 
Some autonomic fi bers synapse fi rst in the celiac 
plexus, whereas others reach the liver directly via 
splanchnic nerves and vagal branches before form-
ing the hepatic plexus. Th e majority of sensory aff er-
ent fi bers travel with sympathetic fi bers. 
 Hepatic Blood Flow 
 Normal hepatic blood fl ow is 25% to 30% of the car-
diac output and is provided by the hepatic artery and 
portal vein.  Th e hepatic artery supplies about 
45% to 50% of the liver’s oxygen requirements, 
1
fi ve portal tracts, composed of hepatic arterioles, 
portal venules, bile canaliculi, lymphatics, and 
nerves, surround each lobule. 
 In contrast to a lobule, an  acinus , the functional 
unit of the liver, is defi ned by a portal tract in the 
middle and centrilobular veins at the periphery. 
Cells closest to the portal tract (zone 1) are well 
 oxygenated; those closest to centrilobular veins 
(zone 3) receive the least oxygen and are most 
 susceptible to injury. 
 Blood from hepatic arterioles and portal 
venules comingle in the sinusoidal channels, which 
lie between the cellular plates and serve as capillar-
ies. Th ese channels are lined by endothelial cells and 
by macrophages known as  Kupff er cells . Th e Kupff er 
cells remove bacteria endotoxins, viruses, proteins 
and particulate matter from the blood. Th e  space 
of Disse lies between the sinusoidal capillaries and 
the hepatocytes. Venous drainage from the central 
veins of hepatic lobules coalesces to form the hepatic 
veins (right, middle, and left ), which empty into the 
 FIGURE 321  The hepatic lobule. 
Space of Disse
Terminal
lymphatics
Bile canaliculi
Bile duct
Branch of the
hepatic artery
Branch of the
portal vein
Kupffer cell
Liver cells
Sinusoids
Central vein
Lymphatic
vessel
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia 
693 
on blood fl ow to the gastrointestinal tract and the 
spleen. A reciprocal, though somewhat limited, 
mechanism exists, such that a decrease in either 
hepatic arterial or portal venous fl ow results in a 
compensatory increase in the other. 
 Th e hepatic artery has α 1 -adrenergic vasocon-
striction receptors as well as β 2 -adrenergic, dopami-
nergic (D 1 ), and cholinergic vasodilator receptors. 
Th e portal vein has only α 1 -adrenergic and dopa-
minergic (D 1 ) receptors. Sympathetic activation 
results in vasoconstriction of the hepatic artery and 
mesenteric vessels, decreasing hepatic blood fl ow. 
β-Adrenergic stimulation vasodilates the hepatic 
artery; β-blockers reduce blood fl ow, and, therefore, 
decrease portal pressure. 
 Reservoir Function 
 Portal vein pressure is normally only about 7–10 mm 
Hg, but the low resistance of the hepatic sinusoids 
allows relatively large blood fl ows through the por-
tal vein. Small changes in hepatic venous tone and 
hepatic venous pressure thus can result in large 
changes in hepatic blood volume, allowing the liver 
to act as a blood reservoir ( Figure 32–3 ). A decrease 
in hepatic venous pressure, as occurs during hemor-
rhage, shift s blood from hepatic veins and sinusoids 
into the central venous circulation and augments 
Hepatic
vein
Vena
cava
Hepatic
artery
Hepatic
sinuses
Celiac
trunk
(artery)
Aorta
Splenic
vein
Mesenteric artery
Intestinal artery
Intestinal vein
Portal
vein
Capillaries
 FIGURE 322  Hepatic blood ﬂ ow. (Modiﬁ ed and 
reproduced, with permission, from Guyton AC:  Textbook of Medical 
Physiology , 7th ed. W.B. Saunders, 1986.) 
and the portal vein supplies the remaining 50% to 
55% ( Figure 32–2 ). Hepatic arterial fl ow seems to be 
dependent on metabolic demand (autoregulation), 
whereas fl ow through the portal vein is dependent 
 FIGURE 323  Hepatic venous 
compliance and the role of the liver as a 
blood reservoir. (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, 
with permission, from Lautt WW, Greeway CV: 
Am J Physiol 1976;231:292.) 
Increase in hepatic blood volume (mL/100 g)
Elevation in hepatic venous pressure (mm Hg)
1
0
2
3
n = 12
n = 12
n = 12
n = 8
4
5
6
7
8
9
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
694 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Metabolic Function 
 Th e abundance of enzymatic pathways in the liver 
allows it to play a key role in the metabolism of car-
bohydrates, fats, proteins, and other substances (see 
 Figure 32–4 and  Table 32–1 ). Th e fi nal products of 
carbohydrate digestion are glucose, fructose, and 
galactose. With the exception of the large amount 
of fructose that is converted by the liver to lactate, 
circulating blood volume. Blood loss can be reduced 
during liver surgery by lowering the central venous 
pressure, thereby reducing hepatic venous pressure 
and hepatic blood volume. In patients with conges-
tive heart failure, the increase in central venous pres-
sure is transmitted to the hepatic veins and causes 
congestion of the liver that can adversely aff ect liver 
function. 
Glycogen
Glycogenesis
(glycogenolysis)
Phosphogluconate pathway
(Pentose monophosphate)
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
NADP
PROTEINS
Pyruvate
Lactate
Amino acids
α-Ketoglutarate
α Keto
acid
Glutamate
Urea
Citric
acid
cycle
Acetyl-CoA
β-oxidation
Fatty acids
Malonyl-CoA
Acetoacetate
(Ketone bodies)
Triglycerides
Galactose
CARBOHYDRATE
Glucose 
Fructose
FATS
Glycerol
Glycolysis
(gluconeogenesis)
NAD
Urea
Cycle
NADPH + H+
NADH + H+
CO2
CO2
NH3
CO2
 FIGURE 324  Important metabolic pathways in 
hepatocytes. Although small amounts of adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) are derived directly from some 
intermediary reactions, the overwhelming majority of 
ATP produced is the result of oxidative phosphorylation of 
the reduced forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADPH). 
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia 
695 
the maintenance of a normal blood glucose concen-
tration. Glucocorticoids, catecholamines, glucagon, 
and thyroid hormone greatly enhance gluconeogen-
esis, whereas insulin inhibits it. 
 When carbohydrate stores are saturated, the 
liver converts the excess ingested carbohydrates and 
proteins into fat. Th e fatty acids thus formed can be 
used immediately for fuel or stored in adipose tis-
sue or the liver for later consumption. Nearly all 
cells utilize fatty acids derived from ingested fats or 
synthesized from intermediary metabolites of car-
bohydrates and protein as an energy source—only 
red blood cells and the renal medulla are limited to 
glucose utilization. Neurons normally utilize only 
glucose, but, aft er a few days of starvation, they can 
switch to ketone bodies, the breakdown products of 
fatty acids that have been synthesized by the liver as 
an energy source. 
 To oxidize fatty acids, they are converted into 
acetylcoenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), which is then oxi-
dized via the citric acid cycle to produce ATP. Th e 
liver is capable of high rates of fatty acid oxidation 
and can form acetoacetic acid (one of the ketone 
bodies) from excess acetyl-CoA. Th e acetoacetate 
released by hepatocytes serves as an alternative 
energy source for other cell types by reconversion 
into acetyl-CoA. Insulin inhibits hepatic ketone 
body production. Acetyl-CoA is also used by the 
liver for the production of cholesterol and phos-
pholipids, which is necessary in the synthesis of 
cellular membranes throughout the body. 
 Th e liver performs a critical role in protein 
metabolism. Without this function, death usu-
ally occurs within several days. Th e steps involved 
in protein metabolism include: (1) deamination of 
amino acids, (2) formation of urea (to eliminate the 
ammonia produced from deamination), (3) inter-
conversions between nonessential amino acids, and 
(4) formation of plasma proteins. Deamination is 
necessary for the conversion of excess amino acids 
into carbohydrates and fats. Th e enzymatic pro-
cesses, most commonly transamination, convert 
amino acids into their respective keto acids and pro-
duce ammonia as a byproduct. 
 Ammonia formed from deamination (as well 
as that produced by colonic bacteria and absorbed 
through the gut) is highly toxic to tissues. Th rough 
hepatic conversion of fructose and galactose into 
glucose makes glucose metabolism the fi nal com-
mon pathway for most carbohydrates. 
 All cells utilize glucose to produce energy in the 
form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), either aero-
bically via the citric acid cycle or anaerobically via 
glycolysis. Th e liver and adipose tissue can also uti-
lize the phosphogluconate pathway, which provides 
energy and fatty acid synthesis. Most of the glucose 
absorbed following a meal is normally stored as gly-
cogen, which only the liver and muscle are able to 
store in signifi cant amounts. When glycogen stor-
age capacity is exceeded, excess glucose is converted 
into fat. Insulin enhances glycogen synthesis, and 
epinephrine and glucagon enhance glycogenolysis. 
Because glucose consumption averages 150 g/day, 
and hepatic glycogen stores are normally only about 
70 g/day, glycogen stores are depleted aft er 24 hr of 
fasting. Aft er this period of fasting,  gluconeogenesis , 
the  de novo synthesis of glucose, is necessary to pro-
vide an uninterrupted supply of glucose for other 
organs. 
 Th e liver and kidney are unique in their capac-
ity to form glucose from lactate, pyruvate, amino 
acids (mainly alanine), and glycerol (derived from 
fat metabolism). Hepatic gluconeogenesis is vital in 
 TABLE 321 Metabolic functions of the liver. 
Creation and secretion of bile
Nutrient metabolism
Amino acids
Monosaccharides (sugars)
Lipids (fatty acids, cholesterol, phospholipids, 
lipoproteins)
Vitamins
Phase I and II biotransformation
Toxins
Drugs
Hormones (steroids)
Synthesis
Albumin, α 1 -antitrypsin, proteases
Clotting factors
Acute phase proteins
Plasma cholinesterase
Immune function
Kupffer cells
696 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
liver also produces plasma cholinesterase (pseudo-
cholinesterase), an enzyme that hydrolyzes esters, 
including some local anesthetics and some muscle 
relaxants. Other important proteins formed by the 
liver include protease inhibitors (antithrombin III, 
α 2 -antiplasmin, and α 1 -antitrypsin), transport pro-
teins (transferrin, haptoglobin, and ceruloplasmin), 
complement, α 1 -acid glycoprotein, C-reactive pro-
tein, and serum amyloid A. 
 Drug Metabolism 
 Many exogenous substances, including most 
drugs, undergo hepatic biotransformation, and the 
end-products of these reactions are usually either 
inactivated or converted to more water-soluble 
substances that can be readily excreted in bile or 
urine. Hepatic biotransformations are oft en cat-
egorized as one of two types of reactions.  Phase I 
reactions modify reactive chemical groups through 
mixed-function oxidases or the cytochrome P-450 
enzyme systems, resulting in oxidation, reduc-
tion, deamination, sulfoxidation, dealkylation, or 
methylation. Barbiturates and benzodiazepines are 
inactivated by phase I reactions.  Phase II reactions , 
which may or may not follow a phase I reaction, 
involve conjugation of the substance with glucuro-
nide, sulfate, taurine, or glycine. Th e conjugated 
compound can then be readily eliminated in urine 
or bile. 
 Some enzyme systems, such as those of cyto-
chrome P-450, can be induced by a few drugs, such 
as ethanol, barbiturates, ketamine, and perhaps ben-
zodiazepines. Th is can result in increased tolerance 
to the drugs’ eff ects. Conversely, some agents, such 
as cimetidine and chloramphenicol, can prolong the 
eff ects of other drugs by inhibiting these enzymes. 
Some drugs, including lidocaine, morphine, vera-
pamil, labetalol, and propranolol, have very high 
rates of hepatic extraction from the circulation, 
and their metabolism is therefore highly dependent 
upon the rate of hepatic blood fl ow. As a result, a 
decrease in their metabolic clearance usually refl ects 
decreased hepatic blood fl ow rather than hepatocel-
lular dysfunction. 
 Th e liver plays a major role in hormone, vitamin, 
and mineral metabolism. It is an important site for the 
a series of enzymatic steps, the liver combines two 
molecules of ammonia with CO 2 to form urea. Th e 
urea thus formed readily diff uses out of the liver and 
can then be excreted by the kidneys. 
 Nearly all plasma proteins, with the notable 
exception of immunoglobulins, are formed by the 
liver. Th ese include albumin, α 1 -antitrypsin and 
other proteases/elastases, and the coagulation fac-
tors. Albumin is responsible for maintaining a nor-
mal plasma oncotic pressure and is the principal 
binding and transport protein for fatty acids and a 
large number of hormones and drugs. Consequently, 
changes in albumin concentration can aff ect the 
concentration of the pharmacologically active, 
unbound fraction of many drugs. 
 All coagulation factors, with the exception 
of factor VIII and von Willebrand factor, are 
produced by the liver (see  Table 32–2 ,  Figure 32–5 , 
and Chapter 51). Vascular endothelial cells synthe-
size factor VIII, levels of which are therefore usu-
ally maintained in chronic liver disease. Vitamin 
K is a necessary cofactor in the synthesis of pro-
thrombin (factor II) and factors VII, IX, and X. Th e 
2
 TABLE 322 Coagulation factors. 
Factor
Approximate Half-Life (h)
I
Fibrinogen
100
II
Prothrombin
80
III
Tissue thromboplastin
—
IV
Calcium
—
V
Proaccelerin
18
VII
Proconvertin
6
VIII
Antihemophilic factor
10
IX
Christmas factor
24
X
Stuart factor
50
XI
Plasma thromboplastin 
antecedents
25
XII
Hageman factor
60
XIII
Fibrin-stabilizing factor
90
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia 
697 
EXTRINSIC PATHWAY
INTRINSIC PATHWAY
VII
VIIa
V
II
Xa
XIa
XIII
Fibrin
Cross-linked
fibrin
XIIa
XII
Kallikrein
PK
HMWK
Va
IIa
IIa
VIII
VIII
X
IX
XI
Platelet
membrane
lipoprotein
III
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
 FIGURE 325  The intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways. 
698 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
limited stores of vitamin K, a defi ciency can develop 
in a few days.  Vitamin K defi ciency is manifested 
as a coagulopathy due to impaired formation of 
prothrombin and of factors VII, IX, and X. 
 Bilirubin is primarily the end-product of hemo-
globin metabolism. It is formed from degradation 
of the heme ring in Kupff er cells. Bilirubin is then 
released into blood, where it readily binds to albu-
min. Hepatic uptake of bilirubin from the circula-
tion is passive, but binding to intracellular proteins 
traps the bilirubin inside hepatocytes. Bilirubin is 
conjugated by the hepatocytes, primarily with gluc-
uronide, and actively excreted into bile canaliculi. 
 LIVER TESTS 
 Th e most commonly performed liver tests are nei-
ther sensitive nor specifi c. No one test evaluates 
overall hepatic function, refl ecting instead one 
aspect of hepatic function that must be interpreted 
in conjunction with other tests and clinical assess-
ment of the patient. 
 Many “liver function” tests, such as serum 
transaminase measurements, refl ect hepato-
cellular integrity more than hepatic function. Liver 
tests that measure hepatic synthetic function include 
3
conversion of thyroxine (T4) into the more active tri-
iodothyronine (T3), and degradation of thyroid hor-
mone is principally hepatic. Th e liver is also the major 
site of degradation for insulin, steroid hormones 
(estrogen, aldosterone, and cortisol), glucagon, and 
antidiuretic hormone. Hepatocytes are the principal 
storage sites for vitamins A, B 12 , E, D, and K. Lastly, 
hepatic production of transferrin and haptoglobin is 
important because these proteins are involved in iron 
hemostasis, whereas ceruloplasmin is important in 
copper regulation. 
 Bile Formation 
 Bile ( Table 32–3 ) plays an important role in 
absorption of fat and excretion of bilirubin, cho-
lesterol, and many drugs. Hepatocytes continu-
ously secrete bile salts, cholesterol, phospholipids, 
conjugated bilirubin, and other substances into 
bile canaliculi. 
 Bile ducts from hepatic lobules join and eventu-
ally form the right and left  hepatic ducts. Th ese ducts, 
in turn, combine to form the hepatic duct, which 
together with the cystic duct from the gallbladder 
becomes the common bile duct ( Figure 32–6 ). Th e 
gallbladder serves as a reservoir for bile. Th e bile 
acids formed by hepatocytes from cholesterol are 
essential for emulsifying the insoluble components 
of bile and facilitating the intestinal absorption of 
lipids. Defects in the formation or secretion of bile 
salts interfere with the absorption of fats and fat-sol-
uble vitamins (A, D, E, and K). Because of normally 
 TABLE 323 Composition of bile. 
97% water
<1% bile salts
Pigments
Inorganic salts
Lipids
Cholesterol
Fatty acids
Lecithin
Alkaline phosphatase
Duodenum
Pancreas
Acid
Common
bile duct
Hepatic ducts
Liver
Gallbladder
Cystic duct
Sphincter
of Oddi
Pancreatic
duct
Stomach
 FIGURE 326  The biliary system. (Modiﬁ ed and 
reproduced, with permission, from Guyton AC:  Textbook of Medical 
Physiology , 7th ed. W.B. Saunders, 1986.) 
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia
699
syndrome) or acquired intrahepatic cholestasis, or 
extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Hyperbilirubinemia 
that is primarily unconjugated may be seen with 
hemolysis or with congenital (Gilbert or Crigler–
Najjar syndrome) or acquired defects in bilirubin 
conjugation. Unconjugated bilirubin is neurotoxic, 
and high levels may produce encephalopathy. 
 Serum Aminotransferases 
(Transaminases) 
 Th ese enzymes are released into the circulation 
as a result of hepatocellular injury or death. Two 
aminotransferases are most commonly measured: 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), also known as 
serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), 
and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), also known as 
serum glutamic pyruvic-transferase (SGPT). 
 Serum Alkaline Phosphatase 
 Alkaline phosphatase is produced by the liver, bone, 
small bowel, kidneys, and placenta and is excreted 
into bile. Normal serum alkaline phosphatase activ-
ity is generally 25–85 IU/L; children and adolescents 
have much higher levels, refl ecting active growth. 
Most of the circulating enzyme is normally derived 
from bone; however, with biliary obstruction, more 
hepatic alkaline phosphatase is synthesized and 
released into the circulation. 
 Serum Albumin 
 Th e normal serum albumin concentration is 3.5–
5.5 g/dL. Because its half-life is about 2–3 weeks, 
albumin concentration may initially be normal 
with acute liver disease.  Albumin values less 
than 2.5 g/dL are generally indicative of 
chronic liver disease, acute stress, or severe malnu-
trition. Increased losses of albumin in the urine 
(nephrotic syndrome) or the gastrointestinal tract 
(protein-losing enteropathy) can also produce 
hypoalbuminemia. 
 Blood Ammonia 
 Signifi cant elevations of blood ammonia levels 
usually refl ect disruption of hepatic urea syn-
thesis. Normal whole blood ammonia levels are 
47–65 mmol/L (80–110 mg/dL). Marked elevations 
usually refl ect severe hepatocellular damage and 
may cause encephalopathy. 
4
serum albumin, prothrombin time (PT, or inter-
national normalized ratio [INR]), cholesterol, and 
pseudocholinesterase. Moreover, because of the liver’s 
large functional reserve, substantial cirrhosis may be 
present with few or no laboratory abnormalities. 
 Liver abnormalities can oft en be divided into 
either parenchymal disorders or obstructive dis-
orders based on laboratory tests ( Table 32–4 ). 
Obstructive disorders primarily aff ect biliary excre-
tion of substances, whereas parenchymal disorders 
result in generalized hepatocellular dysfunction. 
 Serum Bilirubin 
 Th e normal total bilirubin concentration, composed 
of conjugated (direct), water-soluble and uncon-
jugated (indirect), lipid-soluble forms, is less than 
1.5 mg/dL (<25 mmol/L) and refl ects the balance 
between bilirubin production and excretion. Jaundice 
is usually clinically obvious when total bilirubin 
exceeds 3 mg/dL. A predominantly conjugated hyper-
bilirubinemia (>50%) is associated with increased 
urinary urobilinogen and may refl ect hepatocellular 
dysfunction, congenital (Dubin–Johnson or Rotor 
 TABLE 324 Abnormalities in liver tests. 1, 2, 3 
Parenchymal 
(Hepatocellular) 
Dysfunction
Biliary 
Obstruction or 
Cholestasis
AST (SGOT)
↑ to ↑↑↑
↑
ALT (SGPT)
↑ to ↑↑↑
↑
Albumin
0 to ↓↓↓
0
Prothrombin time
0 to ↑↑↑
0 to ↑↑ 4 
Bilirubin
0 to ↑↑↑
0 to ↑↑↑
Alkaline phosphatase
↑
↑ to ↑↑↑
5′-Nucleotidase
0 to ↑
↑ to ↑↑↑
γ-Glutamyl 
transpeptidase
↑ to ↑↑↑
↑↑↑
 1 Adapted from Wilson JD et al. (eds):  Harrison’s Principles of Internal 
Medicine , 12th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1991.
 2 AST, aspartate aminotransferase; SGOT, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic 
transaminase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; SGPT, serum glutamic 
pyruvic-transferase.
 3 ↑, increases; 0, no change; ↓, decreases.
 4 Usually corrects with vitamin K.
700 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
clot tensile strength, allowing precise management 
of hemostatic therapy. Th e rate of clot formation, the 
strength of the clot, and the impact of any lysis can 
be observed. Th e presence of disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation can be evaluated, as can the eff ect 
of heparin or heparinoid activity. In addition, plate-
let function can be assessed, including the eff ects of 
platelet inhibition. 
 EFFECT OF ANESTHESIA ON 
HEPATIC FUNCTION 
 Hepatic blood fl ow usually decreases during 
regional and general anesthesia, and multiple factors 
are responsible, including both direct and indirect 
eff ects of anesthetic agents, the type of ventilation 
employed, and the type of surgery being performed. 
 Decreases in cardiac output reduce hepatic 
blood fl ow via refl ex sympathetic activation, which 
vasoconstricts both the arterial and the venous 
splanchnic vasculature. 
 Th e hemodynamic eff ects of ventilation can 
also have a signifi cant impact on hepatic blood fl ow. 
Controlled positive-pressure ventilation with high 
mean airway pressures reduces venous return to the 
heart and decreases cardiac output; both mecha-
nisms can compromise hepatic blood fl ow. Th e 
former increases hepatic venous pressure, whereas 
the latter can reduce blood pressure and increase 
 Prothrombin Time 
 Th e PT, which normally ranges between 
11–14 sec, depending on the control value, 
measures the activity of fi brinogen, prothrom-
bin, and factors V, VII, and X. Th e relatively short 
half-life of factor VII (4–6 h) makes the PT useful 
in evaluating hepatic synthetic function of patients 
with acute or chronic liver disease. Prolongations 
of the PT greater than 3–4 sec from the control are 
considered signifi cant and usually correspond to an 
INR >1.5. Because only 20% to 30% of normal factor 
activity is required for normal coagulation, prolon-
gation of the PT usually refl ects either severe liver 
disease or vitamin K defi ciency. (See  Table 32–5 
for a list of coagulation test abnormalities.) 
 Point-of-Care Viscoelastic 
Coagulation Monitoring 
 Th is technology provides a “real time” assessment 
of the coagulation status and utilizes thromboelas-
tography (TEG ® ), rotation thromboelastometry 
(ROTEM ® ), or Sonoclot ® analysis to assess global 
coagulation via the viscoelastic properties of whole 
blood ( Figure 32–7 ). A clear picture is provided of 
the global eff ect of imbalances between the proco-
agulant and anticoagulant systems and the profi bri-
nolytic and antifi brinolytic systems and the resultant 
5
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 327  Examples of typical thromboelastograph 
tracings.  A: Normal.  B: Hypercoagulation.  C: Hypocoagula-
tion (eg, thrombocytopenia).  D: Fibrinolysis. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Johansson PI, Stissing T, Bochsen L, et al: 
Thrombelastography and thromboelastometry in assessing coagulopathy 
in trauma. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 2009;17:45.) 
 TABLE 325 Coagulation test abnormalities. 1 
PT
PTT
TT
Fibrinogen
Advanced liver disease
↑
↑
N or ↑
N or ↓
DIC
↑
↑
↑
↓
Vitamin K deficiency
↑↑
↑
N
N
Warfarin therapy
↑↑
↑
N
N
Heparin therapy
↑
↑↑
↑
N
Hemophilia
Factor VIII deficiency
Factor IX deficiency
N
N
↑
↑
N
N
N
N
Factor VII deficiency
↑
N
N
N
Factor XIII deficiency
N
N
N
N
 1 PT, prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; TT, thrombin 
time; N, normal; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation.
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia
701
other causes should be considered. Correct diagnosis 
requires a careful review of preoperative liver func-
tion and of intraoperative and postoperative events, 
such as transfusions, sustained hypotension or 
hypoxemia, and drug exposure. Currently utilized 
volatile anesthetic agents have minimal, if any, direct 
adverse eff ect upon hepatocytes. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Coagulopathy in a Patient with Liver 
Disease (also see Chapter 51) 
 A 52-year-old man with a long history of alcohol 
abuse presents for a splenorenal shunt after three 
major episodes of upper gastrointestinal hem-
orrhage from esophageal varices. Coagulation 
studies reveal a PT of 17 sec (control: 12 sec), INR 
of 1.7, and a partial PT of 43 sec (control: 29 sec). 
The platelet count is 75,000/µL. 
 What factors can contribute to excessive 
bleeding during and following surgery? 
 Hemostasis following trauma or surgery is 
dependent on three major processes: (1) vascu-
lar spasm, (2) formation of a platelet plug (primary 
sympathetic tone. Positive end-expiratory pressure 
(PEEP) further accentuates these eff ects. 
 Surgical procedures near the liver can reduce 
hepatic blood fl ow up to 60%. Although the mecha-
nisms are not clear, they most likely involve sympa-
thetic activation, local refl exes, and direct compression 
of vessels in the portal and hepatic circulations. 
β-Adrenergic blockers, α 1 -adrenergic ago-
nists, H 2 -receptor blockers, and vasopressin reduce 
hepatic blood fl ow. Low-dose dopamine infusions 
may increase liver blood fl ow. 
 Metabolic Functions 
 Th e eff ects of the various anesthetic agents on inter-
mediary hepatic metabolism involving carbohy-
drate, fat, and protein are poorly defi ned. An 
endocrine stress response secondary to fasting and 
surgical trauma is generally observed.  Th e 
neuroendocrine stress response to surgery and 
trauma is characterized by elevated circulating levels 
of catecholamines, glucagon, and cortisol and results 
in the mobilization of carbohydrate stores and pro-
tein, causing hyperglycemia and negative nitrogen 
balance (catabolism). Th e neuroendocrine stress 
response may be at least partially blunted by regional 
anesthesia, deep general anesthesia and/or pharma-
cological blockade of the sympathetic system, with 
regional anesthesia having the most salutary eff ect 
on catabolism.  All opioids can potentially 
cause spasm of the sphincter of Oddi and 
increase biliary pressure. Naloxone and glucagon 
may relieve opioid-induced spasm. 
 Procedures in close proximity to the liver 
 frequently result in modest elevations in lactate dehy-
drogenase and transaminase concentrations regard-
less of the anesthetic agent or technique employed. 
 When the results of liver function tests are ele-
vated postoperatively, the usual cause is under-
lying liver disease or the surgical procedure itself. 
Persistent abnormalities in liver tests may be indica-
tive of viral hepatitis (usually transfusion related), 
sepsis, idiosyncratic drug reactions, or surgical com-
plications. Postoperative jaundice can result from a 
variety of factors ( Table 32–6 ), but the most com-
mon cause is overproduction of bilirubin because 
of resorption of a large hematoma or red cell 
breakdown following transfusion. Nonetheless, all 
6
7
8
 TABLE 326 Causes of postoperative 
jaundice. 
 Prehepatic (increased bilirubin production) 
Resorption of hematomas
Hemolytic anemia transfusion
Senescent red cell breakdown
Hemolytic reactions
 Hepatic (hepatocellular dysfunction) 
Preexisting liver disease
Ischemic or hypoxemic injury
Drug-induced
Gilbert’s syndrome
Intrahepatic cholestasis
Halothane
 Posthepatic (biliary obstruction) 
Postoperative cholecystitis
Postoperative pancreatitis
Retained common bile duct stone
Bile duct injury
 Miscellaneous 
702 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
which usually binds and strengthens a platelet 
plug. Fibrin can be formed via one of two pathways 
( extrinsic or  intrinsic ;  Figure 32–5 ) that involve cal-
cium and activation of soluble coagulation precur-
sor proteins in blood ( Table 32–2 ). Regardless of 
which pathway is activated, the coagulation cas-
cade ends in the conversion of  ﬁ brinogen to  ﬁ brin . 
The extrinsic pathway of the coagulation cascade 
is triggered by the release of a tissue lipoprotein, 
 thromboplastin , from the membranes of injured 
cells and is likely the more important pathway in 
humans. The intrinsic pathway can be triggered by 
the interaction between subendothelial collagen 
with circulating Hageman factor (XII), high-molec-
ular-weight kininogen, and prekallikrein. The latter 
two substances are also involved in the formation 
of bradykinin. 
 Thrombin plays a central role in coagulation 
because it not only activates platelets, but also 
accelerates conversion of factors V, VIII, and XIII 
to their active forms. Conversion of prothrombin 
to thrombin is markedly accelerated by activated 
platelets. Thrombin then converts ﬁ brinogen to 
soluble ﬁ brin monomers that polymerize on the 
platelet plug. The cross-linking of ﬁ brin polymers 
by factor XIII is necessary to form a strong, insolu-
ble ﬁ brin clot. Finally, retraction of the clot, which 
requires platelets, expresses ﬂ uid from the clot and 
helps pull the walls of the damaged blood vessel 
together. 
 What prevents coagulation of blood in normal 
tissues? 
 The coagulation process is limited to injured 
areas by localization of platelets to the injured 
area and by maintenance of normal blood ﬂ ow 
in uninjured areas. Normal endothelium pro-
duces  prostacyclin (prostaglandin I 2 , PGI 2 ), which 
is a potent vasodilator that also inhibits plate-
let activation and helps to conﬁ ne the primary 
hemostatic process to the injured area. Normal 
blood ﬂ ow is important in clearing activated 
coagulation factors, which are taken up by the 
 monocyte–macrophage scavenger system. Mul-
tiple inhibitors of coagulation are normally pres-
ent in plasma, including antithrombin III, protein 
hemostasis), and (3) coagulation of blood (secondary 
hemostasis) in addition to adequate surgical control 
of bleeding sites. The ﬁ rst two are nearly immediate 
(seconds), whereas the third is delayed (minutes). A 
defect in any of these processes can lead to a bleed-
ing diathesis and increased blood loss. 
 Outline the mechanisms involved in primary 
hemostasis. 
 Injury to smaller blood vessels normally 
causes localized spasm as a result of the release of 
humoral factors from platelets and local myogenic 
reﬂ exes. Sympathetic-mediated vasoconstriction is 
also operative in medium-sized vessels. Exposure 
of circulating platelets to the damaged endothe-
lial surface causes them to undergo a series of 
changes that results in the formation of a platelet 
plug. If the break in a vessel is small, the plug itself 
can often completely stop bleeding. If the break is 
large, however, coagulation of blood is also neces-
sary to stop the bleeding. 
 Formation of the platelet plug can be broken 
down into three stages: (1) adhesion, (2) release of 
platelet granules, and (3) aggregation. Following 
injury, circulating platelets adhere to subendothe-
lial collagen via speciﬁ c glycoprotein (GP) receptors 
on their membrane. This interaction is stabilized by 
a circulating GP called  von Willebrand factor (vWF), 
which forms additional bridges between suben-
dothelial collagen and platelets via GPIb. Collagen 
(as well as epinephrine and thrombin) activates 
platelet membrane-bound phospholipases A and 
C, which, in turn, results in the formation of throm-
boxane A 2 (TXA 2 ) and platelet degranulation. TXA 2 
is a potent vasoconstrictor that also promotes 
platelet aggregation. Platelet granules contain a 
large number of substances, including adenos-
ine diphosphate (ADP), factor V, vWF, ﬁ brinogen, 
and ﬁ bronectin. These factors attract and activate 
additional platelets. ADP alters platelet membrane 
GPIIb/IIIa, which facilitates the binding of ﬁ brino-
gen to activated platelets. 
 Describe the mechanisms involved in normal 
coagulation. 
 Coagulation, often referred to as secondary 
hemostasis, involves formation of a ﬁ brin clot, 
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia 
703 
causes are usually responsible: (1) vitamin K deﬁ -
ciency due to dietary deﬁ ciency or to impaired 
absorption or storage, (2) impaired hepatic synthe-
sis of coagulation factors, and (3) splenic seques-
tration of platelets resulting from hypersplenism. 
To complicate matters further, patients with cir-
rhosis typically have multiple potential bleeding 
sites (esophageal varices, gastritis, peptic ulcers, 
and hemorrhoids) and frequently require mul-
tiple blood transfusions. With severe liver disease, 
patients may also have decreased synthesis of 
coagulation inhibitors and may fail to clear acti-
vated coagulation factors and ﬁ brin split products 
because of impaired Kupﬀ er cell function; the resul-
tant coagulation defect resembles, and becomes 
indistinguishable from, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC). 
 What is DIC? 
 In DIC, the coagulation cascade is activated by 
the release of endogenous tissue thromboplastin 
or thromboplastin-like substances, or by direct 
activation of factor XII by endotoxin or foreign sur-
faces. Widespread deposition of ﬁ brin in the micro-
circulation results in consumption of coagulation 
factors, secondary ﬁ brinolysis, thrombocytopenia, 
and a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Diﬀ use 
bleeding, and, in some cases, thromboembolic 
phenomena, usually follows. Treatment is gener-
ally aimed at the underlying cause. Supportive 
measures include transfusion of coagulation fac-
tors and platelets. Heparin therapy is controversial, 
but may beneﬁ t patients with thromboembolic 
phenomena. 
 What is primary ﬁ brinolysis? 
 This bleeding disorder is due to uncontrolled 
ﬁ brinolysis. Patients may have a deﬁ ciency of α 2 -
antiplasmin or impaired clearance of tPA. The lat-
ter may be common in patients with severe liver 
disease and during the anhepatic phase of liver 
transplantation. The disorder may occasionally be 
encountered in patients with carcinoma of the 
prostate. Diagnosis is often diﬃ  cult, but is sug-
gested by a bleeding diathesis with a low ﬁ brino-
gen level but relatively normal coagulation tests 
and platelet count (below). Treatment includes 
C, protein S, and tissue factor pathway inhibitor. 
Antithrombin III complexes with and inactivates 
circulating coagulation factors (with the notable 
exception of factor VII), and protein C speciﬁ cally 
inactivates factors V and VIII.  Heparin exerts its 
anticoagulant activity by augmenting the activity 
of antithrombin III . Protein S enhances the activ-
ity of protein C, and deﬁ ciencies of protein C and 
protein S lead to hypercoagulability. Tissue factor 
pathway inhibitor antagonizes the action of acti-
vated factor VII. 
 What is the role of the ﬁ brinolytic system 
in normal hemostasis? 
 The ﬁ brinolytic system is normally activated 
simultaneously with the coagulation cascade and 
functions to maintain the ﬂ uidity of blood during 
coagulation. It is also responsible for clot lysis once 
tissue repair begins. When a clot is formed, a large 
amount of the protein  plasminogen is incorporated. 
Plasminogen is then activated by tissue plasmino-
gen activator (tPA), which is usually released by 
endothelial cells in response to thrombin, and by 
Hageman factor (XII). The resulting formation of 
 plasmin degrades ﬁ brin and ﬁ brinogen, as well 
as other coagulation factors. Urokinase (found in 
urine) and streptokinase (a product of bacteria) 
are also potent activators of plasminogen to plas-
min. The action of tPA is localized because (1) it is 
absorbed into the ﬁ brin clot, (2) it activates plasmin-
ogen more eﬀ ectively on the clot, (3) free plasmin is 
rapidly neutralized by a circulating α 2 -antiplasmin, 
and (4) circulating tPA is cleared by the liver. Plasmin 
degrades ﬁ brin and ﬁ brinogen into small frag-
ments. These ﬁ brin degradation products possess 
anticoagulant activity because they compete with 
ﬁ brinogen for thrombin; they are normally cleared 
by the monocyte–macrophage system. The drugs 
ε-aminocaproic acid (EACA) and tranexamic acid 
inhibit the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin. 
Endothelium also normally secretes a plasminogen 
activator inhibitor (PAI-1) that antagonizes tPA. 
 What hemostatic defects are likely to be present 
in this patient? 
 Multifactorial coagulopathy often develops in 
patients with advanced liver disease. Three major 
704 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
with severe trauma or extensive surgery. In con-
trast, patients with platelet counts under 20,000/µL 
develop signiﬁ cant bleeding following even minor 
trauma. Thrombocytopenia usually results from 
one of three mechanisms: (1) decreased platelet 
production, (2) splenic sequestration of platelets, 
or (3) increased platelet destruction. The third 
mechanism may fall under one of two categories of 
destruction: immune or nonimmune. Nonimmune 
destruction includes vasculitis or DIC. 
 A prolonged bleeding time with a normal 
platelet count implies a qualitative platelet defect. 
Although the bleeding time is somewhat depen-
dent on the technique employed, values longer 
than 10 min are generally considered abnormal. 
Signiﬁ cant intraoperative and postoperative bleed-
ing may be expected when the bleeding time 
exceeds 15 min. Specialized testing is required to 
diagnose speciﬁ c platelet functional defects. 
 What are the most common causes of qualitative 
platelet defects? 
 The most common platelet defect is due to 
inhibition of TXA 2 production by aspirin and other 
nonsteroidal antiinﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs). 
In contrast to aspirin, which irreversibly acety-
lates and inactivates cyclooxygenase for the life 
of the platelet (up to 8 days), enzyme inhibition 
by other NSAIDs is reversible and generally lasts 
only 24 hr. Increasingly patients are treated with a 
variety of anti platelet agents such as clopidogrel 
which impair platelet function. Assays of platelet 
function are available to determine the degree to 
which platelet function is inhibited. 
 What is von Willebrand’s disease? 
 The most common inherited bleeding disorder 
(1:800–1000 patients) is  von Willebrand’s disease . 
Patients with this disorder produce a defective vWF 
or low levels of a normal vWF (normal: 5–10 mg/L). 
Most patients are heterozygous and have relatively 
mild hemostatic defects that become apparent 
clinically only when they are subjected to major 
surgery or trauma or following ingestion of NSAIDs. 
In addition to helping link platelets, vWF serves 
fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate and possibly 
either EACA or tranexamic acid. 
 How are coagulation tests helpful in evaluating 
inadequate hemostasis? 
 The diagnosis of coagulation abnormalities can 
be facilitated by measurement of the activated par-
tial thromboplastin time (aPTT), PT, thrombin time 
(TT), ﬁ brin degradation products (see below), and 
ﬁ brinogen level ( Table 32–5 ). The aPTT measures 
the intrinsic pathway (factors I, II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI, 
and XII). The whole blood clotting time and acti-
vated clotting time (ACT) also measure the intrinsic 
pathway. In contrast, the PT measures the extrinsic 
pathway (factors I, II, V, and VII). The TT speciﬁ cally 
measures conversion of ﬁ brinogen to ﬁ brin (fac-
tors I and II). The normal plasma ﬁ brinogen level is 
200–400 mg/dL (5.9–11.7 µmol/L). Because heparin 
therapy primarily aﬀ ects the intrinsic pathway, in 
low doses it usually prolongs the aPTT only. In high 
doses, heparin also prolongs the PT. In contrast, 
warfarin primarily aﬀ ects vitamin K-dependent 
factors (II, VII, IX, and X), so the PT is prolonged at 
usual doses, and the aPTT is prolonged only at high 
doses. In vivo plasmin activity can be evaluated by 
measuring circulating levels of peptides cleaved 
from ﬁ brin and ﬁ brinogen by plasmin, namely  ﬁ brin 
degradation products (FDPs) and d-dimers. Patients 
with primary ﬁ brinolysis usually have elevated 
FDPs, but normal d-dimer levels. 
 What tests are most helpful in evaluating 
inadequate primary hemostasis? 
 The most commonly performed tests include a 
platelet count and a bleeding time, but also include 
thromboelastography (TEG ® ), rotation throm-
boelastometry (ROTEM ® ), and Sonoclot ® analy-
sis (see Figure 32–7 and Chapter 51). Patients with 
normally-functioning platelets and platelet counts 
above 100,000/µL have normal primary hemostasis. 
The normal platelet count is 150,000–450,000/µL, 
and the bleeding time is generally not aﬀ ected 
by the platelet count when the latter is greater 
than 100,000/µL. When the platelet count is 
50,000/µL, excessive bleeding generally occurs only 
 
CHAPTER 32 Hepatic Physiology & Anesthesia 
705 
recommended following surgery because of 
the relatively short half-life of factor VIII (8–12 h). 
Administration of DDAVP can raise factor VIII levels 
2- to 3-fold in some patients. EACA or tranexamic 
acid may also be used as adjuncts. 
 Hemophilia B (also known as Christmas dis-
ease) is the result of an X-linked hereditary deﬁ -
ciency of factor IX. The disease is very similar to 
hemophilia A, but much less common (1:100,000 
males). Measurement of factor IX levels establishes 
the diagnosis. Perioperative administration of fresh 
frozen plasma is generally recommended to main-
tain factor IX activity at more than 30% of normal. 
Recombinant or monoclonal puriﬁ ed factor IX is 
available. 
 Factor XIII deﬁ ciency is extremely rare, but nota-
ble in that the aPTT, PT, TT, and bleeding times are 
normal. The diagnosis requires measurement of fac-
tor XIII levels. Because only 1% of normal factor XIII 
activity is generally required, patients are treated by 
a single transfusion of fresh frozen plasma. 
 Do normal laboratory values exclude 
a hemostatic defect? 
 A bleeding diathesis may exist even in the 
absence of gross abnormalities on routine labora-
tory tests. Some hemostatic defects are often not 
detected by routine testing, but require additional 
specialized tests. A history of excessive bleeding 
after dental extractions, childbirth, minor sur-
gery, minor trauma, or even during menstruation 
suggests a hemostatic defect. Conversely, there 
may be no excess bleeding despite abnormal 
laboratory testing. A family history of a bleeding 
diathesis may suggest an inherited coagulation 
defect, but such history is often absent because 
the increased bleeding is often minor and goes 
unnoticed. 
 Hemostatic defects can often be diﬀ erentiated 
by their clinical presentation. Bleeding in patients 
with primary hemostatic defects usually immedi-
ately follows minor trauma, is conﬁ ned to super-
ﬁ cial sites (skin or mucosal surfaces), and often 
can be controlled by local compression. Small pin-
point hemorrhages from capillaries in the dermis 
as a carrier for coagulation factor VIII. As a result, 
these patients typically have a prolonged bleed-
ing time, decreased plasma vWF concentration, 
and decreased factor VIII activity. Acquired forms 
of von Willebrand’s disease may be encountered 
in patients with some immune disorders and those 
with tumors that absorb vWF onto their surface. 
At least three forms of the disease are recognized, 
ranging in severity from mild to severe. 
 Treatment with desmopressin (DDAVP) can 
raise vWF levels in some patients with mild von 
Willebrand’s disease (as well as normal individu-
als). The drug is usually administered at a dose of 
0.3 mcg/kg 30 min before surgery. Patients who do 
not respond to DDAVP should receive cryoprecipi-
tate or factor VIII concentrates, both of which are 
rich in vWF; prophylactic infusions are generally 
recommended before and after surgery twice a 
day for 2–4 days to guarantee surgical hemostasis. 
 What other hereditary hemostatic defects may 
be encountered in anesthetic practice? 
 The most common inherited defect in sec-
ondary hemostasis is  factor VIII deﬁ ciency ( hemo-
philia A ). This X-linked abnormality is estimated to 
aﬀ ect 1:10,000 males. Disease severity is generally 
inversely related to factor VIII activity. Most symp-
tomatic patients experience hemarthrosis, bleed-
ing into deep tissues, and hematuria. Symptomatic 
patients generally have less than 5% of normal 
factor VIII activity. Classically, patients present with 
a prolonged aPTT, but a normal PT and bleeding 
time. The diagnosis is conﬁ rmed by measuring fac-
tor VIII activity in blood. Aﬀ ected patients generally 
do not experience increased bleeding during sur-
gery when factor VIII levels are more than 30%, but 
most clinicians recommend increasing factor VIII 
levels to more than 50% prior to surgery. Normal 
(fresh frozen) plasma, by deﬁ nition, is considered 
to have 1 U of factor VIII activity per milliliter. In 
contrast, cryoprecipitate has 5–10 U/mL, whereas 
factor VIII concentrates have approximately 40 U/
mL. Each unit of factor VIII transfused is estimated 
to raise factor VIII levels 2% per kilogram of body 
weight. Twice-a-day transfusions are generally 
706 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
with compression. Hemorrhages may be palpable 
as hematomas or may go unnoticed when located 
deeper (retroperitoneal). Coagulation may be 
impaired by systemic hypothermic or subnormal 
temperature of the site of bleeding, even when 
coagulation test (PT, aPTT, bleeding time) results 
are normal and there is no history of hemostatic 
defects. 
(petechiae) are typically present on examination. 
Bleeding into subcutaneous tissues (ecchymosis) 
from small arterioles or venules is also common 
in patients with platelet disorders. In contrast, 
bleeding that results from secondary hemostatic 
defects is usually delayed following injury, is typi-
cally deep (subcutaneous tissues, joints, body cavi-
ties, or muscles), and is often diﬃ  cult to stop even 
 707
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Liver Disease 
 Michael Ramsay, MD, FRCA 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
Because of the increased risk of perioperative 
morbidity and mortality, patients with acute 
hepatitis should have any elective surgery 
postponed until the acute hepatitis has 
resolved, as indicated by the normalization 
of liver tests . 
Isoﬂ urane and sevoﬂ urane are the volatile 
agents of choice because they preserve 
hepatic blood ﬂ ow and oxygen delivery. 
Factors known to reduce hepatic blood ﬂ ow, 
such as hypotension, excessive sympathetic 
activation, and high mean airway pressures 
during controlled ventilation, should be 
avoided . 
In evaluating patients for chronic hepatitis, 
laboratory test results may show only a mild 
elevation in serum aminotransferase activity 
and often correlate poorly with disease 
severity . 
Approximately 10% of patients with 
cirrhosis also develop at least one episode 
of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, and 
some patients may eventually develop 
hepatocellular carcinoma . 
Massive bleeding from gastroesophageal 
varices is a major cause of morbidity 
and mortality, and, in addition to the 
cardiovascular eﬀ ects of acute blood loss, the 
absorbed nitrogen load from the breakdown 
1
2
3
4
5
of blood in the intestinal tract can precipitate 
hepatic encephalopathy . 
The cardiovascular changes observed in the 
patient with hepatic cirrhosis are usually 
that of a hyperdynamic circulation, although 
clinically signiﬁ cant cirrhotic cardiomyopathy 
is often present and not recognized . 
The eﬀ ects of hepatic cirrhosis on pulmonary 
vascular resistance vessels may result in 
chronic hypoxemia . 
Hepatorenal syndrome is a functional 
renal defect in patients with cirrhosis that 
usually follows gastrointestinal bleeding, 
aggressive diuresis, sepsis, or major 
surgery. It is characterized by progressive 
oliguria with avid sodium retention, 
azotemia, intractable ascites, and a very 
high mortality rate . 
Factors known to precipitate hepatic 
encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis 
include gastrointestinal bleeding, increased 
dietary protein intake, hypokalemic alkalosis 
from vomiting or diuresis, infections, and 
worsening liver function . 
Following the removal of large amounts 
of ascitic ﬂ uid, aggressive intravenous 
ﬂ uid replacement is often necessary 
to prevent profound hypotension and 
kidney failure . 
6
7
8
9
10
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
33
708 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Clot breakdown may be enhanced by an imbalance 
of the fi brinolytic system. 
 Chronic liver disease is characterized by the 
impaired synthesis of coagulation factors, resulting 
in prolongation of the prothrombin time (PT) and 
international normalized ratio (INR) ( Table 33–1 ). 
However, the anticoagulant factors (protein C, anti-
thrombin, and tissue factor pathway inhibitor) are also 
reduced and may balance out any eff ect of a prolonged 
PT. Th is may be confi rmed by assessing thrombin 
generation in the presence of endothelial-produced 
thrombomodulin. Adequate thrombin production 
requires an adequate number of functioning platelets. 
If the platelet count is >60,000/µL, coagulation may 
well be normal in a patient with severe cirrhosis. 
 Th e patient with cirrhosis will typically have 
hyperfi brinolysis. However, there is a delicate bal-
ance between the activators and inactivators that 
regulate the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, 
and, therefore, individual laboratory tests may not 
give a true picture of the state of fi brinolysis. Th e 
thromboelastography (TEG ® ), rotational thrombo-
elastometry (ROTEM ® ), and Sonoclot ® technolo-
gies are the optimal methods of demonstrating the 
global state of the coagulation system at a specifi c 
moment in time in any patient with liver disease (see 
Chapter 51). 
 Th e prevalence of liver disease is increasing in the 
United States. Cirrhosis, the terminal pathology in 
the majority of liver diseases, has a general popu-
lation incidence as high as 5% in some autopsy 
series. It is a major cause of death in men in their 
fourth and fi ft h decades of life, and mortality rates 
are increasing. Ten percent of the patients with liver 
disease undergo operative procedures during the 
fi nal 2 years of their lives. Th e liver has remarkable 
functional reserve, and thus overt clinical manifesta-
tions of hepatic disease are oft en absent until exten-
sive damage has occurred. When patients with little 
hepatic reserve come to the operating room, eff ects 
from anesthesia and the surgical procedure can pre-
cipitate further hepatic decompensation, leading to 
frank hepatic failure. 
 COAGULATION 
IN LIVER DISEASE 
 In stable chronic liver disease, the causes of exces-
sive bleeding primarily involve severe thrombocyto-
penia, endothelial dysfunction, portal hypertension, 
renal failure, and sepsis (see Chapters 32 and 51). 
However, the hemostatic changes that occur with 
liver disease may cause hypercoagulation and 
thrombosis, as well as an increased risk of bleeding. 
 TABLE 331 Coagulation test abnormalities.  1  
PT
PTT
TT
Fibrinogen
Advanced liver disease
↑
↑
N or ↑
N or ↓
DIC
↑
↑
↑
↓
Vitamin K deficiency
↑↑
↑
N
N
Warfarin therapy
↑↑
↑
N
N
Heparin therapy
↑
↑↑
↑
N
Hemophilia
 Factor VIII deficiency
 Factor IX deficiency
N
N
↑
↑
N
N
N
N
Factor VII deficiency
↑
N
N
N
Factor XIII deficiency
N
N
N
N
  1  PT, prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; TT, thrombin time; N, normal; DIC, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation.
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
709 
hepatitis C virus. A small percentage of patients 
(mainly immunosuppressed patients and those on 
long-term hemodialysis regimens) become asymp-
tomatic infectious carriers following infection with 
hepatitis B virus, and up to 30% of these patients 
remain infectious with the hepatitis B surface anti-
gen (HBsAg) persisting in their blood. Most patients 
with chronic hepatitis C infection seem to have 
very low, intermittent, or absent circulating viral 
particles and are therefore not highly infective. 
Approximately 0.5% to 1% of patients with hepatitis 
C infection become asymptomatic infectious car-
riers, and infectivity correlates with the detection 
of hepatitis C viral RNA in peripheral blood. Such 
infectious carriers pose a major health hazard to 
operating room personnel. 
 In addition to “universal precautions” for 
avoiding direct contact with blood and secretions 
(gloves, mask, protective eyewear, and not recapping 
needles), immunization of healthcare personnel is 
highly eff ective against hepatitis B infection. A vac-
cine for hepatitis C is not available; moreover, unlike 
hepatitis B infection, hepatitis C infection does not 
seem to confer immunity to subsequent exposure. 
Postexposure prophylaxis with hyperimmune glob-
ulin is eff ective for hepatitis B, but not hepatitis C. 
 Drug-induced Hepatitis 
 Drug-induced hepatitis ( Table 33–2 ) can result 
from direct, dose-dependent toxicity of a drug or 
drug metabolite, an idiosyncratic drug reaction, or a 
combination of these two causes. Th e clinical course 
oft en resembles viral hepatitis, making diagnosis 
diffi  cult. Alcoholic hepatitis is probably the most 
common form of drug-induced hepatitis, but the 
etiology may not be obvious from the history. 
Chronic alcohol ingestion can also result in hepato-
megaly from fatty infi ltration of the liver, which 
refl ects impaired fatty acid oxidation, increased 
uptake and esterifi cation of fatty acids, and 
 diminished lipoprotein synthesis and secretion. 
Acetaminophen ingestion of 25 g or more usually 
results in fatal fulminant hepatotoxicity. A few 
drugs, such as chlorpromazine and oral contracep-
tives, may cause cholestatic-type reactions (see 
below). Ingestion of potent hepatotoxins, such 
as carbon tetrachloride and certain species of 
 Hepatitis 
 ACUTE HEPATITIS 
 Acute hepatitis is usually the result of a viral infec-
tion, drug reaction, or exposure to a hepatotoxin. 
Th e illness represents acute hepatocellular injury 
with a variable degree of cellular necrosis. Clinical 
manifestations depend both on the severity of the 
infl ammatory reaction, and, more importantly, on 
the degree of necrosis. Mild infl ammatory reactions 
may present merely as asymptomatic elevations in 
the serum transaminases, whereas massive hepatic 
necrosis presents as acute fulminant hepatic failure. 
 Viral Hepatitis 
 Viral hepatitis is most commonly due to hepa-
titis A, hepatitis B, or hepatitis C viral infection. 
At least two other hepatitis viruses have also been 
identifi ed: hepatitis D (delta virus) and hepa-
titis E (enteric non-A, non-B). Hepatitis types 
A and E are transmitted by the fecal-oral route, 
whereas hepatitis types B and C are transmitted 
primarily percutaneously and by contact with 
body fl uids. Hepatitis D is unique in that it may be 
transmitted by either route and requires the pres-
ence of hepatitis B virus in the host to be infective. 
Other viruses may also cause hepatitis, including 
Epstein–Barr, herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus, 
and coxsackieviruses. 
 Patients with viral hepatitis oft en have a 1- to 
2-week mild prodromal illness (fatigue, malaise, 
low-grade fever, or nausea and vomiting) that may 
or may not be followed by jaundice. Th e jaundice 
typically lasts 2–12 weeks, but complete recovery, as 
evidenced by serum transaminase measurements, 
usually takes 4 months. Because clinical manifes-
tations overlap, serological testing is necessary to 
determine the causative viral agent. Th e clinical 
course tends to be more complicated and prolonged 
with hepatitis B and C viruses relative to other types 
of viral hepatitis. Cholestasis (see below) may be a 
major manifestation. Rarely, fulminant hepatic fail-
ure (massive hepatic necrosis) can develop. 
 Th e incidence of chronic active hepatitis (see 
below) is 3% to 10% following infection with hepati-
tis B virus and at least 50% following infection with 
710 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Laboratory evaluation of the patient with hep-
atitis should include blood urea nitrogen, serum 
electrolytes, creatinine, glucose, transaminases, bili-
rubin, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin, platelet 
count, and PT. Serum should also be checked for 
HBsAg whenever possible. A blood alcohol level 
is useful if the history or physical examination is 
compatible with ethanol intoxication. Hypokalemia 
and metabolic alkalosis are not uncommon and 
are usually due to vomiting. Concomitant hypo-
magnesemia may be present in chronic alcoholics 
and predisposes to cardiac arrhythmias. Th e eleva-
tion in serum transaminases does not necessarily 
correlate with the amount of hepatic necrosis. Th e 
serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is generally 
higher than the serum aspartate aminotransfer-
ase (AST), except in alcoholic hepatitis, where the 
reverse occurs. Bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase 
are usually only moderately elevated, except with 
the cholestatic variant of hepatitis. Th e PT is the best 
indicator of hepatic synthetic function. Persistent 
prolongation of longer than 3 sec (INR > 1.5) fol-
lowing administration of vitamin K is indicative of 
severe hepatic dysfunction. Hypoglycemia is not 
uncommon. Hypoalbuminemia is usually not pres-
ent except in protracted cases, with severe malnutri-
tion, or when chronic liver disease is present. 
 If a patient with acute hepatitis must undergo 
an emergent operation, the preanesthetic evalua-
tion should focus on determining the cause and the 
degree of hepatic impairment. Information should 
be obtained regarding recent drug exposures, 
including alcohol intake, intravenous drug use, 
recent transfusions, and prior anesthetics. Th e pres-
ence of nausea or vomiting should be noted, and, if 
present, dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities 
should be anticipated and corrected. Changes in 
mental status may indicate severe hepatic impair-
ment. Inappropriate behavior or obtundation in 
alcoholic patients may be signs of acute intoxica-
tion, whereas tremulousness and irritability usually 
refl ect withdrawal. Hypertension and tachycardia 
are oft en also prominent with the latter. Fresh fro-
zen plasma may be necessary to correct a coagu-
lopathy. Premedication is generally not given, in an 
eff ort to minimize drug exposure and not confound 
hepatic encephalopathy in patients with advanced 
mushrooms ( Amanita, Galerina ), also may result in 
fatal hepatotoxicity. 
 Because of the increased risk of perioperative 
morbidity and mortality, patients with acute 
hepatitis should have elective surgery postponed 
until the illness has resolved, as indicated by the nor-
malization of liver tests. In addition, acute alcohol 
toxicity greatly complicates anesthetic management, 
and acute alcohol withdrawal during the periopera-
tive period may be associated with a mortality rate 
as high as 50%. Only emergent surgery should be 
considered for patients presenting in acute alcohol 
withdrawal. Patients with hepatitis are at risk of 
deterioration of hepatic function and the develop-
ment of complications from hepatic failure, such 
as encephalopathy, coagulopathy, or hepatorenal 
syndrome. 
1
 TABLE 332 Drugs and substances 
associated with hepatitis. 
 Toxic 
 Alcohol 
 Acetaminophen 
  Salicylates 
 Tetracyclines 
 Trichloroethylene 
 Vinyl chloride 
 Carbon tetrachloride 
 Yellow phosphorus 
 Poisonous mushrooms (Amanita,  Galerina ) 
 Idiosyncratic 
 Volatile anesthetics (halothane) 
 Phenytoin 
 Sulfonamides 
 Rifampin 
 Indomethacin 
 Toxic and idiosyncratic 
 Methyldopa 
 Isoniazid 
 Sodium valproate 
 Amiodarone 
 Primarily cholestatic 
 Chlorpromazine 
 Cyclosporine 
 Oral contraceptives 
 Anabolic steroids 
 Erythromycin estolate 
 Methimazole 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
711
with destruction of normal cellular architecture 
(piecemeal necrosis) on the biopsy. Evidence of cir-
rhosis is either present initially or eventually devel-
ops in 20% to 50% of patients. Although chronic 
active hepatitis seems to have many causes, it occurs 
most commonly as a sequela of hepatitis B or hepa-
titis C. Other causes include drugs (methyldopa, 
isoniazid, and nitrofurantoin) and autoimmune 
disorders. Both immunological factors and a 
genetic predisposition may be responsible in most 
cases. Patients usually present with a history of 
fatigue and recurrent jaundice; extrahepatic mani-
festations, such as arthritis and serositis, are not 
uncommon. Manifestations of cirrhosis eventually 
predominate in patients with progressive disease. 
 In  evaluating patients for chronic hepatitis, 
laboratory test results may show only a mild 
elevation in serum aminotransferase activity and 
oft en correlate poorly with disease severity. Patients 
without chronic hepatitis B or C infection usually 
have a favorable response to immunosuppressants 
and are treated with long-term corticosteroid ther-
apy with or without azathioprine. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 Patients with chronic persistent or chronic lobular 
hepatitis should be treated similarly to those with 
acute hepatitis. In contrast, those with chronic active 
hepatitis should be assumed to already have cirrho-
sis and should be treated accordingly (see below). 
Patients with autoimmune chronic active hepatitis 
may also present with problems related to other 
autoimmune manifestations (such as diabetes or 
thyroiditis) or long-term corticosteroid therapy that 
they have likely received. 
 Cirrhosis 
 Cirrhosis is a serious and progressive disease that 
eventually results in hepatic failure, and the most 
common cause of cirrhosis in the United States is 
chronic alcohol abuse. Other causes include chronic 
active hepatitis (postnecrotic cirrhosis), chronic bili-
ary infl ammation or obstruction (primary biliary 
cirrhosis, sclerosing cholangitis), chronic right-
sided congestive heart failure (cardiac cirrhosis), 
3
liver disease. However, benzodiazepines and thia-
mine are indicated in alcoholic patients with, or at 
risk for, acute withdrawal. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 Th e goal of intraoperative management is to preserve 
existing hepatic function and avoid factors that may 
be detrimental to the liver. Drug selection and dos-
age should be individualized. Some patients with 
viral hepatitis may exhibit increased central ner-
vous system sensitivity to anesthetics, whereas alco-
holic patients will oft en display cross-tolerance to 
both intravenous and volatile anesthetics. Alcoholic 
patients also require close cardiovascular monitoring, 
because the cardiac depressant eff ects of alcohol are 
additive to those of anesthetics; moreover, alcoholic 
cardiomyopathy is present in many alcoholic patients. 
 Inhalation anesthetics are generally preferable 
to intravenous agents because most of the latter are 
dependent on the liver for metabolism or elimina-
tion. Standard induction doses of intravenous 
induction agents can generally be used because their 
action is terminated by redistribution rather than 
metabolism or excretion. A prolonged duration of 
action, however, may be encountered with large or 
repeated doses of intravenous agents, particularly 
opioids.  Isofl urane and sevofl urane are the 
volatile agents of choice because they preserve 
hepatic blood fl ow and oxygen delivery. Factors 
known to reduce hepatic blood fl ow, such as hypo-
tension, excessive sympathetic activation, and high 
mean airway pressures during controlled ventila-
tion, should be avoided. Regional anesthesia, includ-
ing major conduction blockade, may be employed in 
the absence of coagulopathy, provided hypotension 
is avoided. 
 CHRONIC HEPATITIS 
 Chronic hepatitis is defi ned as persistent hepatic 
infl ammation for longer than 6 months, as evi-
denced by elevated serum aminotransferases. 
Patients can usually be classifi ed as having one of 
three distinct syndromes based on a liver biopsy: 
chronic persistent hepatitis, chronic lobular hepati-
tis, or chronic active hepatitis. Patients with chronic 
active hepatitis have chronic hepatic infl ammation 
2
712 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
( Table 33–3 ) and controlling or preventing its 
complications. 
 A. Gastrointestinal Manifestations 
 Portal hypertension leads to the development of 
extensive portosystemic venous collateral channels. 
autoimmune hepatitis, hemochromatosis, Wilson’s 
disease, α 1 -antitrypsin defi ciency, nonalcoholic ste-
atohepatitis, and cryptogenic cirrhosis. Regardless 
of the cause, hepatocyte necrosis is followed by 
fi brosis and nodular regeneration. Distortion of the 
liver’s normal cellular and vascular architecture 
obstructs portal venous fl ow and leads to portal 
hypertension, whereas impairment of the liver’s nor-
mal synthetic and other diverse metabolic functions 
results in multisystem disease. Clinically, signs and 
symptoms oft en do not correlate with disease sever-
ity. Manifestations are typically absent initially, but 
jaundice and ascites eventually develop in most 
patients. Other signs include spider angiomas, pal-
mar erythema, gynecomastia, and splenomegaly. 
Moreover, cirrhosis is generally associated with the 
development of three major complications: (1) vari-
ceal 
hemorrhage 
from 
portal 
hypertension, 
(2) intractable fl uid retention in the form of ascites 
and the hepatorenal syndrome, and (3) hepatic 
encephalopathy or coma.  Approximately 10% 
of patients with cirrhosis also develop at least 
one episode of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, 
and some patients eventually develop hepatocellular 
carcinoma. 
 A few diseases can produce hepatic fi brosis 
without hepatocellular necrosis or nodular regener-
ation, resulting in portal hypertension and its asso-
ciated complications with hepatocellular function 
oft en preserved. Th ese disorders include schistoso-
miasis, idiopathic portal fi brosis (Banti’s syndrome), 
and congenital hepatic fi brosis. Obstruction of the 
hepatic veins or inferior vena cava (Budd–Chiari 
syndrome) can also cause portal hypertension. 
Th e latter may be the result of venous thrombosis 
(hypercoagulable state), a tumor thrombus (eg, renal 
carcinoma), or occlusive disease of the sublobular 
hepatic veins. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 The detrimental effects of anesthesia and sur-
gery on hepatic blood flow are discussed below. 
Patients with cirrhosis are at increased risk of 
deterioration of liver function because of their 
limited functional reserves. Successful anesthetic 
management of these patients is dependent on 
recognizing the multisystem nature of cirrhosis 
4
 TABLE 333 Manifestations of cirrhosis. 
 Gastrointestinal 
 Portal hypertension
  Ascites 
   Esophageal varices 
  Hemorrhoids 
  Gastrointestinal bleeding 
 Circulatory 
 Hyperdynamic state (high cardiac output) 
  Systemic arteriovenous shunts 
 Low systemic vascular resistance 
 Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy; pulmonary hypertension 
 Pulmonary 
  Increased intrapulmonary shunting; 
hepatopulmonary syndrome 
 Decreased functional residual capacity 
 Pleural effusions 
  Restrictive ventilatory defect 
 Respiratory alkalosis 
 Renal 
 Increased proximal reabsorption of sodium 
 Increased distal reabsorption of sodium 
 Impaired free water clearance
 Decreased renal perfusion 
 Hepatorenal syndrome 
 Hematological 
 Anemia 
  Coagulopathy
 Hypersplenism 
 Thrombocytopenia 
 Leukopenia 
 Infectious 
 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 
 Metabolic 
 Hyponatremia and hypernatremia 
 Hypokalemia and hypocalcemia 
 Hypomagnesemia 
 Hypoalbuminemia 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Neurological 
 Encephalopathy 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
713
reduce the likelihood of these complications and 
bleeding. Placement of a percutaneous transjugu-
lar intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) can 
reduce portal hypertension and subsequent bleed-
ing, but may increase the incidence of encepha-
lopathy. When the bleeding fails to stop or recurs, 
emergency surgery may be indicated. Surgical risk 
has been shown to correlate with the degree of 
hepatic impairment, based on clinical and labora-
tory fi ndings. Child’s classifi cation for evaluating 
hepatic reserve is shown in  Table 33–4 . Shunting 
procedures are generally performed on low-risk 
patients, whereas ablative surgery, esophageal tran-
section, and gastric devascularization are reserved 
for high-risk patients. 
 B. Hematologic Manifestations 
 Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and, less commonly, 
leukopenia, may be present. Th e cause of the ane-
mia is usually multifactorial and includes blood loss, 
increased red blood cell destruction, bone marrow 
suppression, and nutritional defi ciencies. Congestive 
splenomegaly secondary to portal hypertension is 
largely responsible for the thrombocytopenia and 
leukopenia. Coagulation factor defi ciencies arise as 
a result of decreased hepatic synthesis. Enhanced 
fi brinolysis secondary to decreased clearance of acti-
vators of the fi brinolytic system may also contribute 
to the coagulopathy. 
 Th e need for preoperative blood transfusions 
should be balanced against the obligatory increase 
in nitrogen load. Protein breakdown from excessive 
blood transfusions can precipitate encephalopathy. 
Four major collateral sites are generally recognized: 
gastroesophageal, hemorrhoidal, periumbilical, and 
retroperitoneal. Portal hypertension is oft en apparent 
preoperatively, as evidenced by dilated abdominal 
wall veins ( caput medusae) .  Massive bleeding 
from gastroesophageal varices is a major cause 
of morbidity and mortality, and, in addition to the 
eff ects of acute blood loss, the absorbed nitrogen load 
from the breakdown of blood in the intestinal tract 
can precipitate hepatic encephalopathy. 
 Th e treatment of variceal bleeding is primarily 
supportive, but frequently involves endoscopic pro-
cedures for identifi cation of the bleeding site(s) and 
therapeutic maneuvers, such as injection sclerosis of 
varices, monopolar and bipolar electrocoagulation, 
or application of hemoclips or bands. In addition 
to the risks posed by a patient who is physiologi-
cally fragile and acutely hypovolemic and hypo-
tensive, anesthesia for such endoscopic procedures 
frequently involves the additional challenges of an 
encephalopathic and uncooperative patient and a 
stomach full of food and blood. Endoscopic uni-
polar electrocautery may adversely aff ect implanted 
cardiac pacing and defi brillator devices. 
 Blood loss should be replaced with intra-
venous fl uids and blood products. Nonsurgical 
treatment includes vasopressin, somatostatin, 
pro pranolol, and balloon tamponade with a 
Sengstaken–Blakemore tube. Vasopressin, soma-
tostatin, and propranolol reduce the rate of blood 
loss. High doses of vasopressin can result in con-
gestive heart failure or myocardial ischemia; con-
comitant infusion of intravenous nitroglycerin may 
5
 TABLE 334 Child’s classiﬁ cation for evaluating hepatic reserve.  1  
Risk Group
A
B
C
Bilirubin (mg/dL)
<2.0
2.0–3.0
>3.0
Serum albumin (g/dL)
>3.5
3.0–3.5
<3.0
Ascites
None
Controlled
Poorly controlled
Encephalopathy
Absent
Minimal
Coma
Nutrition
Excellent
Good
Poor
Mortality rate (%)
2–5
10
50
  1  Adapted and reproduced, with permission, from Child CG:  The Liver and Portal Hypertension . W.B. Saunders, 1964.
714 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
systolic and diastolic dysfunction are oft en found. 
Noninvasive stress imaging is frequently used to 
assess coronary artery disease in patients older than 
age 50 years and those with risk factors. 
 Hepatopulmonary Syndrome 
 Th e eff ects of hepatic cirrhosis on the pulmo-
nary vascular resistance (PVR) vessels may 
result in chronic hypoxemia.  Hepatopulmonary syn-
drome ( Table 33–7 ) is found in approximately 30% 
of liver transplant candidates and is characterized 
7
However, coagulopathy should be corrected before 
surgery. Clotting factors should be replaced with 
appropriate blood products, such as fresh frozen 
plasma and cryoprecipitate. Platelet transfusions 
should be considered immediately prior to surgery 
for counts less than 75,000/µL. 
 C. Circulatory Manifestations 
 End-stage liver disease, and, in particular, cirrhosis 
of the liver, may be associated with disorders of all 
major organ systems ( Tables 33–3 and  33–5 ). 
 Th e cardiovascular changes observed in the 
patient with hepatic cirrhosis are usually that of a 
hyperdynamic circulation, although clinically signif-
icant cirrhotic cardiomyopathy is oft en present and 
not recognized ( Table 33–6 ). Th ere may be a reduced 
cardiac contractile response to stress, altered dia-
stolic relaxation, downregulation of β-adrenergic 
receptors, and electrophysiological changes as a 
result of cirrhotic cardiomyopathy. 
 Echocardiographic examination of cardiac 
function may initially be interpreted as normal 
because of signifi cant aft erload reduction caused 
by low systemic vascular resistance. However, both 
6
 TABLE 335 Diﬀ erential diagnosis of 
cardiopulmonary dysfunction in chronic liver 
disease and portal hypertension. 
 Primary cardiopulmonary disorders 
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 • Congestive heart failure 
 • Asthma 
 • Restrictive lung disease 
 • Pneumonia 
 Complications of cirrhosis 
 • Ascites 
 • Pleural effusions 
 • Muscle wasting 
 Cardiopulmonary/liver disease 
 • Alcoholic liver disease with alcoholic cardiomyopathy 
 • Hemochromatosis with iron overload cardiomyopathy 
 • A-1 antitrypsin deficiency with panacinar emphesema 
 • Primary biliary cirrhosis with fibrosing alveolitis 
 Pulmonary vascular disorders 
 • Hepatopulmonary syndrome 
 • Portopulmonary hypertension 
 TABLE 336 Hemodynamic and 
pathological changes in the typical cirrhotic 
patient. 
 • Increased cardiac output 
 • Increased heart rate 
 • Decreased systemic vascular resistance 
 • Increased circulating volume 
 • Coronary artery disease 
 • Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy (often unrecognized) 
 •  Low systemic vascular resistance conceals poor left 
ventricular function 
 • Reduced responsiveness to β-agonists 
 TABLE 337 Hepatopulmonary syndrome. 
 Clinical features 
 • Cyanosis 
 • Digital clubbing 
 • Cutaneous telangiectasia 
 •  Orthodeoxia – oxygen desaturation on sitting or 
standing 
 • Platypnea – breathing easier lying flat 
 • Dyspnea 
 Diagnostic criteria  
 •  Presence of liver disease, usually with portal 
hypertension and cirrhosis 
 • An alveolar to arterial oxygen gradient of >15 mm Hg 
 • Pulmonary arteriovenous connections demonstrated by:
  A delayed contrast-enhanced (agitated saline) 
echocardiogram showing contrast in the left heart 
chambers 4 to 6 heartbeats after contrast appears in 
the right heart chambers 
  Brain uptake >6% following technetium-99m 
macroaggregated albumin lung perfusion scan 
 Indications 
 •  Liver transplantation is the only therapy that will cure 
hepatopulmonary syndrome 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
715 
 Th e success of liver transplantation will depend 
on the right ventricle maintaining good function 
during and aft er the transplant procedure despite 
increases in cardiac output, volume, and PVR. If 
RV dysfunction or failure occurs, graft  congestion 
with possible failure and serious morbidity, includ-
ing mortality, may ensue. Assessment of the right 
ventricle using transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) is oft en helpful. 
 Th e role of liver transplantation in the manage-
ment of POPH is not well defi ned. In some patients, 
pulmonary hypertension will reverse quickly aft er 
transplant; however, other patients may require 
months or years of ongoing vasodilator therapy. 
Other patients may continue to progress and even-
tually develop RV failure. Some patients will develop 
pulmonary hypertension aft er liver transplantation. 
Liver transplantation off ers the best outcome in 
patients with POPH that is responsive to vasodilator 
therapy. 
 D. Respiratory Manifestations 
 Disturbances in pulmonary gas exchange and venti-
latory mechanics are oft en present. Hyperventilation 
is common and results in a primary respiratory alka-
losis. As noted above, hypoxemia is frequently pres-
ent and is due to right-to-left  shunting of up to 40% 
of cardiac output. Shunting is due to an increase in 
both pulmonary arteriovenous communications 
(absolute) and ventilation/perfusion mismatch-
ing (relative). Elevation of the diaphragm from 
ascites decreases lung volume, particularly func-
tional residual capacity, and predisposes to atelec-
tasis. Moreover, large amounts of ascites produce a 
restrictive ventilatory defect that increases the work 
of breathing. 
 Review of the chest radiograph and arterial 
blood gas measurements is useful preoperatively 
because atelectasis and hypoxemia are usually 
not evident on clinical examination. Paracentesis 
should be considered in patients with massive 
ascites and pulmonary compromise, but should 
be performed with caution because excessive fl uid 
removal can lead to circulatory collapse. 
 E. Renal Manifestations and Fluid Balance 
 Derangements of fl uid and electrolyte balance may 
manifest as ascites, edema, electrolyte disturbances, 
by pulmonary arteriolar endothelial dysfunction. 
Th e resultant intrapulmonary vascular dilata-
tion causes intrapulmonary right-to-left  shunting 
and an increase in the alveolar to arterial oxygen 
gradient. 
 Portopulmonary Hypertension 
 Pulmonary vascular remodeling may occur in 
association with chronic liver disease, involving 
vascular smooth muscle proliferation, vasoconstric-
tion, intimal proliferation, and eventual fi brosis, all 
presenting as an obstructive pathology that causes 
an increased resistance to fl ow. Th is may result in 
pulmonary hypertension; if associated with portal 
hypertension, it is termed  portopulmonary hyperten-
sion (POPH;  Table 33–8 ). 
 Th e diagnostic criteria for POPH include a mean 
pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) >25 mm Hg at 
rest, and a PVR > 240 dyn.s.cm −5 . Th e transpulmo-
nary gradient of >12 mm Hg (mPAP – pulmonary 
arteriolar occlusion pressure [PAOP]) refl ects the 
obstruction to fl ow and distinguishes the contribu-
tion of volume and resistance to the increase in mPAP. 
 POPH may be classifi ed as mild (mPAP 
25–35 mm Hg), moderate (mPAP > 35 and <45 mm 
Hg), and severe (mPAP > 45 mm Hg). Mild POPH 
is not associated with increased mortality at liver 
transplantation, although the immediate recovery 
period may be challenging if there is a signifi cant 
increase in cardiac output aft er reperfusion of the 
new graft . Moderate and severe POPH are associ-
ated with signifi cant mortality at transplantation. 
However, the key factor is not mPAP, but rather right 
ventricular (RV) function. 
 TABLE 338 Clinical features of 
portopulmonary hypertension. 
 •  Increased pulmonary vascular resistance: 
vasoconstriction, structural vascular remodeling, 
and eventual fibrosis. 
 •  Mean pulmonary artery pressure >25 mm Hg with 
normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 
 •  Right ventricular overload 
 •  Right heart failure 
 •  Hepatic congestion 
 •  Increased liver transplantation mortality risk, especially if 
mean pulmonary artery pressure is >35 mm Hg 
716 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
In patients with both ascites and peripheral edema, 
no more than 1 kg/day should be lost during 
diuresis; in those with ascites alone, no more than 
0.5 kg/day should be lost. Hyponatremia (serum 
[Na + ] < 130 mEq/L) also requires water restric-
tion (<1.5 L/d), and potassium defi cits should be 
replaced preoperatively. 
 F. Central Nervous System Manifestations 
 Hepatic encephalopathy is characterized by altera-
tions in mental status with fl uctuating neurological 
signs (asterixis, hyperrefl exia, and/or inverted plan-
tar refl ex) and characteristic electroencephalo-
graphic changes (symmetric high-voltage, slow-wave 
activity). Some patients also have elevated intracra-
nial pressure. Metabolic encephalopathy seems to be 
related to both the amount of hepatocellular damage 
present and the degree of shunting of portal blood 
away from the liver and directly into the systemic 
circulation. Th e accumulation of substances origi-
nating in the gastrointestinal tract (but normally 
metabolized by the liver) has been implicated. 
 Factors known to precipitate hepatic encepha-
lopathy include gastrointestinal bleeding, 
increased dietary protein intake, hypokalemic alka-
losis from vomiting or diuresis, infections, and 
worsening liver function. 
 Hepatic encephalopathy should be aggressively 
treated preoperatively. Precipitating causes should 
be corrected. Oral lactulose 30–50 mL every 8 hr 
or neomycin 500 mg every 6 hr is useful in reduc-
ing intestinal ammonia absorption. Lactulose acts 
as an osmotic laxative, and, like neomycin, likely 
inhibits ammonia production by intestinal bacteria. 
Sedatives should be avoided. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 Patients with postnecrotic cirrhosis due to hepatitis 
B or hepatitis C who are carriers of the virus may 
be infectious. Universal precautions are always indi-
cated in preventing contact with blood and body fl u-
ids from all patients. 
 A. Drug Responses 
 Th e response to anesthetic agents is unpredictable in 
patients with cirrhosis. Changes in central nervous 
system sensitivity, volumes of distribution, protein 
9
and hepatorenal syndrome. Important mechanisms 
responsible for ascites include (1) portal hyper-
tension, which increases hydrostatic pressure and 
favors transudation of fl uid across the intestine into 
the peritoneal cavity; (2) hypoalbuminemia, which 
decreases plasma oncotic pressure and favors fl uid 
transudation; (3) seepage of protein-rich lymphatic 
fl uid from the serosal surface of the liver secondary 
to distortion and obstruction of lymphatic channels 
in the liver; and (4) avid renal sodium and water 
retention. 
 Patients with cirrhosis and ascites have 
decreased renal perfusion, altered intrarenal hemo-
dynamics, enhanced proximal and distal sodium 
reabsorption, and oft en an impairment of free water 
clearance. Hyponatremia and hypokalemia are com-
mon. Th e former is dilutional, whereas the latter is 
due to excessive urinary potassium losses (from sec-
ondary hyperaldosteronism or diuretics). Th e most 
severe expression of these abnormalities is seen with 
the development of hepatorenal syndrome. Patients 
with ascites have elevated levels of circulating cate-
cholamines, probably due to enhanced sympathetic 
outfl ow. In addition to increased renin and angio-
tensin II, these patients are insensitive to circulating 
atrial natriuretic peptide. 
 Hepatorenal syndrome is a functional renal 
defect in patients with cirrhosis that usually 
follows gastrointestinal bleeding, aggressive diuresis, 
sepsis, or major surgery. It is characterized by pro-
gressive oliguria with avid sodium retention, azo-
temia, intractable ascites, and a very high mortality 
rate. Treatment is supportive and oft en unsuccessful 
unless liver transplantation is undertaken. 
 Judicious perioperative fl uid management in 
patients with advanced liver disease is critical. Th e 
importance of preserving kidney function periop-
eratively cannot be overemphasized. Overzealous 
preoperative diuresis should be avoided, and acute 
intravascular fl uid defi cits should be corrected with 
colloid infusions. Diuresis of ascites and edema 
fl uid should be accomplished over several days. 
Loop diuretics are administered only aft er measures 
such as bed rest, sodium restriction (<2 g NaCl/d), 
and spironolactone are deemed ineff ective. Daily 
body weight measurements are useful in prevent-
ing intravascular volume depletion during diuresis. 
8
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
717
(PEEP) to treat ventilation/perfusion inequalities 
and subsequent hypoxemia. Patients receiving vaso-
pressin infusions should be monitored for myocar-
dial ischemia from coronary vasoconstriction. 
 Continuous intraarterial pressure monitoring 
is oft en used because hemodynamic instability fre-
quently occurs as a result of excessive bleeding and 
surgical manipulations. Intravascular volume sta-
tus is oft en diffi  cult to optimize, and goal-directed 
hemodynamic and fl uid therapy utilizing esopha-
geal Doppler, arterial waveform analysis, or echocar-
diography should be considered. Such approaches 
may be helpful in preventing the hepatorenal syn-
drome. Urinary output must be followed closely; 
mannitol may be considered for persistently low 
urinary outputs despite adequate intravascular fl uid 
replacement. 
 D. Fluid Replacement 
 Most patients are sodium-restricted preoperatively, 
but preservation of intravascular volume and uri-
nary output takes priority intraoperatively. Th e use 
of predominantly colloid intravenous fl uids 
( albumin) may be preferable to avoid sodium over-
load and to increase oncotic pressure. Intravenous 
fl uid replacement should take into account the 
excessive bleeding and fl uid shift s that oft en occur 
in these patients during abdominal procedures. 
Venous engorgement from portal hypertension, 
lysis of adhesions from previous surgery, and coag-
ulopathy lead to excessive bleeding during surgical 
procedures, whereas evacuation of ascites and pro-
longed surgical procedures result in large fl uid 
shift s.  Following the removal of large amounts 
of ascitic fl uid, aggressive intravenous fl uid 
 replacement is oft en necessary to prevent profound 
hypotension and kidney failure. 
 Most preoperative patients are anemic and coag-
ulopathic, and perioperative red blood cell transfusion 
may lead to hypocalcemia (citrate toxicity) because of 
elevated plasma citrate levels resulting from impaired 
citrate metabolism in the cirrhotic liver. Citrate, the 
anticoagulant in stored red blood cell preparations, 
binds with plasma calcium, producing hypocalcemia. 
Intravenous calcium is oft en necessary to reverse the 
negative inotropic eff ects of decreased blood ionized 
calcium concentration (see Chapter 51). 
10
binding, drug metabolism, and drug elimination are 
common. An increase in the volume of distribution 
for highly ionized drugs, such as neuromuscular 
blockers (NMBs), is due to the expanded extracel-
lular fl uid compartment; an apparent resistance may 
be observed, requiring larger than normal loading 
doses. However, smaller than normal maintenance 
doses of NMBs dependent on hepatic elimination 
(pancuronium, rocuronium, and vecuronium) are 
needed. Th e duration of action of succinylcho-
line may be prolonged because of reduced levels of 
pseudocholinesterase, but this is rarely of clinical 
consequence. 
 B. Anesthetic Technique 
 Th e cirrhotic liver is very dependent on hepatic 
arterial perfusion because of reduced portal venous 
blood fl ow. Preservation of hepatic arterial blood 
fl ow and avoidance of agents with potentially adverse 
eff ects on hepatic function are critical. Regional 
anesthesia may be used in patients without throm-
bocytopenia or coagulopathy, but hypotension must 
be avoided. A propofol induction followed by iso-
fl urane or sevofl urane in oxygen or an oxygen–air 
mixture is commonly employed for general anesthe-
sia. Opioid supplementation reduces the dose of the 
volatile agent required, but the half-lives of opioids 
are oft en signifi cantly prolonged, which may cause 
prolonged postoperative respiratory depression. 
Cisatracurium may be the NMB of choice because 
of its nonhepatic metabolism. 
 Preoperative nausea, vomiting, upper gastroin-
testinal bleeding, and abdominal distention due to 
massive ascites require a well-planned anesthetic 
induction. Preoxygenation and a rapid-sequence 
induction with cricoid pressure are oft en performed. 
In unstable patients and those with active bleeding, 
either an awake intubation or a rapid-sequence 
induction using ketamine or etomidate and succi-
nylcholine is suggested. 
 C. Monitoring 
 Pulse oximetry should be supplemented with arterial 
blood gas measurements to monitor acid–base sta-
tus. Patients with large right-to-left  intrapulmonary 
shunts may not tolerate the addition of nitrous oxide 
and may require positive end-expiratory pressure 
718 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
coagulopathy or surgical bleeding. Severe postoper-
ative pain from the oft en extensive surgical incision 
may hinder postoperative mobilization and conva-
lescence, but perioperative coagulopathy may limit 
the use of epidural analgesia. Infusion of local anes-
thetic into the surgical wound can reduce the need 
for opioids. Postoperative mechanical ventilation 
may be necessary in patients undergoing extensive 
resections. 
 Liver Transplantation 
 When a center opens a liver transplantation pro-
gram, a credentialed director should be appointed 
to the anesthesia component. Th is individual should 
be an anesthesiologist with experience and training 
in liver transplantation anesthesia. A dedicated team 
of anesthesiologists should be assembled to manage 
the perioperative course of all liver transplantation 
patients. Th is team should have a thorough under-
standing of the indications for, and contraindications 
to, liver transplantation ( Tables 33–9 and  33–10 ), as 
well as associated comorbidities (eg, coronary artery 
disease, cirrhotic cardiomyopathy, portopulmonary 
hypertension, hepatopulmonary syndrome, hepa-
torenal syndrome and hepatic encephalopathy and 
cerebral edema). It has been demonstrated that such 
an approach improves outcomes, as measured by 
 Hepatic Surgery 
 Common hepatic procedures include repair of lac-
erations, drainage of abscesses, and resection of 
primary or metastatic neoplasms, and up to 80% to 
85% of the liver can be resected in many patients. 
In addition, liver transplantation is performed in 
many centers. Th e perioperative care of patients 
undergoing hepatic surgery is oft en challenging 
because of coexisting medical problems and debili-
tation found in many patients with intrinsic liver 
disease, and because of the potential for signifi -
cant operative blood loss. Hepatitis and cirrhosis 
greatly complicate anesthetic management and 
increase perioperative mortality. Multiple large-
bore intravenous catheters and fl uid blood warm-
ers are necessary; rapid infusion devices facilitate 
management when massive blood transfusion 
is anticipated. Continuous intraarterial pressure 
monitoring is typically utilized. 
 Hemodynamic optimization is oft en compli-
cated by the confl ict between the need to maintain 
suffi  cient intravascular volume to ensure adequate 
hepatic perfusion and the need to keep central 
venous pressure low to minimize liver engorgement 
and surgical bleeding.” Central venous pressure 
measurement is not an accurate monitor of volume 
status, and, when this determination is important, 
the appropriate alternative modality is goal-directed 
therapy utilizing esophageal Doppler, arterial wave-
form analysis, or TEE. Care should be taken in plac-
ing an esophageal Doppler or TEE probe in a patient 
with esophageal variceal disease. 
 Some clinicians avoid hypotensive anesthesia 
because of its potentially deleterious eff ects on liver 
tissue, whereas others believe that it can reduce 
blood loss when used judiciously. Administration 
of antifi brinolytics, such as ε-aminocaproic acid 
or tranexamic acid, may reduce operative blood 
loss. Hypoglycemia, coagulopathy, and sepsis may 
occur following large liver resections. Drainage of 
an abscess or cyst may be complicated by perito-
neal contamination. In the case of a hydatid cyst, 
spillage can cause anaphylaxis due to the release of 
 Echinococcus antigens. 
 Postoperative complications include hepatic 
dysfunction, sepsis, and blood loss secondary to 
 TABLE 339  Indications for liver 
transplantation. 
Pediatric
Adult
 Congenital hepatic fibrosis 
 Alagille’s disease 
 Biliary atresia 
 α 1 -antitrypsin deficiency 
 Byler’s disease 
 Metabolic disorders 
 Wilson’s disease 
 Tyrosinemia 
 Glycogen storage diseases 
 Crigler–Najjar disease 
 Hemophilia 
 Lysosmal storage diseases 
 Protoporpyria 
 Familial 
hypercholesterolemia 
 Primary hyperoxaluria 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Cryptogenic cirrhosis 
 Viral hepatitis with cirrhosis 
 Alcoholic cirrhosis 
 Primary hepatocellular 
malignancies 
 Nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis 
 Fulminant hepatitis 
 Hepatic vein thrombosis 
 Familial amyloid 
polyneuropathy 
 Chronic viral hepatitis 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
719 
a score of 40 predicts a 71.3% risk of mortality at 
3 months ( Figure 33–1 ). 
   Th e MELD score 
        = 0.957 × log e [serum creatinine (mg/dL)] 
            + 0.378 × log e [total serum bilirubin (mg/dL)] 
            + 1.120 × log e [INR] 
 Multiply the resulting value by 10, and round to 
nearest whole number. Th e minimum for all values 
is 1.0; the maximum value for creatinine is 4.0. 
 Most liver transplant candidates have high 
MELD scores and present with jaundice, renal fail-
ure, and coagulopathy. Th ey may also be emaci-
ated and have massive ascites, and some may have 
encephalopathy, hepatopulmonary syndrome, cir-
rhotic cardiomyopathy, and POPH. Th e typical 
hemodynamic fi nding is a high cardiac index and 
low systemic vascular resistance. 
 Signifi cant blood loss may be anticipated, and 
large-bore intravenous catheters should be placed 
for access. A rapid infusion pump should be avail-
able. Routine hemodynamic monitoring should 
include intraarterial pressure monitoring and a 
central venous catheter. TEE is routinely utilized 
reduced blood transfusions, the need for postopera-
tive mechanical ventilation, and the duration of stay 
in the intensive care unit. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Th e  Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) 
score is used by the United Network for Organ 
Sharing (UNOS) to prioritize patients on the wait-
ing list for a liver transplant. Th e score is based on 
the patient’s serum bilirubin, serum creatinine, and 
INR, and is a predictor of survival time if the patient 
does not get a liver transplant. A score of 20 pre-
dicts a 19.6% risk of mortality at 3 months, whereas 
 TABLE 3310 Contraindications to liver 
transplantation. 
Absolute
Relative
 Active sepsis 
 Active substance or alcohol abuse 
 Advanced cardiac disease 
 Extrahepatic malignancy 
 Metastatic malignancy 
 Cholangiocarcinoma 
 Severe obesity 
 Severe pulmonary 
hypertension 
 Severe 
cardiomyopathy 
 High viral load HIV 
 FIGURE 331  Relationship between Model for End-
stage Liver Disease (MELD) score and 3-month mortality 
in patients with cirrhotic liver disease. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Wiesner RH, McDiarmid SV, Kamath PS, et al: MELD 
and PELD: application of survival models to liver allocation. Liver 
Transpl 2001;7:567.) 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–10
0
10
MELD Score
Probability
20
30
40
720 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
will correct with the new liver if its function is good. 
Fibrinolysis, a low ionized calcium level, and hypo-
thermia must be corrected, as these may promote 
bleeding. However, coagulation defects usually do 
not need to be treated preoperatively or intraopera-
tively unless bleeding is a problem. Intraoperative 
transfusion of platelets and fresh frozen plasma 
is associated with decreased long-term patient 
survival. 
 Th e liver transplantation surgical procedure is 
divided into three stages: dissection (preanhepatic), 
anhepatic, and neohepatic periods. 
 Th e dissection (preanhepatic) phase is high-
lighted by the management of hemodynamic 
changes related to blood loss and surgical com-
pression of major vessels. Hyponatremia should be 
carefully managed without rapid serum sodium cor-
rection, because this may promote the development 
of central pontine myelinolysis. Hyperkalemia may 
require aggressive intervention with diuresis, trans-
fusion of only washed packed red blood cells, or 
CVVHD. Citrate toxicity (hypocalcemia) will occur 
rapidly if blood is transfused; therefore, ionized 
calcium should be closely monitored, and calcium 
chloride administered as necessary. A low CVP is 
helpful to minimize blood loss while systemic arte-
rial pressure is maintained. 
 Th e anhepatic phase begins with the vascu-
lar occlusion of the infl ow to the liver and ends 
with reperfusion. Some centers utilize venovenous 
bypass to prevent congestion of the visceral organs 
and improve venous return. It  may protect kidney 
function. 
 In the neohepatic phase, two pathophysiologi-
cal events may occur on opening the portal vein 
and allowing reperfusion of the graft . Th e fi rst is a 
reperfusion syndrome caused by the cold, acidotic, 
hyperkalemic solution that may contain emboli 
and vasoactive substances being fl ushed from the 
graft  directly into the right heart. Th is may cause 
hypotension, right heart dysfunction, arrhythmias, 
and even cardiac arrest, and may be preempted 
to some extent by the prophylactic administra-
tion of calcium chloride and sodium bicarbonate. 
Th e second syndrome that may occur is ischemia/
reperfusion injury. Th is may result from impaired 
reperfusion due to severe endothelial dysfunction, 
in many centers. Pulmonary artery catheterization, 
once routine, has now been abandoned for liver 
transplant patients at many centers. 
 Th e immediate availability of intraoperative 
continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD) 
may be very helpful for volume management in 
the patient with marginal or no renal function. In 
patients with signifi cant electrolyte abnormalities, 
serum sodium and potassium can be closely man-
aged by adjusting the CVVHD dialysate solution. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 As noted above, hepatic disease causes endothelial 
dysfunction that impairs all organs of the body. Th e 
heart develops cirrhotic cardiomyopathy; the brain, 
encephalopathy and eventual cerebral edema; the 
kidneys, hepatorenal syndrome and eventual acute 
tubular necrosis; and the lungs, hepatopulmonary 
syndrome and/or portopulmonary hypertension. 
Th erefore, each organ must be carefully managed 
throughout the operative procedure and the postop-
erative period. 
 Maintenance of cerebral perfusion pressure 
is particularly important in patients with cerebral 
edema, and many centers will temporarily correct 
the coagulopathy in order to place an intracranial 
transducer for monitoring intracranial pressure. 
Additional cerebral protective measures include 
head elevation of 20°, mild hypothermia, and mild 
hypocarbia with vasopressor support to maintain 
mean arterial pressure. When the patient’s head is 
elevated, the arterial pressure transducer should be 
zeroed at the level of the external auditory meatus 
for accurate determination of cerebral perfusion 
pressure. 
 Th e coagulopathy is managed with the aid 
of a point-of-care viscoelastic coagulation assay 
device (TEG ® , ROTEM ® , or Sonoclot ® ) or frequent 
assessment of conventional tests of coagulation. 
Blood loss may be signifi cant, and transfusions are 
targeted to maintain the hemoglobin level >7 g/dL. 
 Transfusions must be tempered to keep the 
central venous pressure (CVP) low during the liver 
dissection to reduce blood loss and minimize liver 
congestion, and at reperfusion and during the 
remainder of the procedure to prevent graft  conges-
tion and hepatic dysfunction. Most coagulopathies 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
721 
 • Aggressive treatment of metabolic acidosis and 
coagulopathy 
 • CVVHD 
 Pediatric Liver Transplantation 
 Selected pediatric centers report survival rates of 
90% at one year. Th e use of reduced-size and living 
donor graft s has increased the organ availability in 
this patient population. 
 Living Donor Transplantation 
 Th e use of living donors has increased the pool of 
organs available for transplantation. However, this 
procedure does expose healthy individuals to mor-
bidity and mortality risks. Informed consent from 
the donor must be obtained with the understanding 
that there is oft en a great deal of emotional pressure 
on family members to donate, and that consent must 
be freely given without coercion. 
 In most donor anesthesia protocols, main-
tenance of a CVP <5 cm H 2 O is utilized to reduce 
intraoperative blood loss. Good postoperative anal-
gesia is required so that comfortable donor patients 
may be extubated at the end of the procedure. 
Complications of this surgery for the donor patient 
include transient hepatic dysfunction, wound infec-
tion, postoperative bleeding, portal vein thrombosis, 
and biliary leaks. An increased incidence of periop-
erative nerve injury to the brachial plexus has been 
reported in donor patients. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Liver Transplantation 
 A 23-year-old woman develops fulminant 
hepatic failure after ingesting wild mushrooms. 
She is not expected to survive without a liver 
transplant. 
 What are the indications for liver 
transplantation? 
 Orthotopic liver transplantation is usually per-
formed in patients with end-stage liver disease who 
and, in rare cases, may lead to primary nonfunc-
tion of the graft . 
 Postoperative Management 
 Patients who undergo liver transplantation are 
oft en severely debilitated and malnourished and 
have multiorgan dysfunction; therefore, they will 
need careful support until they have recovered. 
Continuous monitoring of cardiovascular, pulmo-
nary, renal, and neurological status is necessary. 
Early extubation is appropriate in selected patients 
if they are comfortable, cooperative, and not exces-
sively coagulopathic. Immunosuppression must be 
precisely managed to minimize the risk of sepsis. A 
close watch on graft  function must be maintained, 
with a low threshold for checking hepatic artery 
patency and fl ow. Postoperative bleeding, biliary 
leaks, and vascular thromboses may require surgi-
cal reexploration. 
 SPECIAL SITUATIONS 
 Patients with elevated intracranial pressure and 
those at risk of its development should have intra-
cranial pressure (ICP) monitoring in place, if pos-
sible, to enable the appropriate management of 
cerebral perfusion pressure. Th e cerebral perfu-
sion pressure should be maintained >50 mm Hg 
by adequate mean arterial pressure and a 20–25° 
head-up position. Mild hypothermia should be 
considered. 
 Th e management of patients who are at risk of 
or have elevated ICP should include the following: 
 • ICP < 20 mm Hg 
 • CPP > 50 mm Hg 
 • Mean arterial pressure >60 mm Hg 
 • Proper bed position (elevate the head of the 
bed by 20–25°) 
 • Controlled airway and ventilation 
 • Controlled sedation (eg, propofol) 
 • Vasopressor support (eg, vasopressin, 
norepinephrine) when necessary 
 • Controlled hypothermia (32–33 o C) 
 • Glycemic control 
722 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
greater understanding and experience with trans-
plantation, the safe use of venovenous bypass, 
and the introduction of rapid infusion devices that 
allow +transfusion of up to 2 L/min of warmed 
blood. 
 What are the three phases of the 
transplantation surgical procedure? 
 These procedures can be divided into three 
phases: A dissection (preanhepatic) phase, an 
anhepatic phase, and a neohepatic phase. 
 1.  Dissection (preanhepatic) phase: Through a 
wide subcostal incision, the liver is dissected 
so that it remains attached only by the infe-
rior vena cava, portal vein, hepatic artery, and 
common bile duct. Previous abdominal pro-
cedures greatly prolong the duration of, and 
increase the blood loss associated with, this 
phase. 
 2.  Anhepatic phase: Once the liver is freed, 
the inferior vena cava is clamped above and 
below the liver, as are the hepatic artery, por-
tal vein, and common bile duct. The liver is 
then completely excised. Venovenous bypass 
(see below) may or may not be employed dur-
ing this phase. The donor liver is then anasto-
mosed to the supra- and infrahepatic inferior 
venae cavae and the portal vein. 
 3.  Revascularization 
and 
biliary 
reconstruc-
tion (neohepatic or postanhepatic) phase: 
Following completion of the venous anas-
tomoses, venous clamps are removed and 
the circulation to the new liver is completed 
by anastomosing the hepatic artery. Lastly, 
the common bile duct of the donor liver is 
then usually connected to the recipient via a 
choledochocholedochostomy or Roux-en-Y 
choledochojejunostomy. 
 What major problems complicate 
anesthesia for liver transplantation? 
 Problems include the multisystem nature of 
cirrhosis, the often massive blood loss throughout 
the transplantation procedure, the hemodynamic 
consequences of clamping and unclamping the 
begin to experience life-threatening complica-
tions, especially when such complications become 
unresponsive to medical or nontransplant surgery. 
Transplantation is also carried out in patients with 
fulminant hepatic failure (from viral hepatitis or a 
hepatotoxin) when survival with medical manage-
ment alone is judged unlikely. The Model for End-
stage Liver Disease (MELD) score is used to assess 
urgency for transplantation. 
 The most common indications for liver trans-
plantation in children, in order of decreasing 
frequency, are biliary atresia, inborn errors of metab-
olism (usually α 1 -antitrypsin deﬁ ciency, Wilson’s 
disease, tyrosinemia, and Crigler–Najjar type I syn-
drome), and postnecrotic cirrhosis. 
 The most common indications in adults are 
postnecrotic (nonalcoholic) cirrhosis, primary bili-
ary cirrhosis, and sclerosing cholangitis, and, less 
commonly, primary malignant tumors in the liver. 
 What factors have contributed to the 
recent success of liver transplantation? 
 One-year survival rates for liver transplan-
tations exceed 80% to 85% in some centers. 
Currently, 5-year survival rates are 50% to 60%. The 
success of this procedure owes much to the use of 
cyclosporine and tacrolimus for immunosuppres-
sant therapy. These drugs selectively suppress the 
activities of helper T cells (CD4 lymphocytes) by 
inhibiting production of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 
other cytokines. IL-2 is required for the generation 
and proliferation of cytotoxic T cells responsible 
for graft rejection and for activating B cells respon-
sible for T cell-dependent humoral responses. 
Cyclosporine is usually initially combined with 
corticosteroids and other agents (eg, mycophe-
nolate and azathioprine). Tacrolimus has proved 
eﬀ ective in cyclosporine-resistant rejection and 
is the preferred alternative to cyclosporine as 
the primary immunosuppressant agent. The use 
of anti-OKT-3, a monoclonal antibody directed 
against lymphocytes, has been extremely useful 
in treating steroid-resistant acute rejection. 
 Additional factors inﬂ uencing the improve-
ment in liver transplantation outcome include a 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
723 
measurements of arterial blood gases, serum 
electrolytes, serum ionized calcium, and serum 
glucose are necessary to detect and appropriately 
treat metabolic derangements. Coagulation can 
be monitored by measuring PT, activated partial 
thromboplastin time, ﬁ brinogen level, platelet 
counts, and by point-of-care viscoelastic coagula-
tion analysis—TEG ® , ROTEM ® , or Sonoclot ® analy-
sis. These latter modalities not only assess overall 
clotting and platelet function, but can also detect 
ﬁ brinolysis. 
 What anesthetic technique may be 
used for liver transplantation? 
 Most patients should be considered as hav-
ing a “full stomach,” often because of marked 
abdominal distention or recent upper gastroin-
testinal bleeding. General anesthesia is usually 
induced via a rapid sequence induction with cri-
coid pressure. The semiupright position during 
induction prevents rapid oxygen desaturation and 
facilitates ventilation until the abdomen is open. 
Hyperventilation should be avoided unless there is 
increased intracranial pressure. Anesthesia is gen-
erally maintained with a volatile agent (usually iso-
ﬂ urane or sevoﬂ urane), and an intravenous opioid 
(usually fentanyl or sufentanil). The concentration 
of the volatile agent should be limited to less than 
1 minimum alveolar concentration in patients with 
severe encephalopathy. Nitrous oxide is usually 
avoided. Many patients are routinely transferred 
to the intensive care unit intubated and mechani-
cally ventilated at the end of the operative proce-
dure. Immediate postoperative extubation may be 
considered if the patient is comfortable, coopera-
tive, physiologically stable, and not hemorrhaging 
signiﬁ cantly. 
 What physiological derangements are 
associated with the anhepatic phase? 
 When the liver is removed, the large citrate load 
from blood products is no longer metabolized and 
results in hypocalcemia and secondary myocardial 
depression. Periodic calcium chloride adminis-
tration (200–500 mg) is necessary, but should be 
inferior vena cava and portal vein, the metabolic 
consequences of the anhepatic phase, and the 
risks of air embolism and hyperkalemia when cir-
culation to the new liver is fully established. 
 Preoperative coagulation defects, thrombocy-
topenia, and previous abdominal surgery greatly 
increase blood loss. Extensive venous collaterals 
between the portal and systemic venous circula-
tions also contribute to increased bleeding from 
the abdominal wall. Potential complications of 
massive blood transfusion include hypothermia, 
coagulopathies, hyperkalemia, citrate intoxication 
(hypocalcemia), and the potential transmission of 
infectious agents. Blood salvaging techniques can 
be extremely useful in reducing donor red blood 
cell transfusion .
 What is adequate venous access 
for these procedures? 
 Bleeding is a recurring problem during 
each phase of liver transplantation. Adequate 
venous access is paramount in anesthetic man-
agement. Several large-bore (14-gauge or larger) 
intravenous catheters should be placed above 
the diaphragm. Specialized 8.5F catheters can 
be placed in antecubital veins and used in con-
junction with rapid infusion devices. Eﬀ orts to 
minimize the risk of hypothermia should include 
the use of ﬂ uid warming and forced-air surface 
warming devices. 
 What monitoring techniques are 
most useful during surgery? 
 All patients require direct intraarterial pressure 
monitoring. A central venous catheter should be 
used to deliver ﬂ uid replacement. Goal-directed 
hemodynamic and ﬂ uid management utilizing 
arterial pulse wave analysis, esophageal Doppler, 
or TEE is becoming common. Urinary output 
should be monitored carefully throughout surgery 
via an indwelling urinary catheter. 
 Laboratory 
measurements 
constitute 
an 
important part of intraoperative monitoring. Serial 
hematocrit measurements are mandatory to guide 
red blood cell replacement. Similarly, frequent 
724 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
bicarbonate, inotropic support is also often 
required. Hyperﬁ brinolysis is commonly present 
and seems to be due to a marked increase in tissue 
plasminogen activator and a decrease in plasmino-
gen activator inhibitor and α 2 -antiplasmin during 
the anhepatic phase. Fibrinolysis can be detected 
by point-of-care viscoelastic coagulation analysis. 
ε-Aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid, which 
inhibit the formation of plasmin, may be indi-
cated in those instances, but should not be used 
prophylactically. 
 What problems are encountered 
postoperatively? 
 Patients often have an uncomplicated post-
operative course, and, after a suﬃ  cient period of 
observation in the postanesthesia care unit, may 
be transferred directly to the nursing unit designed 
for liver transplant patients. Problems to anticipate 
include persistent hemorrhage, ﬂ uid overload, 
metabolic abnormalities (particularly metabolic 
alkalosis and hypokalemia), respiratory failure, 
pleural eﬀ usions, acute kidney injury or failure, sys-
temic infections, and surgical complications (eg, 
bile leaks or stricture, or thrombosis of the hepatic 
or portal vessels). The last two complications may 
be suspected during Doppler ultrasound and are 
conﬁ rmed by angiography. Neurological compli-
cations include seizures, intracranial hemorrhage, 
encephalopathy, central pontine myelinolysis from 
a sudden increase in serum  sodium, and immuno-
suppressant-related neurotoxicity. Kidney dysfunc-
tion is often multifactorial in origin; contributory 
factors include periods of hypotension, impaired 
renal perfusion when the inferior vena cava is 
clamped (resulting in high pressures in the renal 
veins), and cyclosporine or antibiotic nephropathy. 
Measurement of immunosuppressant levels may 
be helpful in avoiding toxicity. 
 Prophylactic antibiotics and antifungal agents 
are routinely given in many centers because of a 
high incidence of infections. 
 Graft function is usually monitored by the PT, 
serum bilirubin, aminotransferase activity, and 
serum lactate measurements. Diagnosis requires 
liver biopsy. 
guided by ionized calcium concentration measure-
ments to avoid hypercalcemia. Progressive acido-
sis is also encountered because acid metabolites 
from the intestines and lower body are not cleared 
by the liver. Sodium bicarbonate therapy may be 
necessary and should similarly be guided by arte-
rial blood gas analysis. Excessive administration 
of sodium bicarbonate results in hypernatremia, 
hyperosmolality, and accentuation of the meta-
bolic alkalosis that typically follows massive blood 
transfusions. Tromethamine should be considered 
when large amounts of alkali therapy are neces-
sary. Although hypoglycemia can occur during the 
anhepatic phase, hyperglycemia is a more com-
mon occurrence following reperfusion. 
 Pulmonary and systemic (paradoxic) air 
embolism can occur when the circulation is 
fully reestablished to the donor liver because 
air often enters hepatic sinusoids after harvest-
ing. Systemic air embolism probably reﬂ ects the 
fact that many of these patients have extensive 
arteriovenous communications. The anhepatic 
phase ends when the three venous clamps 
are removed and the donor liver is perfused. 
Thromboembolic phenomena are also possible 
following reperfusion. 
 What problems may be anticipated 
during the revascularization phase? 
 Perfusion of the donor liver by the recipient’s 
blood often results in transiently increased serum 
potassium concentration of up to 1–2 mEq/L and 
increased systemic acidosis. Reperfusion releases 
potassium from any remaining preservative solu-
tion (115–120 mEq/L of potassium) still within the 
liver, as well as potassium released from tissues dis-
tal to venous clamps. Unclamping may also release 
a large acid load from ischemic tissue in the lower 
body (particularly without venovenous bypass); 
preemptive administration of sodium bicarbonate 
is advocated by some. 
 When the circulation to the new liver is estab-
lished, the sudden increase in blood volume, 
acidosis, and hyperkalemia can produce tachyar-
rhythmias, or, more commonly, bradyarrhyth-
mias. In addition to calcium chloride and sodium 
 
CHAPTER 33 Anesthesia for Patients with Liver Disease  
725 
 Johansson PI, Stissing T, Bochsen L, et al: 
Th romboelastography and thromboelastometry in 
assessing coagulopathy in trauma. Scand J Trauma 
Resusc Emerg Med 2009;17:45. 
 Kochar R, Nevah Rubin MI, Fallon MB: Pulmonary 
complications of cirrhosis. Curr Gastroenterol Rep 
2011;13:34. 
 Muilenburg DJ, Singh A, Torzilli G, et al: Surgery in 
the patient with liver disease. Anesthesiol Clin 
2009;27:721. 
 Ozier Y, Klinck JR: Anesthetic management of hepatic 
transplantation. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008;21:391. 
 Sniecinski RM, Levy JH: Bleeding and management of 
coagulopathy. J Th orac Cardiovasc Surg 2011;142:662. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Feltracco F, Ori C: Anesthetic management of living 
transplantation. Minerva Anestesiol 2010;76:525. 
 Ganter MT, Hofer CK: Coagulation monitoring: 
current techniques and clinical use of viscoelastic 
point-of-care coagulation devices. Anesth Analg 
2008;106:1366. 
 Hammer GB, Krane EJ: Anaesthesia for liver 
transplantation in children. Paediatr Anaesth 
2001;11:3 .
 Hevesi ZG, Lopukhin SY, Mezrich JD, et al: Designated 
liver transplant anesthesia team reduces blood 
transfusion, need for mechanical ventilation, and 
duration of intensive care. Liver Transpl 2009;15:460. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 727
34
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for Patients 
with Endocrine Disease 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Diabetic autonomic neuropathy may 
limit the patient’s ability to compensate 
(with tachycardia and increased 
peripheral resistance) for intravascular 
volume changes and may predispose 
the patient to cardiovascular instability 
(eg, postinduction hypotension) and even 
sudden cardiac death. 
 Temporomandibular joint and cervical 
spine mobility should be assessed 
preoperatively in diabetic patients to 
reduce the likelihood of unanticipated 
diﬃ  cult intubation. Diﬃ  cult intubation 
has been reported in as many as 30% of 
persons with type 1 diabetes. 
 Sulfonylureas and metformin have long half-
lives and many clinicians will discontinue 
them 24–48 h before surgery. They can be 
started postoperatively when the patient 
resumes oral intake. 
 Incompletely treated hyperthyroid patients 
can be chronically hypovolemic and prone 
to an exaggerated hypotensive response 
during induction of anesthesia. 
 Clinically hypothyroid patients are more 
susceptible to the hypotensive eﬀ ect 
of anesthetic agents because of their 
diminished cardiac output, blunted 
1
2
3
4
5
baroreceptor reﬂ exes, and decreased 
intravascular volume. 
 Patients with glucocorticoid deﬁ ciency 
must receive adequate steroid 
replacement therapy during the 
perioperative period. 
 In patients with a pheochromocytoma, 
drugs or techniques that indirectly stimulate 
or promote the release of catecholamines 
(eg, ephedrine, hypoventilation, or 
bolus doses of ketamine), potentiate the 
arrhythmic eﬀ ects of catecholamines 
(classically halothane), or consistently 
release histamine (eg, large doses of 
atracurium or morphine sulfate) may 
precipitate hypertension and are best 
avoided. 
 Obese patients may be diﬃ  cult to intubate 
as a result of limited mobility of the 
temporomandibular and atlantooccipital 
joints, a narrowed upper airway, and a 
shortened distance between the mandible 
and sternal fat pads. 
 The key to anesthetic management of 
patients with carcinoid syndrome is to 
avoid anesthetic and surgical techniques 
or agents that could cause the tumor to 
release vasoactive substances. 
6
7
8
9
728 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
known. Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is associated 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus, but rarely individuals 
with DKA appear phenotypically to have type 2 dia-
betes mellitus. Long-term complications of diabetes 
include retinopathy, kidney disease, hypertension, 
coronary artery disease, peripheral and cerebral 
vascular disease, and peripheral and autonomic 
neuropathies. 
 Th ere are three life-threatening acute compli-
cations of diabetes and its treatment—DKA, hyper-
osmolar nonketotic coma, and hypoglycemia—in 
addition to other acute medical problems (such 
as sepsis) in which the presence of diabetes makes 
treatment more diffi  cult. Decreased insulin activ-
ity allows the catabolism of free fatty acids into 
ketone bodies (acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate), 
some of which are weak acids (see  Chapter 50 ). 
Accumulation of these organic acids results in DKA, 
 Th e underproduction or overproduction of hor-
mones can have dramatic physiological and pharma-
cological consequences. Th erefore, it is not surprising 
that endocrinopathies aff ect anesthetic management. 
Th is chapter briefl y reviews normal physiology and 
pathophysiology of four endocrine organs: the pan-
creas, the thyroid, the parathyroids, and the adre-
nal gland. It also considers obesity and carcinoid 
syndrome. 
 The Pancreas 
 Physiology 
 Adults normally secrete approximately 50 units 
of insulin each day from the β cells of the islets 
of Langerhans in the pancreas. Th e rate of insulin 
secretion is primarily determined by the plasma 
glucose concentration. Insulin, the most important 
anabolic hormone, has multiple metabolic eff ects, 
including facilitating glucose and potassium entry 
into adipose and muscle cells; increasing glycogen, 
protein, and fatty acid synthesis; and decreasing gly-
cogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, ketogenesis, lipolysis, 
and protein catabolism. 
 In general, insulin stimulates anabolism, 
whereas lack of insulin is associated with catabolism 
and a negative nitrogen balance ( Table 34–1 ). 
 DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Diabetes mellitus is characterized by impairment of 
carbohydrate metabolism caused by an absolute or 
relative defi ciency of insulin or of insulin respon-
siveness, which leads to hyperglycemia and glycos-
uria. Th e diagnosis is based on an elevated fasting 
plasma glucose greater than 126 mg/dL or glycated 
hemoglobin (HbA 1c ) of 6.5% or greater. Values are 
sometimes reported for blood glucose, which runs 
12–15% lower than plasma glucose. Even when test-
ing whole blood, newer glucose meters calculate and 
display plasma glucose. 
 Diabetes is classifi ed in multiple ways 
( Table 34–2 ). Type 1 (insulin-requiring due to 
endogenous insulin defi ciency) and type 2 (insulin-
resistant) diabetes are the most common and well 
 TABLE 341 Eﬀ ects of insulin.  1  
 Eﬀ ects on liver 
 Anabolic
 Promotes glycogenesis 
 Increases synthesis of triglycerides, 
cholesterol, and VLDL  2  
 Increases protein synthesis 
 Promotes glycolysis 
 Anticatabolic
 Inhibits glycogenolysis 
 Inhibits ketogenesis 
 Inhibits gluconeogenesis 
 Eﬀ ects on muscle 
 Anabolic
 Increases amino acid transport 
 Increases protein synthesis 
 Anticatabolic
 Increases glucose transport 
 Enhances activity of glycogen synthetase 
 Inhibits activity of glycogen phosphorylase 
 Eﬀ ects on fat 
 Promotes triglyceride storage
 Induces lipoprotein lipase, making fatty acids 
available for absorption into fat cells 
 Increases glucose transport into fat cells, thus 
increasing availability of α-glycerol phosphate 
for triglyceride synthesis 
 Inhibits intracellular lipolysis 
  1  Reproduced, with permission, from Gardner DG, Shoback D (editors): 
 Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology , 9 th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2011.
  2  VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease 
729 
may need to be increased if glucose concentrations 
do not decrease. As glucose moves intracellularly, 
so does potassium. Although this can quickly lead 
to a critical level of hypokalemia if not corrected, 
overaggressive potassium replacement can lead to 
an equally life-threatening hyperkalemia. Potassium 
and blood glucose should be monitored frequently 
during treatment of DKA. 
 Several liters of 0.9% saline (1–2 L the fi rst hour, 
followed by 200–500 mL/h) may be required to cor-
rect dehydration in adult patients. When plasma 
glucose decreases to 250 mg/dL, an infusion of D 5 W 
should be added to the insulin infusion to decrease 
the possibility of hypoglycemia and to provide a con-
tinuous source of glucose (with the infused insulin) 
for eventual normalization of intracellular metabo-
lism. Patients may benefi t from precise monitoring 
of urinary output during initial treatment of DKA. 
 Bicarbonate is rarely needed to correct severe 
acidosis (pH < 7.1) as the acidosis corrects with 
volume expansion and with normalization of the 
plasma glucose concentration. 
 Ketoacidosis is not a feature of  hyperosmolar 
nonketotic coma possibly because enough insu-
lin is available to prevent ketone body formation. 
Instead, a hyperglycemia-induced diuresis leads to 
dehydration and hyperosmolality. Severe dehydra-
tion may eventually lead to kidney failure, lactic 
acidosis, and a predisposition to form intravascular 
thromboses. Hyperosmolality (frequently exceed-
ing 360 mOsm/L) induces dehydration of neurons, 
causing changes in mental status and seizures. 
Severe hyperglycemia causes a factitious hypona-
tremia: each 100 mg/dL increase in plasma glucose 
lowers plasma sodium concentration by 1.6 mEq/L. 
Treatment includes fl uid resuscitation with normal 
saline, relatively small doses of insulin, and potas-
sium supplementation. 
 Hypoglycemia in the diabetic patient is the result 
of an absolute or relative excess of insulin relative to 
carbohydrate intake and exercise. Furthermore, dia-
betic patients are incompletely able to counter hypo-
glycemia despite secreting glucagon or epinephrine 
(counterregulatory failure). Th e dependence of the 
brain on glucose as an energy source makes it the 
organ most susceptible to episodes of hypoglycemia. 
If hypoglycemia is not treated, mental status changes 
an anion-gap metabolic acidosis. DKA can easily 
be distinguished from lactic acidosis, with which it 
can coexist; lactic acidosis is identifi ed by elevated 
plasma lactate (>6 mmol/L) and the absence of 
urine and plasma ketones (although they can occur 
concurrently and starvation ketosis may occur with 
lactic acidosis). Alcoholic ketoacidosis can follow 
heavy alcohol consumption (binge drinking) in a 
nondiabetic patient and may include a normal or 
slightly elevated blood glucose level. Such patients 
may also have a disproportionate increase in 
β-hydroxybutyrate compared with acetoacetate, in 
contrast to those with DKA. 
 Infection is a common precipitating cause of 
DKA in a known diabetic patient, and DKA may 
be the reason that a previously undiagnosed person 
with type 1 diabetes presents for medical treatment. 
Clinical manifestations of DKA include tachypnea 
(respiratory compensation for the metabolic aci-
dosis), abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and 
changes in sensorium. Th e treatment of DKA should 
include correcting the oft en substantial hypovole-
mia, the hyperglycemia, and the total body potas-
sium defi cit. Th is is typically accomplished with a 
continuous infusion of isotonic fl uids and potassium 
and an insulin infusion. 
 Th e goal for decreasing blood glucose in keto-
acidosis should be 75–100 mg/dL/h or 10%/h. 
Th erapy generally begins with an intravenous insu-
lin infusion at 0.1 units/kg/h. DKA patients may be 
resistant to insulin, and the insulin infusion rate 
 TABLE 342 Diagnosis and classiﬁ cation of 
diabetes mellitus. 
 Diagnosis (based on blood glucose level) 
Fasting
Glucose tolerance test
126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)
200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L)
 Classiﬁ cation 
Type 1 (juvenile)
Type 2
Absolute insulin deﬁ ciency 
secondary to immune-
mediated or idiopathic causes
Onset in childhood or adulthood 
secondary to insulin resistance 
(relative insulin insensitivity)
Gestational
Onset of disease during 
pregnancy; may or may not 
persist postpartum
730 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
to cardiovascular instability (eg, postinduction 
hypotension) and even sudden cardiac death. Th e 
incidence of perioperative cardiovascular instability 
appears increased by the concomitant use of angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin 
receptor blockers. Autonomic dysfunction contrib-
utes to delayed gastric emptying (diabetic gastropare-
sis). Premedication with a nonparticulate antacid and 
metoclopramide is oft en used in an obese diabetic 
patient with signs of cardiac autonomic dysfunction. 
However, autonomic dysfunction can aff ect the gas-
trointestinal tract without any signs of cardiac 
involvement. 
 Diabetic renal dysfunction is manifested fi rst by 
proteinuria and later by elevated serum creatinine. By 
these criteria, most patients with type 1 diabetes have 
evidence of kidney disease by 30 years of age. Because 
of an increased incidence of infections related to a 
compromised immune system, strict attention to 
aseptic technique, important for all patients, is espe-
cially important in those with diabetes. 
 Chronic hyperglycemia can lead to glycosyl-
ation of tissue proteins and limited mobility of joints. 
 Temporomandibular joint and cervical spine 
mobility should be assessed preoperatively in 
diabetic patients to reduce the likelihood of unan-
ticipated diffi  cult intubations. Diffi  cult intubation 
has been reported in as many as 30% of persons with 
type 1 diabetes. 
 B. Intraoperative 
 Th e goal of intraoperative blood glucose manage-
ment is to avoid hypoglycemia while maintaining 
2
can progress from anxiety, lightheadedness, or con-
fusion to convulsions and coma. Systemic manifes-
tations of hypoglycemia result from catecholamine 
discharge and include diaphoresis, tachycardia, and 
nervousness. Most of the signs and symptoms of 
hypoglycemia will be masked by general anesthe-
sia. Although the lower boundary of normal plasma 
glucose levels is ill-defi ned, medically important 
hypoglycemia is present when plasma glucose is less 
than 50 mg/dL. Th e treatment of hypoglycemia in 
anesthetized or critically ill patients consists of intra-
venous administration of 50% glucose (each milli-
liter of 50% glucose will raise the blood glucose of 
a 70-kg patient by approximately 2 mg/dL). Awake 
patients can be treated orally with fl uids containing 
glucose or sucrose. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative 
 Abnormally elevated hemoglobin A 1c concentrations 
identify patients who have maintained poor control 
of blood glucose over time. Th ese patients may be at 
greater risk for perioperative hyperglycemia, peri-
operative complications, and adverse outcomes. Th e 
perioperative morbidity of diabetic patients is related 
to their preexisting end-organ damage. Unfortunately, 
one third to one half of patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus may be unaware of their condition. 
 A preoperative chest radiograph in a diabetic 
patient is more likely to uncover cardiac enlargement, 
pulmonary vascular congestion, or pleural eff usion, 
but is not routinely indicated. Diabetic patients also 
have an increased incidence of ST-segment and 
T-wave-segment abnormalities on preoperative elec-
trocardiograms (ECGs). Myocardial ischemia or old 
infarction may be evident on an ECG despite a nega-
tive history. Diabetic patients with hypertension have 
a 50% likelihood of coexisting  diabetic autonomic 
neuropathy ( Table 34–3 ). Refl ex dysfunction of 
the autonomic nervous system may be increased 
by old age, diabetes of longer than 10 years’ duration, 
coronary artery disease, or β-adrenergic blockade. 
 Diabetic autonomic neuropathy may limit the 
patient’s ability to compensate (with tachycar-
dia and increased peripheral resistance) for intravas-
cular volume changes and may predispose the patient 
1
 TABLE 343 Clinical signs of diabetic 
autonomic neuropathy. 
 Hypertension 
 Painless myocardial ischemia 
 Orthostatic hypotension 
 Lack of heart rate variability  1  
 Reduced heart rate response to atropine and propranolol 
 Resting tachycardia 
 Early satiety 
 Neurogenic bladder 
 Lack of sweating 
 Impotence 
 1  Normal heart rate variability during voluntary deep breathing 
(6 breaths/min) should be >10 beats/min.
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease 
731 
Hagedorn; intermediate-acting) insulin and 10 units 
of regular or Lispro (short-acting) insulin or insulin 
analogue each morning and whose blood glucose 
is at least 150 mg/dL would receive 15 units (half 
the normal 30-unit morning dose) of NPH subcu-
taneously before surgery along with an infusion of 
5% dextrose solution (1.5 mL/kg/h). Absorption of 
subcutaneous or intramuscular insulin depends on 
tissue blood fl ow, however, and can be unpredict-
able during surgery. Dedication of a small-gauge 
intravenous line for the dextrose infusion prevents 
interference with other intraoperative fl uids and 
drugs. Supplemental dextrose can be administered 
if the patient becomes hypoglycemic (<100 mg/dL). 
However, intraoperative hyperglycemia (>150–180 
mg/dL) is treated with intravenous regular insulin 
according to a sliding scale. One unit of regular insu-
lin given to an adult usually lowers plasma glucose 
by 25–30 mg/dL. It must be stressed that these doses 
are approximations and do not apply to patients in 
catabolic states (eg, sepsis, hyperthermia). 
 An alternative method is to administer regu-
lar insulin as a continuous infusion. Th e advantage 
of this technique is more precise control of insulin 
delivery than can be achieved with a subcutaneous 
or intramuscular injection of NPH insulin, partic-
ularly in conditions associated with poor skin and 
muscle perfusion. Regular insulin can be added to 
normal saline in a concentration of 1 unit/mL and 
blood glucose below 180 mg/dL. Attempting to 
maintain strict euglycemia is imprudent; “loose” 
blood glucose control (>180 mg/dL) also carries 
risk. Th e exact range over which blood glucose 
should be maintained in critical illness has been 
the subject of several much-discussed clinical trials. 
Hyperglycemia has been associated with hyperosmo-
larity, infection, poor wound healing, and increased 
mortality. Severe hyperglycemia may worsen neu-
rological outcome following an episode of cerebral 
ischemia and may compromise outcome following 
cardiac surgery or aft er an acute myocardial infarc-
tion. Unless severe hyperglycemia is treated aggres-
sively in type 1 diabetic patients, metabolic control 
may be lost, particularly in association with major 
surgery or critical illness. Maintaining blood glucose 
control (<180 mg/dL) in patients undergoing car-
diopulmonary bypass decreases infectious compli-
cations. A benefi t of true “tight” control (<150 mg/
dL) during surgery or critical illness has not yet been 
demonstrated convincingly and in some studies has 
been associated with worse outcome than “looser” 
control (<180 mg/dL). 
 Lack of consensus regarding the appropriate 
target for blood glucose has not prevented periop-
erative glucose management from becoming yet 
another indicator of so-called “quality” anesthetic 
care. Consequently, anesthesia staff  should carefully 
review their current practices to ensure that their 
glucose management protocols are in line with insti-
tutional expectations. 
 Control of blood glucose in pregnant diabetic 
patients improves fetal outcome. Nonetheless, as 
noted earlier, the brain’s dependence on glucose as 
an energy supply makes it essential that hypoglyce-
mia be avoided. 
 Th ere are several common perioperative 
management regimens for insulin-dependent dia-
betic patients. In the most time-honored (but not 
terribly eff ective) approach, the patient receives a 
fraction—usually half—of the total morning insu-
lin dose in the form of intermediate-acting insulin 
( Table 34–4 ). To decrease the risk of hypoglycemia, 
insulin is administered  aft er intravenous access has 
been established and the morning blood glucose 
level is checked. For example, a patient who nor-
mally takes 30 units of NPH (neutral protamine 
 TABLE 344 Two common techniques for 
perioperative insulin management in diabetes 
mellitus. 
Bolus 
Administration
Continuous 
Infusion
Preoperative
D 5 W (1.5 mL/
kg/h)
NPH  1  insulin 
(half usual 
 AM dose)
D 5 W (1 mL/kg/h)
Regular insulin:
 Units/h = Plasma glucose
150
Intraoperative
Regular insulin 
(as per sliding 
scale)
Same as preoperative
Postoperative
Same as 
intraoperative
Same as preoperative
  1  NPH, neutral protamine Hagedorn.
732 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
with type 2 diabetes vary in their ability to produce 
and respond to endogenous insulin, and measure-
ment every 2 or 3 h may be suffi  cient. Likewise, 
insulin requirements vary with the extensiveness 
of the surgical procedure. Bedside glucose meters 
are capable of determining the glucose concen-
tration in a drop of blood obtained from a fi nger 
stick (or withdrawn from a central or arterial line) 
within a minute. Th ese devices measure the color 
conversion of a glucose oxidase–impregnated 
strip. Th eir accuracy depends, to a large extent, 
on adherence to the device’s specifi c testing proto-
col. Monitoring urine glucose is of value only for 
detecting glycosuria. 
 Patients who take NPH or other protamine-
containing insulin preparations have an increased 
risk of allergic reactions to protamine sulfate—
including anaphylactoid reactions and death. 
Unfortunately, operations that require the use of 
heparin and subsequent reversal with protamine 
(eg, cardiopulmonary bypass) are more common 
in diabetic patients. Th e usefulness of a small prot-
amine test dose of 1–5 mg over 5–10 min prior to the 
full reversal dose is unclear, although this is recom-
mended by some clinicians. 
 Patients who use subcutaneous insulin infu-
sion pumps for management of type 1 diabetes 
usually can leave the pump programmed to deliver 
“basal” amounts of regular insulin (or insulin 
glargine). Th is is the amount of insulin required 
during fasting. Such patients can safely undergo 
short outpatient surgery with the pump on the 
basal setting. If more extensive inpatient proce-
dures are required, these patients will normally 
be managed with intravenous insulin infusions as 
described earlier. 
 C. Postoperative 
 Close monitoring of blood glucose must continue 
postoperatively. Th ere is considerable patient-to-
patient variation in onset and duration of action 
of insulin preparations ( Table 34–5 ). For example, 
the onset of action of subcutaneous regular insulin 
is less than 1 h, but in rare patients its duration of 
action may continue for 6 h. NPH insulin typically 
has an onset of action within 2 h, but the action 
can last longer than 24 h. Another reason for close 
the infusion begun at 0.1 unit/kg/h. As blood glu-
cose fl uctuates, the regular insulin infusion can be 
adjusted up or down as required. Th e dose required 
may be approximated by the following formula: 
Unit per hour = Plasma glucose (mg/dL)
150
 A general target for the intraoperative mainte-
nance of blood glucose is less than 180 mg/dL. Th e 
tighter control aff orded by a continuous intravenous 
technique may be preferable in patients with type 1 
diabetes. 
 When administering an intravenous insu-
lin infusion to surgical patients, adding some (eg, 
20 mEq) KCl to each liter of fl uid may be useful, 
as insulin causes an intracellular potassium shift . 
Because individual insulin needs can vary dramati-
cally, any formula should be considered as only a 
crude guideline. 
 If the patient is taking an oral hypoglycemic 
agent preoperatively rather than insulin, the drug can 
be continued until the day of surgery.  However, 
sulfonylureas and metformin have long half-
lives and many clinicians will discontinue them 
24–48 h before surgery. Th ey can be started postop-
eratively when the patient resumes oral intake. 
Metformin is restarted if renal and hepatic function 
remain adequate. Th e eff ects of oral hypoglycemic 
drugs with a short duration of action can be prolonged 
in the presence of kidney failure. Many patients main-
tained on oral antidiabetic agents will require insulin 
treatment during the intraoperative and postoperative 
periods. Th e stress of surgery causes elevations in 
counterregulatory hormones (eg, catecholamines, 
glucocorticoids, growth hormone) and infl ammatory 
mediators such as tumor necrosis factor and interleu-
kins. Each of these contributes to stress hyperglyce-
mia, which increases insulin requirements. In general, 
type 2 diabetic patients tolerate minor, brief surgical 
procedures without any exogenous insulin. However, 
many ostensibly “nondiabetic” patients show pro-
nounced hyperglycemia during critical illness and 
require a period of insulin therapy. 
 Th e key to any management regimen is to 
monitor plasma glucose levels frequently. Patients 
receiving insulin infusions intraoperatively may 
need to have their glucose measured hourly. Th ose 
3
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease 
733 
 HYPERTHYROIDISM 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Excess thyroid hormone levels can be caused by 
Graves’ disease, toxic multinodular goiter, TSH-
secreting pituitary tumors, “toxic” or “hot” thyroid 
adenomas, or overdosage (accidental or intentional) 
of thyroid replacement hormone. Clinical manifes-
tations of excess thyroid hormone concentrations 
include weight loss, heat intolerance, muscle weak-
ness, diarrhea, hyperactive refl exes, and nervous-
ness. A fi ne tremor, exophthalmos, or goiter may 
be noted, particularly when the cause is Graves’ 
disease. New onset of atrial fi brillation is a classic 
presentation of hyperthyroidism, but cardiac signs 
also include sinus tachycardia and congestive heart 
failure. Th e diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is con-
fi rmed by abnormal thyroid function tests, which 
may include an elevation in serum T 4 and serum T 3 
and a reduced TSH level. 
 Medical treatment of hyperthyroidism relies 
on drugs that inhibit thyroid hormone synthe-
sis (eg, propylthiouracil, methimazole), prevent 
hormone release (eg, potassium, sodium iodide), 
or mask the signs of adrenergic overactivity (eg, 
propranolol). In addition, although β-adrenergic 
antagonists do not aff ect thyroid gland function, 
they do decrease the peripheral conversion of T 4 to 
T 3 . Radioactive iodine destroys thyroid cell func-
tion and may result in hypothyroidism. Radioactive 
iodine is not recommended for pregnant patients. 
Subtotal thyroidectomy is rarely used as an alter-
native to medical therapy. Typically, it is reserved 
for patients with large toxic multinodular goiters or 
solitary toxic adenomas. Graves’ disease is usually 
monitoring is the progression of stress hyperglyce-
mia in the recovery period. 
 The Thyroid 
 Physiology 
 Dietary iodine is absorbed by the gastrointestinal 
tract, converted to iodide ion, and actively trans-
ported into the thyroid gland. Once inside, iodide is 
oxidized back to iodine, which is bound to the amino 
acid tyrosine. Th e end result is two hormones—
triiodothyronine (T 3 ) and thyroxine (T 4 )—which 
are bound to proteins and stored within the thy-
roid. Although the gland releases more T 4  than T 3 , 
the latter is more potent and less protein bound. Of 
all circulating T 3 , most is formed peripherally from 
partial deiodination of T 4 . An elaborate feedback 
mechanism controls thyroid hormone synthesis and 
involves the hypothalamus (thyrotropin-releasing 
factor [TRF] and thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
[TRH]), the anterior pituitary (thyroid-stimulating 
hormone [TSH]), autoregulation, and the adequacy 
of iodine intake. 
 Th yroid hormone (T 3 ) increases carbohydrate 
and fat metabolism and is an important factor in 
determining growth and metabolic rate. An increase 
in metabolic rate is accompanied by an increase in 
oxygen consumption and CO 2 production, indi-
rectly increasing minute ventilation. Heart rate and 
contractility are also increased, presumably from 
an alteration in adrenergic-receptor physiology 
and other internal protein alterations, not from an 
increase in catecholamine concentrations. 
 TABLE 345 Summary of bioavailability characteristics of the insulins.  1  
Insulin Type  2  
Onset
Peak Action
Duration
Short-acting
Lispro
Regular
Semilente, Semitard
10–20 min
15–30 min
30–60 min
30–90 min
1–3 h
4–6 h
4–6 h
5–7 h
12–16 h
Intermediate-acting
Lente, Lentard, NPH
2–4 h
8–10 h
18–24 h
Long-acting
Ultralente, Glargine, Insulatard
4–5 h
8–14 h
25–36 h
  1  There is considerable patient-to-patient variation. Not all formulations available in every country.
  2  NPH, neutral protamine Hagedorn; PZI, protamine zinc insulin.
734 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
 C. Postoperative 
 Th e most serious threat to a hyperthyroid patient 
undergoing surgery is  thyroid storm, which is 
characterized by hyperpyrexia, tachycardia, altered 
consciousness (eg, agitation, delirium, coma), and 
hypotension. Th e onset is usually 6–24 h aft er sur-
gery but can occur intraoperatively, mimicking 
malignant hyperthermia. Unlike malignant hyper-
thermia, however, thyroid storm is not associated 
with muscle rigidity, elevated creatine kinase, or a 
marked degree of metabolic (lactic) and respiratory 
acidosis. Treatment includes hydration and cool-
ing, an esmolol infusion or another intravenous 
β blocker (with a target of maintaining heart rate 
<100/min), propylthiouracil (250–500 mg every 6 h 
orally or by nasogastric tube) followed by sodium 
iodide (1 g intravenously over 12 h), and correction 
of any precipitating cause (eg, infection). Cortisol 
(100–200 mg every 8 h) is recommended to prevent 
complications from coexisting adrenal gland sup-
pression. Th yroid storm is a medical emergency that 
requires aggressive management and monitoring 
(see Case Discussion,  Chapter 56 ). 
 Th yroidectomy is associated with several 
potential surgical complications. Recurrent laryn-
geal nerve palsy will result in hoarseness (unilat-
eral) or aphonia and stridor (bilateral). Vocal cord 
function can be evaluated by laryngoscopy imme-
diately following “deep extubation”, however, this 
is rarely necessary. Failure of one or both cords to 
move may require reintubation and exploration of 
the wound. Hematoma formation may cause airway 
compromise from collapse of the trachea, particu-
larly in patients with tracheomalacia. Dissection of 
the hematoma into the compressible soft  tissues of 
the neck may distort the airway anatomy and may 
make intubation diffi  cult. Immediate treatment 
includes opening the neck wound and evacuating 
the clot, then reassessing the need for reintubation. 
Anesthesia staff  in the postoperative setting must 
be prepared to open the surgical wound and relieve 
airway compression if the surgeon is for any reason 
unavailable. 
 Hypoparathyroidism from unintentional removal 
of all four parathyroid glands will cause acute hypo-
calcemia within 12–72 h (see the section on Clin-
ical Manifestations under Hypoparathyroidism). 
treated with so-called antithyroid drugs or radio-
active iodine. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative 
 All elective surgical procedures, including subto-
tal thyroidectomy, should be postponed until the 
patient is rendered clinically and chemically euthy-
roid with medical treatment. Th e patient should 
have normal T 3 and T 4 concentrations, and should 
not have resting tachycardia. Antithyroid medica-
tions and β-adrenergic antagonists are continued 
through the morning of surgery. Administration of 
propylthiouracil and methimazole is particularly 
important because of their relatively short half-
lives. If emergency surgery must proceed despite 
clinical hyperthyroidism, the hyperdynamic circu-
lation can be controlled by titration of an esmolol 
infusion. 
 B. Intraoperative 
 Cardiovascular function and body temperature 
should be closely monitored in patients with a his-
tory of hyperthyroidism. Th e exophthalmos of 
Graves’ disease increases the risk of corneal abrasion 
or ulceration. 
 Ketamine, indirect-acting adrenergic agonists, 
and other drugs that stimulate the sympathetic ner-
vous system or are unpredictable muscarinic antag-
onists are best avoided in patients with current or 
recently corrected hyperthyroidism because of the 
possibility of exaggerated elevations in blood pres-
sure and heart rate.  Incompletely treated 
hyperthyroid patients can be chronically 
hypovolemic and prone to an exaggerated hypoten-
sive response during induction of anesthesia. 
Adequate anesthetic depth must be obtained, how-
ever, before laryngoscopy or surgical stimulation to 
avoid tachycardia, hypertension, and ventricular 
arrhythmias. 
 Th yrotoxicosis is associated with an increased 
incidence of myopathies and myasthenia gravis; 
therefore, neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBs) 
should be administered cautiously. Hyperthyroidism 
does not increase anesthetic requirements; that 
is, there is no increase in minimum alveolar 
concentration. 
4
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease
735
is routinely given due to frequent coexisting adrenal 
gland suppression. Some patients may require venti-
latory support and external warming. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative 
 Patients with uncorrected severe hypothyroidism or 
myxedema coma should not undergo elective sur-
gery. Such patients should be treated with T 3 intra-
venously prior to emergency surgery. Although a 
euthyroid state is ideal, mild to moderate hypothy-
roidism does not appear to be an absolute contra-
indication to surgery, for example, urgent coronary 
bypass surgery. 
 Hypothyroid patients usually require minimal 
preoperative sedation and are very prone to drug-
induced respiratory depression. In addition, they 
may fail to respond to hypoxia with increased min-
ute ventilation. Patients who have been rendered 
euthyroid may receive their usual dose of thyroid 
medication on the morning of surgery; it must be 
remembered, however, that most commonly used 
preparations have long half-lives (the half-life of T 4
is about 8 days); therefore, omission of a single dose 
should have no medical importance. 
 B. Intraoperative 
 Clinically hypothyroid patients are more sus-
ceptible to the hypotensive eff ect of anesthetic 
agents because of their diminished cardiac output, 
blunted baroreceptor refl exes, and decreased intra-
vascular volume. For these reasons, ketamine or 
etomidate can be recommended for induction of 
anesthesia. Th e possibility of coexistent primary 
adrenal insuffi  ciency should be considered in cases 
of refractory hypotension.  Other potential coex-
isting conditions include hypoglycemia, ane-
mia, hyponatremia, diffi  culty during intubation 
because of a large tongue, and hypothermia from 
a low basal metabolic rate. 
 C. Postoperative 
 Recovery from general anesthesia may be delayed 
in hypothyroid patients by hypothermia, respiratory 
depression, or slowed drug biotransformation; thus 
these patients may require mechanical ventilation. 
Because hypothyroidism increases vulnerability to 
5
Pneumothorax is an unusual complication of neck 
exploration. 
 HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Hypothyroidism can be caused by autoimmune dis-
ease (eg, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis), thyroidectomy, 
radioactive iodine, antithyroid medications, iodine 
defi ciency, or failure of the hypothalamic–pituitary 
axis (secondary hypothyroidism). Hypothyroidism 
during neonatal development results in cretinism, a 
condition marked by physical and mental retarda-
tion. Clinical manifestations of hypothyroidism in 
the adult are usually subtle and include infertility, 
weight gain, cold intolerance, muscle fatigue, leth-
argy, constipation, hypoactive refl exes, dull facial 
expression, and depression. Heart rate, myocar-
dial contractility, stroke volume, and cardiac out-
put decrease, and extremities are cool and mottled 
because of peripheral vasoconstriction. Pleural, 
abdominal, and pericardial eff usions are common. 
Hypothyroidism may be diagnosed by an elevated 
TSH concentration, or a reduced free (or total) T 3
level, or both. Primary hypothyroidism, the more 
common condition, is diff erentiated from secondary 
disease by an elevation in TSH in the former. Normal 
concentrations of TSH despite reduced T 3 concentra-
tions (the so-called “euthyroid sick” syndrome) are 
oft en seen in critical illness. Th e treatment of hypo-
thyroidism consists of oral replacement therapy with 
a thyroid hormone preparation, which takes several 
days to produce a physiological eff ect and several 
weeks to evoke clear-cut clinical improvement. 
 Myxedema coma results from extreme hypothy-
roidism and is characterized by impaired mentation, 
hypoventilation, hypothermia, hyponatremia (from 
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion), 
and congestive heart failure. It is more common in 
elderly patients and may be precipitated by infection, 
surgery, or trauma. Myxedema coma is a life-threat-
ening disease that can be treated with intravenous T 3 . 
T 4 should not be used in this circumstance to avoid 
the need for peripheral conversion to T 3 . Th e ECG 
should be monitored during therapy to detect myo-
cardial ischemia or arrhythmias. Steroid replacement 
(eg, hydrocortisone, 100 mg intravenously every 8 h) 
736 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
hypocalcemia produced by conditions such as kid-
ney failure or intestinal malabsorption syndromes. 
Ectopic hyperparathyroidism is due to production of 
PTH by rare tumors outside the parathyroid gland. 
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide may cause 
signifi cant hypercalcemia when secreted by a carci-
noma (eg, bronchogenic [lung] carcinoma or hepa-
toma). Bone invasion with osteolytic hypercalcemia 
may complicate multiple myeloma, lymphoma, or 
leukemia. Overall, the most common cause of hyper-
calcemia in hospitalized patients is malignancy. 
Nearly all clinical manifestations of hyperparathy-
roidism are due to hypercalcemia ( Table 34–7 ). 
Rarer causes of hypercalcemia include bone metas-
tases of solid organ tumors, vitamin D intoxication, 
milk-alkali syndrome, lithium therapy, sarcoidosis, 
and prolonged immobilization. Th e treatment of 
hyperparathyroidism depends on the cause, but sur-
gical removal of all four glands is oft en required in 
the setting of parathyroid hyperplasia. When there 
is a single adenoma, its removal cures many patients 
with sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 In patients with hypercalcemia due to hyperpara-
thyroidism, hydration with normal saline and diure-
sis facilitated by furosemide will usually decrease 
serum calcium to acceptable values (<14 mg/dL, 
7 mEq/L, or 3.5 mmol/L). More aggressive therapy 
with the intravenous bisphosphonates pamidronate 
(Aredia) or etidronate (Didronel) may be neces-
sary for patients with hypercalcemia of malignancy. 
respiratory depression, a multimodal approach to 
postoperative pain management, rather than strict 
reliance on opioids would be appropriate. 
 The Parathyroid Glands 
 Physiology 
 Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is the principal regu-
lator of calcium homeostasis. It increases serum 
calcium concentrations by promoting resorption of 
bone and teeth, limiting renal excretion of calcium, 
and indirectly enhancing gastrointestinal absorp-
tion by its eff ect on vitamin D metabolism. PTH 
decreases serum phosphate by increasing renal 
excretion. Th e eff ects of PTH on calcium serum 
levels are countered in lower animals by calcito-
nin, a hormone excreted by parafollicular C-cells 
in the thyroid, but a physiological calcium-lowering 
eff ect for calcitonin has not been demonstrated in 
humans ( Table 34–6 ). Of total body calcium, 99% is 
in the skeleton. Of the calcium in the blood, 40% is 
bound to proteins and 60% is ionized or complexed 
to organic ions. Unbound ionized calcium is physi-
ologically the most important fraction. 
 HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Causes of primary hyperparathyroidism include 
parathyroid adenomas, hyperplasia of the para-
thyroid gland, and certain carcinomas. Secondary 
hyperparathyroidism is an adaptive response to 
 TABLE 346 Actions of major calcium-regulating hormones. 
Bone
Kidney
Intestines
Parathyroid 
hormone (PTH)
Increases resorption of 
calcium and phosphate
Increases reabsorption of calcium; decreases 
reabsorption of phosphate; increases 
conversion of 25-OHD 3 to 1,25 (OH) 2 D 3 ;  1  
decreases reabsorption of bicarbonate 
No direct eﬀ ects; increases renal 
production of vitamin D
Calcitonin
Inhibits osteoclastic 
resorption 
Decreases reabsorption of calcium 
and phosphate
Inhibits reabsorption of 
phosphate; increases renal 
excretion of sodium and calcium
Vitamin D
Maintains Ca 2+ 
homeostasis 
Decreases reabsorption of calcium 
(probably less important than PTH)
Increases absorption of calcium
  1  25-OHD 3, 25-hydroxyvitamin D 3 ; 1,25 (OH) 2 D 3 , 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 .
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease 
737 
manifestations of hypoparathyroidism are a result 
of hypocalcemia ( Table 34–8 ), which can also be 
caused by kidney failure, hypomagnesemia, vitamin 
D defi ciency, and acute pancreatitis (see  Chapter 49 ). 
Hypoalbuminemia decreases total serum calcium (a 
1 g/dL drop in serum albumin causes a 0.8 mg/dL 
decrease in total serum calcium), but ionized cal-
cium, the active entity, is unaltered. Th e archetypi-
cal presentation of hypocalcemia is tetany, classically 
diagnosed by Chvostek’s sign (painful twitching of 
the facial musculature following tapping over the 
facial nerve) or Trousseau’s sign (carpal spasm fol-
lowing infl ation of an arm tourniquet above sys-
tolic blood pressure for 3 min). Th ese signs are also 
occasionally present in nonhypocalcemic persons. 
Treatment of symptomatic hypocalcemia consists of 
intravenous administration of calcium salts. 
 Mild hypocalcemia is common following car-
diopulmonary bypass or infusion of albumin solu-
tions. In many adult patients this need not be treated 
as the response of the PTH–vitamin D axis will usu-
ally be suffi  cient to restore ionized calcium to nor-
mal values and mild hypocalcemia will usually have 
no hemodynamic consequences. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Serum calcium should be normalized in any patient 
who presents with cardiac manifestations of severe 
hypocalcemia. Alkalosis from hyperventilation or 
sodium bicarbonate therapy will further decrease 
ionized calcium. Although citrate-containing blood 
products usually do not lower serum calcium sig-
nifi cantly, they should be administered cautiously 
in patients with preexisting hypocalcemia. Other 
Plicamycin (Mithramycin), glucocorticoids, calcito-
nin, or dialysis may be necessary when intravenous 
bisphosphonates are not suffi  cient or are contraindi-
cated. Hypoventilation should be avoided, as acidosis 
increases ionized calcium. Elevated calcium levels can 
cause cardiac arrhythmias. Th e response to NMBs 
may be altered in patients with preexisting muscle 
weakness caused by the eff ects of calcium at the 
neuromuscular junction. Osteoporosis worsened by 
hyperparathyroidism predisposes patients to vertebral 
compression and bone fractures during anesthetic 
procedures, positioning, and transport. Th e notable 
postoperative complications of parathyroidectomy 
are similar to those for subtotal thyroidectomy. 
 HYPOPARATHYROIDISM 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Hypoparathyroidism is usually due to defi ciency 
of PTH following parathyroidectomy. Clinical 
 TABLE 347 Eﬀ ects of hyperparathyroidism. 
 Cardiovascular 
 Hypertension 
 Ventricular arrythmias 
 ECG  1  changes (shortened QT interval,  2  widened T wave) 
 Renal 
 Polyuria 
 Impaired renal concentrating ability 
 Kidney stones 
 Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis 
 Dehydration 
 Polydipsia 
 Kidney failure 
 Gastrointestinal 
 Constipation 
 Nausea and vomiting 
 Anorexia 
 Pancreatitis 
 Peptic ulcer disease 
 Musculoskeletal 
 Muscle weakness 
 Osteoporosis 
 Neurological 
 Mental status change (eg, delirium, psychosis, coma) 
  1  ECG, electrocardiogram.
  2  The QT interval may be prolonged at serum calcium concentrations 
>16 mg/dL.
 TABLE 348 Eﬀ ects of hypoparathyroidism. 
 Cardiovascular 
 ECG  1  changes (prolonged QT interval) 
 Hypotension 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Neurological 
 Neuromuscular irritability (eg, laryngospasm, inspiratory 
stridor, tetany, seizures) 
 Perioral paresthesia 
 Mental status changes (eg, dementia, depression, 
psychosis) 
  1  ECG, electrocardiogram.
738 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
promote sodium retention and potassium excretion 
(a mineralocorticoid eff ect). ACTH released by the 
anterior pituitary is the principal regulator of glu-
cocorticoid secretion. Basal secretion of ACTH and 
glucocorticoids exhibits a diurnal rhythm. Stressful 
conditions promote secretion of ACTH and cortisol, 
while circulating glucocorticoids inhibit ACTH and 
cortisol secretion. Endogenous production of corti-
sol, the most important endogenous glucocorticoid, 
averages 20 mg/d. 
 Th e structure, biosynthesis, physiological 
eff ects, and metabolism of catecholamines are 
discussed in  Chapter 14 . Epinephrine constitutes 
80% of adrenal catecholamine output in humans. 
Catecholamine release is regulated mainly by 
sympathetic cholinergic preganglionic fi bers that 
innervate the adrenal medulla. Stimuli include 
exercise, hemorrhage, surgery, hypotension, hypo-
thermia, hypoglycemia, hypercapnia, hypoxemia, 
pain, and fear. 
 MINERALOCORTICOID EXCESS 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Hypersecretion of aldosterone by the adrenal cor-
tex (primary aldosteronism) can be due to a unilat-
eral adenoma (aldosteronoma or Conn syndrome), 
bilateral hyperplasia, or in very rare cases carcinoma 
of the adrenal gland. Some disease states stimu-
late aldosterone secretion by aff ecting the renin–
angiotensin system. For example, congestive heart 
failure, hepatic cirrhosis with ascites, nephrotic syn-
drome, and some forms of hypertension (eg, renal 
artery stenosis) can cause secondary aldosteronism. 
Although both primary and secondary aldosteron-
ism are characterized by increased levels of aldo-
sterone, only the latter is associated with increased 
renin activity. Th e usual clinical manifestations of 
mineralocorticoid excess include hypokalemia and 
hypertension, and an increased ratio of aldosterone–
plasma renin activity has been noted in laboratory 
studies. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Fluid and electrolyte disturbances can be corrected 
preoperatively using spironolactone. Th is aldoste-
rone antagonist is a potassium-sparing diuretic with 
considerations include avoiding the use of albumin 
solutions (which bind and reduce ionized calcium 
concentrations) and being mindful of the possibility 
of coagulopathy. 
 The Adrenal Gland 
 Physiology 
 Th e adrenal gland is divided into the cortex and 
medulla. Th e adrenal cortex secretes androgens, 
mineralocorticoids (eg, aldosterone), and glucocor-
ticoids (eg, cortisol). Th e adrenal medulla secretes 
catecholamines (primarily epinephrine, but also 
small amounts of norepinephrine and dopamine). 
Th e adrenal androgens have almost no relevance for 
anesthetic management and will not be considered 
further. 
 Aldosterone is primarily involved with fl uid 
and electrolyte balance. Aldosterone secretion 
causes sodium to be reabsorbed in the distal renal 
tubule in exchange for potassium and hydrogen 
ions. Th e net eff ect is an expansion in extracellular 
fl uid volume caused by fl uid retention, a decrease 
in plasma potassium, and metabolic alkalosis. 
Aldosterone secretion is stimulated by the renin–
angiotensin system (specifi cally, angiotensin II), 
pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
and hyperkalemia. Hypovolemia, hypotension, con-
gestive heart failure, and surgery result in an eleva-
tion of aldosterone concentrations. Blockade of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system with angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin 
receptor blockers, or both, is a cornerstone of ther-
apy (and produces increased survival) in hyperten-
sion and chronic heart failure. Aldosterone receptor 
blockers (spironolactone or eplerenone) added to 
standard therapy prolong survival in patients with 
chronic heart failure. 
 Glucocorticoids are essential for life and have 
multiple physiological eff ects, including enhanced 
gluconeogenesis and inhibition of peripheral glucose 
utilization. Th ese actions tend to raise blood glucose 
and worsen diabetic control. Glucocorticoids are 
required for vascular and bronchial smooth muscle to 
respond to catecholamines. Because glucocorticoids 
are structurally related to aldosterone, most tend to 
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease
739
succinate, 100 mg every 8 h). Other complications 
of adrenalectomy may include signifi cant blood loss 
during resection of a highly vascularized tumor and 
unintentional pneumothorax. On the other hand, 
many adrenal tumors are removed uneventfully dur-
ing laparoscopic surgery. 
 GLUCOCORTICOID 
DEFICIENCY 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Primary adrenal insuffi  ciency (Addison’s disease) is 
caused by destruction of the adrenal gland, which 
results in a combined mineralocorticoid and gluco-
corticoid defi ciency. Clinical manifestations are due 
to aldosterone defi ciency (hyponatremia, hypovo-
lemia, hypotension, hyperkalemia, and metabolic 
acidosis) and cortisol defi ciency (weakness, fatigue, 
hypoglycemia, hypotension, and weight loss). 
 Secondary adrenal insuffi  ciency is a result of 
inadequate ACTH secretion by the pituitary. Th e 
most common cause of secondary adrenal insuf-
fi ciency is iatrogenic, the result of prior admin-
istration of exogenous glucocorticoids. Because 
mineralocorticoid secretion is usually adequate in 
secondary adrenal insuffi  ciency, fl uid and electrolyte 
disturbances are not present. Acute adrenal insuffi  -
ciency (addisonian crisis), however, can be triggered 
in steroid-dependent patients who do not receive 
appropriate glucocorticoid doses during periods 
of stress (eg, infection, trauma, surgery), and in 
patients who receive infusions of etomidate. Th e 
clinical features of this medical emergency include 
fever, abdominal pain, orthostatic hypotension, and 
hypovolemia that may progress to circulatory shock 
unresponsive to resuscitation. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Patients with glucocorticoid defi ciency must 
receive adequate steroid replacement therapy 
during the perioperative period. All patients who 
have received potentially suppressive doses of ste-
roids (eg, the daily equivalent of 5 mg of prednisone) 
by any route of administration (topical, inhalational, 
or oral) for a period of more than 2 weeks any time 
in the previous 12 months may be unable to respond 
6
antihypertensive properties. Intravascular volume 
can be assessed preoperatively by testing for ortho-
static hypotension. 
 MINERALOCORTICOID 
DEFICIENCY 
 Clinical Manifestations 
& Anesthetic Considerations 
 Atrophy or destruction of both adrenal glands results 
in a combined defi ciency of mineralocorticoids and 
glucocorticoids (see the section on Glucocorticoid 
Defi ciency). Isolated defi ciency of mineralocorti-
coid activity almost never occurs. 
 GLUCOCORTICOID EXCESS 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Glucocorticoid excess may be due to exogenous 
administration of steroid hormones, intrinsic hyper-
function of the adrenal cortex (eg, adrenocortical 
adenoma), ACTH production by a nonpituitary 
tumor (ectopic ACTH syndrome), or hypersecre-
tion by a pituitary adenoma (Cushing’s disease). 
Regardless of the cause, an excess of corticosteroids 
produces Cushing’s syndrome, characterized by 
muscle wasting and weakness, osteoporosis, central 
obesity, abdominal striae, glucose intolerance, men-
strual irregularity, hypertension, and mental status 
changes. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Patients with Cushing’s syndrome may be volume 
overloaded and have hypokalemic metabolic alka-
losis resulting from the mineralocorticoid activity 
of glucocorticoids. Th ese abnormalities should be 
corrected preoperatively in the manner previously 
described. Patients with osteoporosis are at risk for 
fracture during positioning. If the cause of Cushing’s 
syndrome is exogenous glucocorticoids, the patient’s 
adrenal glands may not be able to respond to peri-
operative stresses, and supplemental steroids 
are indicated (see the section on Glucocorticoid 
Defi ciency). Likewise, patients undergoing adre-
nalectomy require intraoperative glucocorticoid 
replacement (in adults, intravenous hydrocortisone 
740 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
pressure, orthostatic blood pressure and heart rate, 
ventricular ectopy, and electrocardiographic evi-
dence of ischemia should be evaluated. 
 A decrease in plasma volume and red cell mass 
contributes to the severe chronic hypovolemia seen 
in these patients. Th e hematocrit may be normal 
or elevated, depending on the relative contribution 
of hypovolemia and anemia; thus neither hemato-
crit nor hemoglobin concentration reliably defi nes 
the adequacy of intravenous volume. Preoperative 
α-adrenergic blockade with phenoxybenzamine 
(a noncompetitive inhibitor) helps correct the vol-
ume defi cit, in addition to correcting hypertension. 
β Blockade should not be initiated prior to initia-
tion of α blockade but may be added if there is a 
need to control heart rate and to reduce arrhythmias 
provoked by excess catecholamine concentrations. 
A drop in hematocrit should accompany the expan-
sion of circulatory volume, sometimes unmasking 
an underlying anemia. 
 Potentially 
life-threatening 
variations 
in 
blood pressure—particularly during induction and 
manipulation of the tumor—indicate the useful-
ness of invasive arterial pressure monitoring and of 
adequate intravenous access. Young patients with 
minimal or no heart disease may not need a cen-
tral venous line. Patients with evidence of cardiac 
disease (or in whom cardiac disease is suspected) 
may benefi t from having a central line (a convenient 
route of access for administering catecholamines, 
should they be required) and from intraoperative 
transesophageal echocardiography. 
 Intubation should not be attempted until a 
deep level of general anesthesia (possibly also 
including local anesthesia of the trachea) has been 
established. Intraoperative hypertension can be 
treated with phentolamine, nitroprusside, nicardip-
ine, or clevidipine. Phentolamine specifi cally blocks 
α-adrenergic receptors and blocks the eff ects of 
excessive circulating catecholamines. Nitroprusside 
has a rapid onset of action, a short duration of 
action, and as a nitric oxide donor can be eff ective in 
cases where calcium channel blockers are ineff ec-
tive. Nicardipine and clevidipine are being used 
more frequently preoperatively and intraoperatively. 
 Drugs or techniques that indirectly stimulate 
or promote the release of catecholamines 
7
appropriately to surgical stress and should receive 
perioperative glucocorticoid supplementation. 
 What represents adequate steroid coverage is 
controversial, and there are those who advocate 
variable dosing based on the extent of the surgery. 
Although adults normally secrete 20 mg of corti-
sol daily, this may increase to over 300 mg under 
conditions of maximal stress. Th us, a traditional 
recommendation was to administer 100 mg of 
hydrocortisone phosphate every 8 h beginning on 
the morning of surgery. An alternative low-dose 
regimen (25 mg of hydrocortisone at the time of 
induction followed by an infusion of 100 mg during 
the subsequent 24 h) maintains plasma cortisol lev-
els equal to or higher than those reported in healthy 
patients undergoing similar elective surgery. Th is 
second regimen might be particularly appropriate for 
diabetic patients, in whom glucocorticoid adminis-
tration oft en interferes with control of blood glucose. 
 CATECHOLAMINE EXCESS 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Pheochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting 
tumor that consists of cells originating from the 
embryonic neural crest. Th is tumor accounts for 
0.1% of all cases of hypertension. Although the 
tumor is usually localized in a single adrenal gland, 
10–15% are bilateral or extraadrenal. Approximately 
10% of tumors are malignant. Th e cardinal mani-
festations of pheochromocytoma are paroxysmal 
hypertension, headache, sweating, and palpitations. 
Unexpected intraoperative hypertension and tachy-
cardia during manipulation of abdominal structures 
may occasionally be the fi rst indications of an undi-
agnosed pheochromocytoma. Th e pathophysiology, 
diagnosis, and treatment of these tumors require an 
understanding of catecholamine metabolism and of 
the pharmacology of adrenergic agonists and antag-
onists. Th e Case Discussion in  Chapter 14 examines 
these aspects of pheochromocytoma management. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Preoperative assessment should focus on the 
adequacy of α-adrenergic blockade and volume 
replacement. Specifi cally, resting arterial blood 
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease 
741 
artery disease, obstructive sleep apnea, degenera-
tive joint disease (osteoarthritis), and cholelithiasis. 
Even in the absence of obvious coexisting disease, 
however, extreme obesity has profound physiologi-
cal consequences. Oxygen demand, CO 2 production, 
and alveolar ventilation are elevated because meta-
bolic rate is proportional to body weight. Excessive 
adipose tissue over the thorax decreases chest wall 
compliance even though lung compliance may 
remain normal. Increased abdominal mass forces 
the diaphragm cephalad, yielding lung volumes 
suggestive of restrictive lung disease. Reductions 
in lung volumes are accentuated by the supine and 
Trendelenburg positions. In particular, functional 
residual capacity may fall below closing capacity. If 
this occurs, some alveoli will close during normal 
tidal volume ventilation, causing a ventilation/per-
fusion mismatch. 
 Whereas obese patients are oft en hypoxemic, 
only a few are hypercapnic, which should be a 
warning of impending complications. Obesity-
hypoventilation syndrome, or obstructive sleep 
apnea (OSA), is a complication of extreme obesity 
characterized by hypercapnia, cyanosis-induced 
polycythemia, right-sided heart failure, and som-
nolence. Th ese patients appear to have blunted 
respiratory drive and oft en suff er from loud snoring 
and upper-airway obstruction during sleep. OSA 
patients oft en report dry mouths and daytime som-
nolence; bed partners frequently describe apneic 
pauses. OSA has also been associated with increased 
perioperative complications including hyperten-
sion, hypoxia, arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, 
pulmonary edema, stroke, and death. Th e potential 
for diffi  cult mask ventilation and diffi  cult intuba-
tion, followed by upper airway obstruction during 
recovery, should be anticipated. 
 OSA patients are vulnerable during the postop-
erative period, particularly when sedatives or opi-
oids have been given. When OSA patients are placed 
supine, the upper airway is even more prone to 
obstruction. For patients with known or suspected 
OSA, postoperative continuous positive airway pres-
sure (CPAP) should be considered until the anesthe-
siologist can be sure that the patient can protect his 
or her airway and maintain spontaneous ventilation 
without evidence of obstruction. Both the American 
(eg, ephedrine, hypoventilation, or large bolus doses 
of ketamine), potentiate the arrhythmic eff ects of 
catecholamines (classically halothane), or consis-
tently release histamine (eg, large doses of atracu-
rium or morphine sulfate) are best avoided. 
 Aft er ligation of the tumor’s venous supply, the 
primary problem frequently becomes  hypotension 
from hypovolemia, persistent adrenergic blockade, 
and tolerance to the high levels of endogenous cat-
echolamines that have been abruptly withdrawn. 
Appropriate fl uid resuscitation should refl ect 
surgical bleeding and other sources of fl uid loss. 
Assessment of intravascular volume can be guided 
by echocardiographic assessment of left  ventricular 
fi lling using transesophageal echocardiography or 
other noninvasive measures of cardiac output and 
stroke volume. Infusions of adrenergic agonists, 
such as phenylephrine or norepinephrine, oft en 
prove necessary. Postoperative  hypertension is rare 
and may indicate the presence of unresected occult 
tumors. 
 Obesity 
 Overweight and obesity are classifi ed using the 
body mass index (BMI). Overweight is defi ned as 
a BMI of 24 kg/m 2 or higher, obesity as a BMI of 
30 or higher, and extreme obesity (formerly termed 
“morbid obesity”) as a BMI of more than 40. 
BMI is calculated by dividing the weight (in kilo-
grams) by the height (in meters) squared. Health 
risks increase with the degree of obesity and with 
increased abdominal distribution of weight. Men 
with a waist measurement of 40 in. or more and 
women with a waist measurement of 35 in. or more 
are at increased health risk. For a patient 1.8 m tall 
and weighing 70 kg, the BMI would be as shown in 
the following formula: 
 
BMI =
Weight (kg)
(Height [meters])2
= 21.6 kg/m2
= 70 kg
1.82 = 70 
3.24
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Obesity is associated with many diseases, includ-
ing type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, coronary 
742 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
temporomandibular and atlantooccipital joints, a 
narrowed upper airway, and a shortened distance 
between the mandible and sternal fat pads. 
 B. Intraoperative 
 Because of the risks of aspiration and hypoventilation, 
morbidly obese patients are usually intubated for all 
but short general anesthetics. If intubation appears 
likely to be diffi  cult, the use of a fi beroptic bron-
choscope or video laryngoscopy is recommended. 
Positioning the patient on an intubating ramp is help-
ful. Auscultation of breath sounds may prove diffi  cult. 
Even controlled ventilation may require relatively 
increased inspired oxygen concentrations to prevent 
hypoxia, particularly in the lithotomy, Trendelenburg, 
or prone positions. Subdiaphragmatic abdominal 
laparotomy packs can cause further deterioration of 
pulmonary function and a reduction of arterial blood 
pressure by increasing the resistance to venous return. 
Volatile anesthetics may be metabolized more exten-
sively in obese patients. Increased metabolism may 
explain the increased incidence of halothane hepatitis 
observed in obese patients. Obesity has little clinical 
eff ect on the rate of decline of alveolar anesthetic con-
centrations and wake-up time, even following long 
surgical procedures. 
 Th eoretically, greater fat stores would increase 
the volume of distribution for lipid-soluble drugs 
(eg, benzodiazepines, opioids) relative to a lean per-
son of the same body weight. However, the volume 
of distribution of, for example, fentanyl or sufentanil 
is so large that obesity has minimal infl uence. Water-
soluble drugs (eg, NMBs) have a much smaller vol-
ume of distribution, which is minimally increased 
by body fat. Nonetheless, the dosing of water-soluble 
drugs should be based on ideal body weight to avoid 
overdosing. In reality, of course, clinical practice 
does not always validate these expectations. 
 Although dosage requirements for epidural 
and spinal anesthesia are diffi  cult to predict, obese 
patients typically require 20–25% less local anes-
thetic per blocked segment because of epidural 
fat and distended epidural veins. Continuous epi-
dural anesthesia has the advantage of providing 
pain relief and the potential for decreasing respi-
ratory complications in the postoperative period. 
Regional nerve blocks, when appropriate for the 
Society of Anesthesiologists and the Society of 
Ambulatory Anesthesia off er guidelines on periop-
erative management of the patient with OSA. 
 An OSA patient’s heart has an increased work-
load, as cardiac output and blood volume rise to 
perfuse additional fat stores. Th e elevation in cardiac 
output (0.1 L/min/kg of adipose tissue) is achieved 
through an increase in stroke volume—as opposed 
to heart rate. Arterial hypertension leads to left  ven-
tricular hypertrophy. Elevations in pulmonary blood 
fl ow and pulmonary artery vasoconstriction from 
persistent hypoxia can lead to pulmonary hyperten-
sion and cor pulmonale. 
 Obesity is also associated with gastrointestinal 
pathophysiology, including hiatal hernia, gastro-
esophageal refl ux disease, delayed gastric empty-
ing, and hyperacidic gastric fl uid, as well as with 
an increased risk of gastric cancer. Fatty infi ltration 
of the liver also occurs and may be associated with 
abnormal liver tests, but the extent of infi ltration 
does not correlate well with the degree of liver test 
abnormality. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Preoperative 
 For the reasons outlined above, obese patients are at 
an increased risk for developing aspiration pneumo-
nia. Pretreatment with H 2 antagonists and metoclo-
pramide should be considered. Premedication with 
respiratory depressant drugs must be avoided in 
patients with OSA. 
 Preoperative evaluation of extremely obese 
patients undergoing major surgery should attempt 
to assess cardiopulmonary reserve. Preoperative 
testing may include such items as chest radiograph, 
ECG, and arterial blood gas analysis. Physical signs 
of cardiac failure (eg, sacral edema) may be diffi  cult 
to identify. Blood pressures must be taken with a cuff  
of the appropriate size. Potential sites for intrave-
nous and intraarterial access should be checked in 
anticipation of technical diffi  culties. Obscured land-
marks, diffi  cult positioning, and extensive layers 
of adipose tissue may make regional anesthe-
sia diffi  cult with standard equipment and tech-
niques.  Obese patients may be diffi  cult to 
intubate as a result of limited mobility of the 
8
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease
743
ovarian) or hepatic metastases bypass the portal cir-
culation and, therefore, can cause a variety of clini-
cal manifestations. Many patients undergo surgery 
for resection of carcinoid tumors; most such patients 
have not experienced carcinoid syndrome. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Th e most common manifestations of carcinoid 
syndrome are cutaneous fl ushing, bronchospasm, 
profuse diarrhea, dramatic swings in arterial blood 
pressure (usually hypotension), and supraventricu-
lar arrhythmias ( Table 34–9 ).  Carcinoid syndrome 
is associated with right-sided heart disease caused 
by valvular and myocardial plaque formation, 
and, in some cases, implantation of tumors on the 
tricuspid and pulmonary valves.  Th e diagnosis of 
carcinoid syndrome is confi rmed by detection of 
serotonin metabolites in the urine (5-hydroxyin-
doleacetic acid) or suggested by elevated plasma lev-
els of chromogranin A. Treatment varies depending 
on tumor location but may include surgical resec-
tion, symptomatic relief, or specifi c serotonin and 
histamine antagonists. Somatostatin, an inhibitory 
peptide, reduces the release of vasoactive tumor 
products. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th e key to perioperative management of 
patients with carcinoid syndrome is to 
avoid anesthetic and surgical techniques or agents 
that could cause the tumor to release vasoactive 
9
surgery, have the additional advantages of not inter-
fering with the postoperative deep vein thrombosis 
prophylaxis, rarely producing hypotension, and of 
reducing the need for opioids. 
 C. Postoperative 
 Respiratory failure is a major postoperative problem 
of morbidly obese patients. Th e risk of postopera-
tive hypoxia is increased in patients with preopera-
tive hypoxia, following surgery involving the thorax 
or upper abdomen (particularly vertical incisions). 
Extubation should be delayed until the eff ects of 
NMBs are completely reversed and the patient is 
awake. An obese patient should remain intubated 
until there is no doubt that an adequate airway and 
tidal volume will be maintained. Th is does  not mean 
that all obese patients need be ventilated overnight 
in an intensive care unit. If the patient is extubated 
in the operating room, supplemental oxygen should 
be provided during transportation to the postan-
esthesia care unit. A 45° modifi ed sitting position 
will improve ventilation and oxygenation. Th e risk 
of hypoxia extends for several days into the postop-
erative period, and providing supplemental oxygen 
or CPAP, or both, should be routinely considered. 
Other common postoperative complications in 
obese patients include wound infection, deep venous 
thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism. Morbidly 
obese and OSA patients may be candidates for out-
patient surgery provided they are adequately moni-
tored and assessed postoperatively before discharge 
to home, and provided the surgical procedure will 
not require large doses of opioids for postoperative 
pain control. 
 Carcinoid Syndrome 
 Carcinoid syndrome is the complex of symptoms and 
signs caused by the secretion of vasoactive substances 
(eg, serotonin, kallikrein, histamine) from entero-
epinephrine tumors (carcinoid tumors). Because 
most of these tumors are located in the gastroin-
testinal tract, their metabolic products are released 
into the portal circulation and destroyed by the liver 
before they can cause systemic eff ects. However, the 
products of nonintestinal tumors (eg, pulmonary, 
 TABLE 349 Principal mediators of carcinoid 
syndrome and their clinical manifestations. 
Mediator
Clinical Manifestations
Serotonin
Vasoconstriction (coronary artery spasm, 
hypertension), increased intestinal tone, 
water and electrolyte imbalance (diarrhea), 
tryptophan deﬁ ciency (hypoproteinemia, 
pellagra)
Kallikrein
Vasodilation (hypotension, ﬂ ushing), 
bronchoconstriction
Histamine
Vasodilation (hypotension, ﬂ ushing), 
arrhythmias, bronchoconstriction
744 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management 
medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocy-
toma, and hyperparathyroidism (type 2a) or mul-
tiple mucosal neuromas (type 2b or type 3). The 
hypertensive episode in this case may be due to a 
previously undiagnosed pheochromocytoma. The 
pheochromocytoma in MEN may consist of small 
multiple tumors. These patients are typically young 
adults with strong family histories of MEN. If mul-
tiple surgeries are planned, pheochromocytoma 
resection will usually be scheduled ﬁ rst. 
 What is calcitonin, and why is it associated with 
medullary cancer? 
 Calcitonin is a polypeptide manufactured by 
the parafollicular cells (C cells) in the thyroid gland. 
It is secreted in response to increases in plasma 
ionic calcium and tends to lower calcium levels by 
aﬀ ecting kidney and bone function. Therefore, it 
acts as an antagonist of parathyroid hormone (see 
 Table 34–6 ). 
 Why is this patient hypercalcemic if calcitonin 
lowers serum calcium? 
 An excess or deﬁ ciency of calcitonin has minor 
eﬀ ects in humans compared with the eﬀ ects of 
parathyroid disorders. This patient’s hypercalcemia 
is most likely due to coexisting primary hyperpara-
thyroidism (MEN type 2a). 
 Are headache and diarrhea consistent with the 
diagnosis of MEN? 
 The history of headaches suggests the possibil-
ity of pheochromocytoma, whereas diarrhea may 
be due to calcitonin or one of the other peptides 
often produced by medullary thyroid carcinoma 
(eg, ACTH, somatostatin, β-endorphin). 
 What follow-up is required for this patient? 
 Because of the life-threatening hemodynamic 
changes associated with pheochromocytoma, 
this entity must be medically controlled before 
surgery can be considered (see Case Discussion, 
 Chapter 14 ). Because MEN syndromes are heredi-
tary, family members should be screened for early 
signs of pheochromocytoma, thyroid cancer, and 
hyperparathyroidism. 
substances. Regional anesthesia may limit release of 
stress hormones perioperatively. Large bolus doses 
of histamine-releasing drugs (eg, morphine and 
atracurium) should be avoided. Surgical manipu-
lation of the tumor can cause a massive release of 
hormones. Monitoring likely will include an arterial 
line. If there are concerns about hemodynamic insta-
bility or intrinsic heart disease caused by carcinoid 
syndrome, transesophageal echocardiography may 
be helpful. Alterations in carbohydrate metabolism 
may lead to unsuspected hypoglycemia or hypergly-
cemia. Consultation with an endocrinologist may 
help clarify the role of antihistamine, antiserotonin 
drugs (eg, methysergide), octreotide (a long-acting 
somatostatin analogue), or antikallikrein drugs (eg, 
corticosteroids) in specifi c patients. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia 
 An isolated thyroid nodule is discovered during 
physical examination of a 36-year-old woman 
complaining of diarrhea and headaches. Workup 
of the tumor reveals hypercalcemia and an ele-
vated calcitonin level, which leads to the diag-
nosis of medullary cancer of the thyroid and 
primary hyperparathyroidism. During induction 
of general anesthesia for total thyroidectomy, 
the patient’s blood pressure rises to 240/140 mm 
Hg and her heart rate approaches 140 beats/min, 
with frequent premature ventricular contrac-
tions. The operation is canceled, an arterial line is 
inserted, and the patient is treated with intrave-
nous esmolol and nicardipine. 
 What could be the cause of this patient’s 
hypertensive crisis during induction of general 
anesthesia? 
 Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) is charac-
terized by tumor formation in several endocrine 
organs. MEN type 1 consists of pancreatic (gastri-
nomas, insulinomas), pituitary (chromophobes), 
and parathyroid tumors. MEN type 2 consists of 
 
CHAPTER 34 Anesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease 
745 
 Jones GC, Macklin JP, Alexander WD: Contraindications 
to the use of metformin. Evidence suggests that it is 
time to amend the list. BMJ 2003;326:4. 
 King DR, Velmahos GC: Diffi  culties in managing the 
surgical patient who is morbidly obese. Crit Care Med 
2010;38:S478. 
 Kohl BA, Schwartz S: How to manage perioperative 
endocrine insuffi  ciency. Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:139. 
 NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Chittock DR, 
et al: Intensive versus conventional glucose control 
in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1283. 
 Petri BJ, van Eijck CH, de Herder WW, et al: 
Phaeochromocytomas and sympathetic 
paragangliomas. Br J Surg 2009;96:1381. 
 Van den Berghe G, Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, et al: Clinical 
review: Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill 
patients: NICE-SUGAR or Leuven blood glucose 
target? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:3163. 
 Zaghiyan KN, Murrell Z, Melmed GY, Fleshner PR: 
High-dose perioperative corticosteroids in steroid-
treated patients undergoing major colorectal surgery: 
Necessary or overkill? Am J Surg 2012 Jun 28. [Epub 
ahead of print]. 
 GUIDELINES
 Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof JL, et al: Practice 
guidelines for the perioperative management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea: A report by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Perioperative Management of patients 
with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 
2006;104:1081. 
 Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia Consensus Statement 
on Selection of Patients With Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea Undergoing Ambulatory Surgery. Available 
at:  http://www.sambahq.org/main/clinical-practice-
guidelines/ (accessed July 18, 2012). 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Adesanya AO, Lee W, Greilich NB, Joshi GP: Perioperative 
management of obstructive sleep apnea. Chest 
2010;138:1489. 
 Arlt W, Allolio B: Adrenal insuffi  ciency. Lancet 
2003;361:1881. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 747
35
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for Patients with 
Neuromuscular Disease 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Weakness associated with myasthenia 
gravis is due to autoimmune destruction or 
inactivation of postsynaptic acetylcholine 
receptors at the neuromuscular junction, 
leading to reduced numbers of receptors 
and degradation of their function, and to 
complement-mediated damage to the 
postsynaptic membrane . 
 Patients who have myasthenia gravis with 
respiratory muscle or bulbar involvement 
are at increased risk for pulmonary 
aspiration . 
 Many patients with myasthenia gravis are 
exquisitely sensitive to nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular blockers (NMBs) . 
 Patients who have myasthenia gravis are 
at risk for postoperative respiratory failure. 
Disease duration of more than 6 years, 
concomitant pulmonary disease, a peak 
inspiratory pressure of less than −25 cm H 2 O 
(ie, −20 cm H 2 O), a vital capacity less than 
4 mL/kg, and a pyridostigmine dose greater 
than 750 mg/d are predictive of the need 
for postoperative ventilation following 
thymectomy . 
 Patients with Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome and other paraneoplastic 
neuromuscular syndromes are very sensitive 
to both depolarizing and nondepolarizing 
NMBs . 
1
2
3
4
5
 Respiratory muscle degeneration in patients 
with muscular dystrophy interferes with 
an eﬀ ective cough mechanism and leads 
to retention of secretions and frequent 
pulmonary infections . 
 Degeneration of cardiac muscle in patients 
with muscular dystrophy is also common, 
but results in dilated or hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in only 10% of patients . 
 Succinylcholine should be avoided in 
patients with Duchenne’s or Becker’s 
muscular dystrophies because of 
unpredictable response and the risk of 
inducing severe hyperkalemia or triggering 
malignant hyperthermia . 
 Anesthetic management in patients with 
periodic paralysis is directed toward 
preventing attacks. Intraoperative 
management should include 
frequent determinations of plasma 
potassium concentrations and careful 
electrocardiographic monitoring to detect 
arrhythmias . 
 In patients with periodic paralysis, the 
response to NMBs is unpredictable, and 
neuromuscular function should be carefully 
monitored during their use. Increased 
sensitivity to nondepolarizing NMBs is 
particularly apt to be encountered in 
patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis . 
6
7
8
9
10
748 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Although neuromuscular diseases are relatively 
uncommon, patients with these conditions will 
present to the operating room and to non–operating 
room procedure areas for diagnostic studies, treat-
ment of complications, or surgical management 
of related or unrelated disorders. Overall debility, 
with diminished respiratory muscle strength and 
increased sensitivity to neuromuscular blockers 
(NMBs), predisposes these patients to postoperative 
ventilatory failure and pulmonary aspiration, and 
may slow their post-procedure recovery because 
of diffi  culty with ambulation and increased risk of 
falling. A basic understanding of the major disor-
ders and their potential interaction with anesthetic 
agents is necessary to minimize the risk of periop-
erative morbidity. 
 MYASTHENIA GRAVIS 
 Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disorder char-
acterized by weakness and easy fatigability of skele-
tal muscle. It is classifi ed according to disease 
distribution and severity ( Table 35–1 ). Th e preva-
lence is estimated at 50–200 per million population. 
Th e incidence is highest in women during their third 
decade, and men exhibit two peaks, one in the third 
decade and another in the sixth decade. 
 Weakness associated with myasthenia gravis is 
due to autoimmune destruction or inactivation 
of postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors at the neuro-
muscular junction, leading to reduced numbers of 
receptors and degradation of their function, and to 
complement-mediated damage to the postsynap-
tic end plate. IgG antibodies against the nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor in neuromuscular junctions 
are found in 85–90% of patients with generalized 
myasthenia gravis and up to 50–70% of patients 
with ocular myasthenia. Among patients with myas-
thenia, 10–15% percent develop thymoma, whereas 
approximately 70% exhibit histologic evidence 
of thymic lymphoid follicular hyperplasia. Other 
autoimmune-related disorders (hypothyroidism, 
hyperthyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, and sys-
temic lupus erythematosus) are also present in up to 
10% of patients. Th e diff erential diagnosis of myas-
thenia gravis includes a number of other clinical 
conditions that may mimic its signs and symptoms 
1
 TABLE 351 Myasthenia Gravis Foundation 
of America clinical classiﬁ cation of myasthenia 
gravis.1 
Class
Deﬁ nition
I
 Any ocular muscle weakness 
 May have weakness of eye closure 
 All other muscle strength is normal 
II
 Mild weakness aﬀ ecting other than ocular muscles 
 May also have ocular muscle weakness of any 
severity 
IIa
 Predominantly aﬀ ecting limb, axial muscles, or both 
 May also have lesser involvement of oropharyngeal 
muscles 
IIb
 Predominantly aﬀ ecting oropharyngeal, respiratory 
muscles, or both 
 May also have lesser or equal involvement of limb, 
axial muscles, or both 
III
 Moderate weakness aﬀ ecting other than ocular 
muscles 
 May also have ocular muscle weakness of any 
severity 
IIIa
 Predominantly aﬀ ecting limb, axial muscles, or 
both 
 May also have lesser involvement of oropharyngeal 
muscles 
IIIb
 Predominantly aﬀ ecting oropharyngeal, respiratory 
muscles, or both 
 May also have lesser or equal involvement of limb, 
axial muscles, or both 
IV
 Severe weakness aﬀ ecting other than ocular 
muscles 
 May also have ocular muscle weakness of any 
severity 
IVa
 Predominantly aﬀ ecting limb and/or axial muscles 
 May also have lesser involvement of oropharyngeal 
muscles 
IVb
 Predominantly aﬀ ecting oropharyngeal, respiratory 
muscles, or both 
 May also have lesser or equal involvement of limb, 
axial muscles, or both 
V
Deﬁ ned by intubation, with or without 
mechanical ventilation, except when employed 
during routine postoperative management. The 
use of a feeding tube without intubation places 
the patient in class IVb
1 Reproduced, with permission, from Jaretzki III A, Barohn RJ: Myasthenia 
gravis: Recommendations for clinical research standards. Neurology 
2000;55:16.
 
CHAPTER 35 Anesthesia for Patients with Neuromuscular Disease 
749 
have unpredictable eff ects on the disease but oft en 
lead to exacerbations. A number of medications may 
exacerbate the signs and symptoms of myasthenia 
gravis ( Table 35–3 ). 
 Anticholinesterase drugs are used most com-
monly to treat the muscle weakness of this disorder. 
Th ese drugs increase the amount of acetylcholine 
at the neuromuscular junction through inhibition 
of end plate acetylcholinesterase. Pyridostigmine is 
prescribed most oft en; when given orally, it has an 
( Table 35–2 ).  Myasthenia gravis crisis is an exacer-
bation requiring mechanical ventilation and should 
be suspected in any patient with respiratory failure 
of unclear etiology. 
 Th e course of myasthenia gravis is marked by 
exacerbations and remissions, which may be par-
tial or complete. Th e weakness can be asymmetric, 
confi ned to one group of muscles, or generalized. 
Ocular muscles are most commonly aff ected, result-
ing in fl uctuating ptosis and diplopia. With bulbar 
involvement, laryngeal and pharyngeal muscle 
weakness can result in dysarthria, diffi  culty in chew-
ing and swallowing, problems clearing secretions, or 
pulmonary aspiration. Severe disease is usually also 
associated with proximal muscle weakness (primar-
ily in the neck and shoulders) and involvement of 
respiratory muscles. Muscle strength characteristi-
cally improves with rest but deteriorates rapidly with 
exertion. Infection, stress, surgery, and pregnancy 
 TABLE 352 Diﬀ erential diagnosis of 
myasthenia gravis. 1 
 Other neuromuscular disorders 
 Congenital myasthenic syndromes 
 Botulism 
 Lambert–Eaton syndrome 
 Cranial nerve palsies 
 Diabetes 
 Intracranial aneurism 
 Trauma (eg, orbital factures) 
 Congenital (eg, Dwayne syndrome) 
 Infections (eg, basilar meningitis) 
 Inﬂ ammation (eg, cavernous sinus syndromes) 
 Neoplasm (eg, basilar meningioma) 
 Horner’s syndrome 
 Muscle disease 
 Myotonic muscular dystrophy 
 Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy 
 Mitochondrial myopathies (eg, chronic progressive 
external ophthalmoplegia) 
 Central nervous system pathology 
 Stroke 
 Demyelinating disease 
 Other 
 Motor neuron disease 
 Metabolic disease (eg, thyroid disease) 
 1 Reproduced, with permission, from Mahadeva B, Phillips II L, Juel VC: 
Autoimmune disorders of neuromuscular transmission. Semin Neurol 
2008;28:212.
 TABLE 353 Drugs that may potentiate 
weakness in myasthenia gravis. 1 
 Cardiovascular agents 
 β-Blockers 
 Lidocaine 
 Procainamide 
 Quinidine 
 Verapamil 
 Antibiotics 
 Ampicillin 
 Azithromycin 
 Ciproﬂ oxacin 
 Clarithromycin 
 Erythromycin 
 Gentamycin 
 Neomycin 
 Streptomycin 
 Sulfonamides 
 Tetracycline 
 Tobramycin 
 Central nervous system drugs 
 Chlorpromazine 
 Lithium 
 Phenytoin 
 Trihexyphenidyl 
 Immunomodulators 
 Corticosteroids 
 Interferon-α 
 Rheumatological agents 
 Chloroquine 
 D -Penicillamine 
 Miscellanous 
 Iodinated radiocontrast agents 
 Magnesium 
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers
 1 Data from Mahadeva B, Phillips II L, Juel VC: Autoimmune disorders of 
neuromuscular transmission. Semin Neurol 2008;28:212; and Matney S, 
Huﬀ  D: Diagnosis and treatment of myasthenia gravis. Consult Pharm 
2007;22:239.
750 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
advanced generalized disease may deteriorate signif-
icantly when anticholinesterase agents are withheld. 
Th ese medications should be restarted when the 
patient resumes oral intake postoperatively. When 
necessary, cholinesterase inhibitors can also be given 
parenterally at  
1
30 the oral dose. Potential problems 
associated with management of anticholinesterase 
therapy in the postoperative period include altered 
patient requirements, increased vagal refl exes, and 
the possibility of disrupting bowel anastomoses sec-
ondary to hyperperistalsis. Moreover, because these 
agents also inhibit plasma cholinesterase, they could 
theoretically prolong the duration of ester-type local 
anesthetics and succinylcholine. 
 Preoperative evaluation should focus on the 
recent course of the disease, the muscle groups 
aff ected, drug therapy, and coexisting illnesses. 
 Patients who have myasthenia gravis with 
respiratory muscle or bulbar involvement are 
at increased risk for pulmonary aspiration. 
Premedication with metoclopramide or an H 2
blocker or proton pump inhibitor may decrease this 
risk. Because patients with myasthenia are oft en 
very sensitive to the respiratory depressant eff ect of 
opioids and benzodiazepines, premedication with 
these drugs should be done with caution, if at all. 
 With the exception of NMBs, standard anes-
thetic agents may be used in patients with myasthe-
nia gravis. Marked respiratory depression, however, 
may be encountered following even moderate doses 
of propofol or opioids. When general anesthesia is 
required, a volatile agent–based anesthetic is fre-
quently employed. Deep anesthesia with a volatile 
agent alone in patients with myasthenia may provide 
suffi  cient relaxation for tracheal intubation and 
most surgical procedures, and many clinicians rou-
tinely avoid NMBs entirely. Th e response to succi-
nylcholine is said to be unpredictable, but we have 
not found this to be so in practice. Patients may 
manifest a relative resistance, or a moderately pro-
longed eff ect (see Chapter 11). Th e dose of succinyl-
choline may be increased to 2 mg/kg to overcome 
any resistance, expecting that the duration of paraly-
sis could be increased by 5–10 min. 
 Many patients with myasthenia gravis are 
exquisitely sensitive to nondepolarizing NMBs. 
Even a defasciculating dose in some patients may 
result in nearly complete paralysis. If NMBs are 
2
3
eff ective duration of 2–4 h. Excessive administra-
tion of an anticholinesterase may precipitate  cho-
linergic crisis , which is characterized by increased 
weakness and excessive muscarinic eff ects, includ-
ing salivation, diarrhea, miosis, and bradycardia. 
An  edrophonium (Tensilon) test may help diff erenti-
ate a cholinergic from a myasthenic crisis. Increased 
weakness aft er administration of up to 10 mg of 
intravenous edrophonium indicates cholinergic cri-
sis, whereas increasing strength implies myasthenic 
crisis. If this test is equivocal or if the patient clearly 
has manifestations of cholinergic hyperactivity, all 
cholinesterase drugs should be discontinued and the 
patient should be monitored in an intensive care unit 
or close-observation area. Anticholinesterase drugs 
are oft en the only agents used to treat patients with 
mild disease. Moderate to severe disease is treated 
with a combination of an anticholinesterase drug 
and immunomodulating therapy. Corticosteroids are 
usually tried fi rst, followed by azathioprine, cyclo-
sporine, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, 
and intravenous immunoglobulin. Plasmapheresis 
is reserved for patients with dysphagia or respira-
tory failure, or to normalize muscle strength preop-
eratively in patients undergoing a surgical procedure, 
including thymectomy. Up to 85% of patients younger 
than 55 years of age show clinical improvement fol-
lowing thymectomy even in the absence of a tumor, 
but improvement may be delayed up to several years. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Patients with myasthenia gravis may present for 
thymectomy or for unrelated surgical or obstetric 
procedures, and medical management of their con-
dition should be optimized prior to the intended 
procedure. Myasthenic patients with respiratory and 
oropharyngeal weakness should be treated preop-
eratively with intravenous immunoglobulin or plas-
mapheresis. If strength normalizes, the incidence of 
postoperative respiratory complications should be 
similar to that of a nonmyasthenic patient under-
going a similar surgical procedure. Patients sched-
uled for thymectomy may have deteriorating muscle 
strength, whereas those undergoing other elective 
procedures may be well controlled or in remis-
sion. Adjustments in anticholinesterase medication, 
immunosuppressants, or steroid therapy in the peri-
operative period may be necessary. Patients with 
 
CHAPTER 35 Anesthesia for Patients with Neuromuscular Disease
751
proximal muscle weakness that typically begins 
in the lower extremities but may spread to involve 
upper limb, bulbar, and respiratory muscles. Dry 
mouth, male impotence, and other manifestations 
of autonomic dysfunction are also common. LEMS 
is usually associated with small cell carcinoma of the 
lung but may also be seen with other malignancies or 
as an idiopathic autoimmune disease. Th e disorder 
results from a presynaptic defect of neuromuscular 
transmission in which antibodies to voltage-gated 
calcium channels on the nerve terminal markedly 
reduce the quantal release of acetylcholine at the 
motor end plate. Small cell lung carcinoma cells 
express identical voltage-gated calcium channels, 
serving as a trigger for the autoimmune response in 
patients with paraneoplastic LEMS. 
 In contrast to myasthenia gravis, muscle weak-
ness associated with LEMS improves with repeated 
eff ort and is improved less dramatically by anti-
cholinesterase drugs. Guanidine hydrochloride and 
3,4-diaminopyridine (DAP), which increase the 
presynaptic release of acetylcholine, oft en produce 
signifi cant improvement in LEMS. Corticosteroid or 
other immunosuppressive medications, or plasma-
pheresis, may also be of benefi t. 
 Limbic Encephalitis 
 Limbic encephalitis is a degenerative central ner-
vous system disorder characterized by personality 
changes, hallucinations, seizures, autonomic dys-
function, varying degrees of dementia, and asym-
metric loss of sensation in the extremities. It may 
involve the brain, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal 
cord. In approximately 60% of cases, limbic enceph-
alitis is paraneoplastic. Th ere is a strong association 
with small cell lung carcinoma, and neurological 
dysfunction oft en precedes the cancer diagnosis. 
Th erapy includes treatment of the underlying can-
cer, if present, and administration of immunosup-
pressive medications. 
 Neuromyotonia 
 Neuromyotonia is a condition of peripheral nerve 
hyperexcitability that is frequently associated 
with an underlying cancer but may also be inher-
ited or associated with diabetic, drug- or toxin-
induced, or other acquired neuropathies. Its features 
necessary, small doses of a relatively short-acting 
nondepolarizing agent are preferred. We have not 
found nondepolarizing NMBs to be necessary during 
thymectomy with volatile anesthesia. Neuromuscular 
blockade should be monitored very closely with a 
nerve stimulator, and ventilatory function should be 
evaluated carefully prior to extubation. 
 Patients who have myasthenia gravis are at risk 
for postoperative respiratory failure. Disease 
duration of more than 6 years, concomitant pulmo-
nary disease, peak inspiratory pressure of less than 
−25 cm H 2 O (ie, −20 cm H 2 O), vital capacity less 
than 4 mL/kg, and pyridostigmine dose greater than 
750 mg/d are predictive of the need for postopera-
tive ventilation following thymectomy. 
 Women with myasthenia can experience 
increased weakness in the last trimester of pregnancy 
and in the early postpartum period. Epidural anesthe-
sia is generally preferable for these patients because it 
avoids potential problems with respiratory depression 
and NMBs related to general anesthesia. Excessively 
high levels of motor blockade, however, can also result 
in hypoventilation. Infants of myasthenic mothers 
may show transient myasthenia for 1–3 weeks follow-
ing birth, induced by transplacental transfer of ace-
tylcholine receptor antibodies, which may necessitate 
intubation and mechanical ventilation. 
 PARANEOPLASTIC 
NEUROMUSCULAR 
SYNDROMES 
Paraneoplastic syndromes are immune-mediated 
diseases associated with an underlying cancer. 
Myasthenia gravis is oft en considered a paraneo-
plastic syndrome because it is an autoimmune dis-
order associated with thymic hyperplasia, including 
thymoma. Other neurological or neuromuscular 
paraneoplastic syndromes include Lambert–Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome, limbic encephalitis, neuro-
myotonia, stiff  person syndrome, myotonic dystro-
phy, and polymyositis. 
 Lambert–Eaton 
Myasthenic Syndrome 
 Th e Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) 
is a paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by 
4
752 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
muscle relaxation for both intubation and most 
surgical procedures. NMBs should be given only 
in small increments and with careful neuromuscu-
lar monitoring. Because these patients frequently 
exhibit marked debility, benzodiazepines, opioids, 
and other medications with sedative eff ects should 
be administered with caution. 
 MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Muscular dystrophies are a heterogeneous group 
of hereditary disorders characterized by muscle 
fi ber necrosis and regeneration, leading to muscle 
degeneration and progressive weakness. Anticipated 
anesthetic risk is increased by the patient’s overall 
debilitated status, which may impede clearance of 
secretions and postoperative ambulation, as well as 
by increased risk of respiratory failure and pulmo-
nary aspiration. Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy is 
the most common and most severe form of muscu-
lar dystrophy. Other muscular dystrophy variants 
include Becker’s, myotonic, facioscapulohumeral, 
and limb-girdle dystrophies. 
 Duchenne’s Muscular Dystrophy 
 An X-linked recessive disorder, Duchenne’s muscu-
lar dystrophy aff ects males almost exclusively. It has 
an incidence of approximately one to three cases per 
10,000 live male births and most commonly presents 
between 3 and 5 years of age. Aff ected individuals 
produce abnormal dystrophin, a protein found on 
the sarcolemma of muscle fi bers. Patients character-
istically develop symmetric proximal muscle weak-
ness that is manifested as a gait disturbance. Fatty 
infi ltration typically causes enlargement (pseudohy-
pertrophy) of muscles, particularly the calves. 
Progressive weakness and contractures eventually 
result in kyphoscoliosis. Many patients are confi ned 
to wheelchairs by age 12. Disease progression may 
be delayed by up to 2–3 years with glucocorticoid 
therapy in some patients. Intellectual impairment is 
common but generally nonprogressive. Plasma cre-
atine kinase (CK) levels are 10–100 times normal 
even early in the disease and may refl ect an abnor-
mal increase in the permeability of muscle cell 
include  myokymia (a continuous undulating move-
ment of muscles described as being like a “bag of 
worms”), stiff ness, impaired muscle relaxation, 
painful muscle cramping, hyperhidrosis, and muscle 
hypertrophy. Treatment includes immunoglobulin 
therapy, plasma exchange, and administration of 
anticonvulsants. 
 Stiﬀ  Person Syndrome 
 Stiff  person syndrome is a progressive disorder 
characterized by axial stiff ness and rigidity that may 
subsequently involve the proximal limb muscles. 
In advanced cases, paraspinal rigidity may cause 
marked spinal deformities, and the patient may 
have diffi  culty with ambulation and a history of fre-
quently falling. Although stiff  person syndrome is 
rare, when it occurs it is frequently associated with 
cancer. Th erapy includes treatment of the underly-
ing cancer, if present, and administration of immu-
noglobulin and benzodiazepines. 
 Myotonic Dystrophy 
 See next page. 
 Polymyositis 
 Polymyositis is an infl ammatory myopathy of skel-
etal musculature, especially proximal limb muscles, 
characterized by weakness and easy fatigability. 
Patients are prone to aspiration and frequent pneu-
monias because of thoracic muscle weakness and 
dysphagia secondary to oropharyngeal muscle 
involvement. Th ey may also exhibit cardiac dys-
rhythmias due to conduction defects. Th erapy 
includes treatment of the underlying neoplasm, if 
present; plasma exchange; and administration of 
immunoglobulin, corticosteroids, and immuno-
modulators such as methotrexate, cyclosporine, and 
tumor necrosis factor-α inhibitors. 
 Anesthetic Considerations for 
Patients with Neuromuscular 
Paraneoplastic Syndromes 
 Patients with LEMS and other neuromuscular 
paraneoplastic syndromes are very sensitive 
to both depolarizing and nondepolarizing NMBs. 
Volatile agents alone are oft en suffi  cient to provide 
5
 
CHAPTER 35 Anesthesia for Patients with Neuromuscular Disease
753
to third decade of life, but it has also been reported 
as a paraneoplastic disorder in association with thy-
moma. Myotonia is the principal early manifesta-
tion; muscle weakness and atrophy become more 
prominent as the disease progresses. Th is weakness 
and atrophy usually aff ect cranial muscles (orbicu-
laris oculi and oris, masseter, and sternocleidomas-
toid), and in contrast to most myopathies, distal 
muscles more than proximal muscles. Plasma CK 
levels are normal or slightly elevated. 
 Multiple organ systems are involved in myo-
tonic dystrophy, as evidenced by presenile cataracts, 
premature frontal baldness, hypersomnolence with 
sleep apnea, and endocrine dysfunction leading to 
pancreatic, adrenal, thyroid, and gonadal insuffi  -
ciency. Respiratory involvement leads to decreased 
vital capacity, and chronic hypoxemia may cause cor 
pulmonale. Gastrointestinal hypomotility may pre-
dispose patients to pulmonary aspiration. Uterine 
atony can prolong labor and increase the incidence 
of retained placenta. Cardiac manifestations, which 
are oft en present before other clinical symptoms 
appear, may include cardiomyopathy, atrial arrhyth-
mias, and varying degrees of heart block. 
 Th e myotonia is usually described by patients 
as a “stiff ness” that may lessen with continued 
activity—the so-called “warm-up” phenomenon. 
Patients oft en report that cold temperatures worsen 
stiff ness. Antimyotonic treatment may include 
mexiletine, phenytoin, baclofen, dantrolene, or car-
bamazepine. A cardiac pacemaker may be placed in 
patients with signifi cant conduction defect, even if 
they are asymptomatic. 
 Facioscapulohumeral Dystrophy 
 Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, an autosomal 
dominant disorder with an incidence of approxi-
mately 1–3:100,000, aff ects both sexes, although 
more females than males are asymptomatic. Patients 
usually present in the second or third decade of 
life with weakness that is confi ned primarily to the 
muscles of the face and the shoulder girdle. Muscles 
in the lower extremities are less commonly aff ected, 
and respiratory muscles are usually spared. Th e dis-
ease is slowly progressive with a variable course. 
Plasma CK levels are usually normal or only slightly 
elevated. Cardiac involvement is rare, but loss of all 
membranes. Female genetic carriers oft en also have 
high plasma CK levels, variable degrees of muscle 
weakness, and, rarely, cardiac involvement. Plasma 
myoglobin concentration may also be elevated. Th e 
diagnosis is confi rmed by muscle biopsy. 
 Respiratory muscle degeneration in patients 
with muscular dystrophy interferes with an 
eff ective cough mechanism and leads to retention of 
secretions and frequent pulmonary infections. Th e 
combination of marked kyphoscoliosis and muscle 
wasting may produce a severe restrictive ventilatory 
defect. Pulmonary hypertension is common with 
disease progression.  Degeneration of cardiac 
muscle in patients with muscular dystrophy is 
also common, but results in dilated or hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in only 10% of patients. Mitral 
regurgitation secondary to papillary muscle dys-
function is also found in up to 25% of patients. 
Electrocardiogram abnormalities include P–R inter-
val prolongation, QRS and ST-segment abnormali-
ties, and prominent R waves over the right 
precordium with deep Q waves over the left  precor-
dium. Atrial arrhythmias are common. Death at a 
relatively young age is usually due to recurrent pul-
monary infections, respiratory failure, or cardiac 
failure. 
 Becker’s Muscular Dystrophy 
 Becker’s muscular dystrophy is, like Duchenne’s, 
an X-linked recessive disorder but is less common 
(1:30,000 male births). Manifestations are nearly 
identical to those of Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy 
except that they usually present later in life (adoles-
cence) and progress more slowly. Mental retardation 
is less common. Patients oft en reach the fourth or 
fi ft h decade, although some may survive into their 
80s. Death is usually from respiratory complica-
tions. Cardiomyopathy may occur in some cases and 
may precede severe skeletal weakness. 
 Myotonic Dystrophy 
 Myotonic dystrophy is a multisystem disorder that 
is the most common cause of  myotonia , a slowing 
of relaxation aft er muscle contraction in response to 
electrical or percussive stimuli. Th e disease is auto-
somal dominant, with an incidence of 1:8000, and 
usually becomes clinically apparent in the second 
6
7
754 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Perioperative morbidity is usually due to respiratory 
complications. Patients with vital capacities less than 
30% of predicted appear to be at greatest risk and 
oft en require temporary postoperative mechanical 
ventilation. 
 B. Myotonic Dystrophy 
 Patients with myotonic dystrophy are at increased 
risk for perioperative respiratory and cardiac com-
plications. Most perioperative problems arise in 
patients with severe weakness and in those cases in 
which surgeons and anesthesiologists are unaware 
of the diagnosis. Th e diagnosis of myotonic dystro-
phy has been made in some patients in the course 
of investigating prolonged apnea following general 
anesthesia. 
 Patients with myotonic dystrophy have altered 
responses to a number of anesthetic medicines. 
Th ey are oft en very sensitive to even small doses 
of opioids, sedatives, and inhalation and intrave-
nous anesthetic agents, all of which may cause sud-
den and prolonged apnea. Premedication should 
therefore be avoided. Succinylcholine is relatively 
contraindicated because it may precipitate intense 
myotonic contractions, complicating orotracheal 
intubation. Myotonic contraction of respiratory, 
chest wall, or laryngeal muscles may make ventila-
tion diffi  cult or impossible. Other drugs that act on 
the motor end plate, such as decamethonium, neo-
stigmine, and physostigmine, can aggravate myo-
tonia. Regional anesthesia may be preferentially 
employed, but does not always prevent myotonic 
contractions. 
 Th e response to nondepolarizing NMBs is 
reported to be normal; however, they do not con-
sistently prevent or relieve myotonic contractions. 
As reversal of nondepolarizing NMBs can induce 
myotonic contractions, the use of short-acting non-
depolarizing agents is recommended. Postoperative 
shivering commonly associated with volatile agents, 
particularly when associated with decreased body 
temperature, can induce myotonic contractions in 
the recovery room. Small doses of meperidine can 
oft en prevent such shivering and may preempt myo-
tonic contractions. 
 Induction of anesthesia without complications 
has been reported with a number of agents including 
atrial electrical activity with an inability to atrially 
pace the heart has been reported; ventricular pacing 
is still possible in these patients. Longevity is mini-
mally aff ected. 
 Limb-Girdle Dystrophy 
 Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is a heteroge-
neous group of genetic neuromuscular diseases. 
Limb-girdle syndromes include severe childhood 
autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy and other 
incompletely defi ned autosomal recessive syn-
dromes such as Erb’s (scapulohumeral type) and 
Leyden–Mobius (pelvifemoral type) dystrophies. 
Most patients present in childhood to the second or 
third decade of life with slowly progressive muscle 
weakness that may involve the shoulder girdle, the 
hip girdle, or both. Plasma CK levels are usually ele-
vated. Cardiac involvement is relatively uncommon 
but may present as frequent arrhythmias or conges-
tive heart failure. Respiratory complications, such 
as hypoventilation and recurrent respiratory infec-
tions, may occur. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A. Duchenne’s and 
Becker’s Muscular Dystrophies 
 Th e anesthetic management of these patients is com-
plicated not only by muscle weakness but also by 
cardiac and pulmonary manifestations. An associa-
tion with malignant hyperthermia has been sug-
gested but is unproven. Preoperative premedication 
with sedatives or opioids should be avoided because 
of increased aspiration risk due to respiratory mus-
cle weakness, gastric hypomotility, or both. 
Intraoperative positioning may be complicated by 
kyphoscoliosis or by fl exion contractures of the 
extremities or neck.  Succinylcholine should be 
avoided in patients with Duchenne’s or 
Becker’s muscular dystrophies because of unpredict-
able response and the risk of inducing severe 
hyperkalemia or triggering malignant hyperther-
mia. Although some patients exhibit a normal 
response to nondepolarizing NMBs, others may be 
very sensitive. Marked respiratory and circulatory 
depression may be seen with volatile anesthetics in 
patients with advanced disease, and regional or local 
anesthesia may be preferable in these patients. 
8
 
CHAPTER 35 Anesthesia for Patients with Neuromuscular Disease 
755 
 Paramyotonia congenita is a very rare autoso-
mal dominant disorder characterized by transient 
stiff ness (myotonia) and, occasionally, weakness 
aft er exposure to cold temperatures. Th e stiff ness 
worsens with activity, in contrast to true myoto-
nia, thus the term  paramyotonia . Serum potassium 
concentration may rise following an attack simi-
lar to hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (see below). 
Medications that have been used to block the cold 
response include mexiletine and tocainide. 
 Anesthetic management of patients with myo-
tonia congenita and paramyotonia is complicated by 
an abnormal response to succinylcholine, intraop-
erative myotonic contractions, and the need to avoid 
hypothermia. NMBs may paradoxically cause gen-
eralized muscle spasms, including trismus, leading 
to diffi  culty with intubation and ventilation. 
 Infi ltration of muscles in the operative fi eld 
with a dilute local anesthetic may alleviate refrac-
tory myotonic contraction. Among patients with 
these types of myotonia, none have been reported 
with positive in vitro tests for malignant hyperther-
mia. Excised muscle in these patients does, however, 
display a prolonged myotonic contraction when 
exposed to succinylcholine. Excessive muscle con-
traction during anesthesia, therefore, likely repre-
sents aggravation of myotonia and not malignant 
hyperthermia. 
 PERIODIC PARALYSIS 
 Periodic paralysis is a group of disorders character-
ized by spontaneous episodes of transient muscle 
weakness or paralysis. Symptoms usually begin in 
childhood, with episodes lasting a few hours and 
typically sparing respiratory muscle involvement. 
Th e weakness usually lasts less than 1 hour but can 
last several days, and frequent attacks may lead to 
progressive, long-term weakness in some patients. 
Hypothermia exacerbates the frequency and severity 
of episodes. Muscle strength and serum potassium 
concentrations are usually normal between attacks. 
Th e episodes of weakness are due to a loss of muscle 
fi ber excitability secondary to partial depolarization 
of the resting potential. Th is partial depolarization 
prevents the generation of action potentials and 
thereby precipitates weakness. 
inhalation agents and propofol. Neuromuscular 
blockade, if needed, should employ short-acting 
NMBs. An association between myotonic dystrophy 
and malignant hyperthermia has been suggested but 
not established. Nitrous oxide and inhalation agents 
can be used as maintenance anesthesia. Reversal with 
anticholinesterases should be avoided, if possible. 
 Th e principal postoperative complications of 
myotonic dystrophy are prolonged hypoventilation, 
atelectasis, aspiration, and pneumonia. Close post-
operative monitoring should be accompanied by 
aggressive pulmonary hygiene with physical therapy 
and incentive spirometry. Aspiration prophylaxis 
is indicated. Patients undergoing upper abdominal 
surgery or those with severe proximal weakness are 
more likely to experience pulmonary complications. 
Perioperative cardiac conduction abnormalities are 
less likely to occur but still warrant close cardiovas-
cular monitoring. 
 C. Other Forms of Muscular Dystrophy 
 Patients with facioscapulohumeral and limb-girdle 
muscular dystrophy generally have normal responses 
to anesthetic agents. Nevertheless, because of the 
great variability and overlap among the various 
forms of muscular dystrophy, sedative-hypnotics, 
opioids, and nondepolarizing NMBs should be used 
cautiously, and succinylcholine should be avoided. 
 MYOTONIAS 
 Myotonia Congenita & 
Paramyotonia Congenita 
 Myotonia congenita is a disorder manifested early 
in life with generalized myotonia. Both autosomal 
dominant (Th omsen’s) and recessive (Becker’s) 
forms exist. Th e disease is confi ned to skeletal 
muscle, and weakness is minimal or absent. Many 
patients have very well developed musculature due 
to near constant muscle contraction. Antimyotonic 
therapy includes phenytoin, mexiletine, quinine sul-
fate, or procainamide. Other medications that have 
been used include tocainide, dantrolene, predni-
sone, acetazolamide, and taurine. Th ere is no cardiac 
involvement in myotonia congenita, and a normal 
life span is expected. 
756 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
condition is treated by stopping the barium salts and 
administering oral potassium. 
 Potassium levels that exceed 7 mEq/L between 
episodes of weakness suggest a secondary form of 
hyperkalemic periodic paralysis. Treatment is tar-
geted toward the primary disease and involves 
restriction of potassium. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Anesthetic management of patients with peri-
odic paralysis is directed toward preventing 
attacks. Intraoperative management should include 
frequent determinations of plasma potassium con-
centration and careful electrocardiographic moni-
toring to detect arrhythmias. Because of the potential 
for glucose-containing intravenous solutions to 
lower plasma potassium concentration, they should 
not be used in patients with hypokalemic paralysis, 
whereas they may benefi t patients with hyperkale-
mic paralysis.  Th e response to NMBs is unpre-
dictable, and neuromuscular function should 
be carefully monitored during their use. Increased 
sensitivity to nondepolarizing NMBs is particularly 
apt to be encountered in patients with hypokalemic 
periodic paralysis. Succinylcholine is contraindi-
cated in hyperkalemic paralysis and perhaps other 
variants as well because of the risk of hyperkalemia. 
Intraoperative maintenance of core temperature is 
important because shivering and hypothermia may 
trigger or exacerbate episodes of periodic paralysis. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Anesthesia for Muscle Biopsy 
 A 16-year-old boy with progressive proximal 
muscle weakness is suspected of having a pri-
mary myopathy and is scheduled for biopsy of 
the quadriceps muscle . 
 What other potential abnormalities should 
concern the anesthesiologist? 
 The diagnosis of myopathy can be diﬃ  cult to 
make and the diﬀ erential diagnosis may include 
any one of several hereditary, inﬂ ammatory, 
endocrine, metabolic, or toxic disorders. A muscle 
9
10
 Periodic paralysis is classifi ed into primary 
genetic channelopathies and secondary acquired 
forms. Th e genetic types are due to dominantly 
inherited mutations in the voltage-gated sodium, 
calcium, or potassium ion channels. Classifi cations 
have been based on clinical diff erences, but these 
have not been shown to relate to specifi c ion chan-
nels. Diff erent defects in the same channel can cause 
diff erent clinical pictures, whereas mutations in dif-
ferent channels may have similar clinical pictures. 
However, the clinical classifi cations remain useful as 
guides to prognosis and therapy. 
 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is typically 
associated with low serum potassium levels, and 
 hyperkalemic periodic paralysis with elevated serum 
potassium levels, during episodes of weakness. In 
these defects, muscle membranes are inexcitable to 
both direct and indirect stimulation due to either 
decreased potassium conductance or increased 
sodium conductance, respectively. Both defects are 
associated with fl uid and electrolyte shift s. 
 Th yrotoxicosis is associated with a secondary 
form of hypokalemic periodic paralysis. It resembles 
the primary form but is much more common in 
men than women, particularly in persons of Asian 
descent and in young adults. Once the thyroid 
condition is treated, the episodes usually cease. Th e 
disorder can develop in 10–25% of hyperthyroid 
Asian men. Th e metabolic sequelae and fl uid and 
electrolyte shift s seen in the primary form are also 
seen in secondary hypokalemic periodic paralysis. 
Treatment involves management of the hyperthy-
roidism, avoidance of high carbohydrate and low 
potassium meals, and administration of potassium 
chloride for acute attacks. 
 Secondary hypokalemic paralysis can also 
develop if there are marked losses of potassium 
through the kidneys or the gastrointestinal tract. Th e 
associated weakness is, at times, episodic and potas-
sium levels are much lower than in other variants 
of hypokalemic periodic paralysis. Management of 
the primary disease with potassium replacement, 
and treatment of acidosis or alkalosis, is important 
in preventing attacks. 
 Patients who consume large amounts of bar-
ium salts, which block potassium channels, can 
also develop hypokalemic periodic paralysis. Th is 
 
CHAPTER 35 Anesthesia for Patients with Neuromuscular Disease 
757 
regional anesthesia is inadequate. The anesthesi-
ologist must therefore always be prepared with a 
plan for general anesthesia . 
 What agents may be safely used for general 
anesthesia? 
 Major goals include preventing pulmonary 
aspiration, avoiding excessive respiratory or circu-
latory depression, avoiding NMBs if possible, and 
perhaps avoiding agents known to trigger malig-
nant hyperthermia. A normal response to a previ-
ous general anesthetic in the patient or a family 
member may be reassuring but does not guarantee 
the same response subsequently. General anesthe-
sia may be induced and maintained with a combi-
nation of a benzodiazepine, propofol, or an opioid 
with or without nitrous oxide. Patients at increased 
risk for aspiration should be intubated. When an 
NMB is necessary, a short-acting nondepolarizing 
agent should be used. Succinylcholine should gen-
erally be avoided because of the unknown risk of 
an unusual response (myotonic contractions, pro-
longed duration, or phase II block), of inducing 
severe hyperkalemia, or of triggering malignant 
hyperthermia . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Díaz-Manera J, Rojas-García R, Illa I: Treatment 
strategies for myasthenia gravis. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother 2009;10:1329. 
 Farrugia ME, Vincent A: Autoimmune mediated 
neuromuscular junction defects. Curr Opin Neurol 
2010;23:489. 
 Gold R, Schneider-Gold C: Current and future standards 
in treatment of myasthenia gravis. Neurotherapeutics 
2008;5:535. 
 Jani-Acsadi A, Lisak RP: Myasthenic crisis: Guidelines 
for prevention and treatment. J Neurological Sci 
2007;261:127. 
 Juel VC: Myasthenia gravis: Management of myasthenic 
crisis and perioperative care. Semin Neurol 
2004;24:75. 
 Mahadeva B, Phillips II L, Juel VC: Autoimmune 
disorders of neuromuscular transmission. Semin 
Neurol 2008;28:212. 
biopsy may be necessary to supplement clinical, 
laboratory, nerve conduction, and electromyo-
graphic ﬁ ndings and help establish the diagnosis. 
Although the cause of the myopathy in this case 
is not yet clear, the clinician must always consider 
potential problems that can be associated with pri-
mary myopathies . 
 Respiratory muscle involvement should always 
be suspected in patients with muscle weakness. 
Pulmonary reserve can be assessed clinically by 
asking about dyspnea and activity level. Pulmonary 
function tests are indicated if signiﬁ cant dyspnea 
on exertion is present. An increased risk of pulmo-
nary aspiration is suggested by a history of dyspha-
gia, regurgitation, recurrent pulmonary infections, 
or abdominal distention. Cardiac abnormalities 
may be manifested as arrhythmias, mitral valve 
prolapse, or cardiomyopathy. A 12-lead electro-
cardiogram is also helpful in excluding conduction 
abnormalities. A chest radiograph can evaluate 
inspiratory eﬀ ort, the pulmonary parenchyma, 
and cardiac size; gastric distention secondary to 
smooth muscle or autonomic dysfunction may 
also be evident. Preoperative laboratory evalua-
tion should have excluded a metabolic cause with 
measurement of serum sodium, potassium, mag-
nesium, calcium, and phosphate concentrations. 
Similarly, thyroid, adrenal, and pituitary disorders 
should have been excluded. Plasma CK measure-
ment may not be helpful, but very high levels 
(10 times normal) generally suggest a muscular 
dystrophy or polymyositis 
 What anesthetic technique should be used? 
 The choice of anesthesia should be based 
on both patient and surgical requirements. Most 
muscle biopsies can be performed under local or 
regional anesthesia with supplemental intrave-
nous sedation, using small doses of midazolam. 
Spinal or epidural anesthesia may be utilized. A 
femoral nerve block can provide excellent anesthe-
sia for biopsy of the quadriceps muscle; a separate 
injection may be necessary for the lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerve to anesthetize the anterolateral 
thigh. General anesthesia should be reserved for 
uncooperative patients or for times when local or 
758 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Watanabe A, Watanabe T, Obama T, et al: Prognostic 
factors for myasthenic crisis aft er transsternal 
thymectomy in patients with myasthenia gravis. 
J Th orac Cardiovasc Surg 2004;127:868. 
 Wu JY, Kuo PH, Fan PC, et al: Th e role of non-invasive 
ventilation and factors predicting extubation 
outcome in myasthenic crisis. Neurocrit Care 
2009;10:35. 
 Skeie GO, Apostolski S, Evoli A, et al: Guidelines 
for treatment of autoimmune neuromuscular 
transmission disorders. Eur J Neurol 2010;17:893. 
 Toothaker TB, Rubin M: Paraneoplastic neurological 
syndromes: A review. Th e Neurologist 2009;15:21. 
 Tornoehlen LM, Pascuzzi RM: Th ymoma, myasthenia 
gravis, and other paraneoplastic syndromes. Hematol 
Onc Clin N Am 2008;22:509. 
 759
36
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for 
Ophthalmic Surgery 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Any factor that increases intraocular 
pressure in the setting of an open globe 
may cause drainage of aqueous or extrusion 
of vitreous through the wound. The latter is 
a serious complication that can permanently 
worsen vision . 
 Succinylcholine increases intraocular 
pressure by 5–10 mm Hg for 5–10 min 
after administration, principally through 
prolonged contracture of the extraocular 
muscles. However, in studies of hundreds of 
patients with open eye injuries, no patient 
experienced extrusion of ocular contents 
after administration of succinylcholine . 
 Traction on extraocular muscles, pressure on 
the eyeball, administration of a retrobulbar 
block, and trauma to the eye can elicit 
a wide variety of cardiac dysrhythmias 
ranging from bradycardia and ventricular 
ectopy to sinus arrest or ventricular 
ﬁ brillation . 
 Complications involving the intraocular 
expansion of gas bubbles injected by 
the ophthalmologist can be avoided 
by discontinuing nitrous oxide at least 
15 min prior to the injection of air or sulfur 
hexaﬂ uoride, or by avoiding the use of 
nitrous oxide entirely . 
 Medications applied topically to the 
mucosa are absorbed systemically at a 
1
2
3
4
5
rate intermediate between absorption 
following intravenous and subcutaneous 
injection (the toxic subcutaneous dose of 
phenylephrine is 10 mg) . 
 Echothiophate is an irreversible 
cholinesterase inhibitor used in the 
treatment of glaucoma. Topical application 
leads to systemic absorption and a 
reduction in plasma cholinesterase activity. 
Because succinylcholine is metabolized by 
this enzyme, echothiophate will prolong its 
duration of action . 
 The key to inducing anesthesia in a patient 
with an open eye injury is controlling 
intraocular pressure with a smooth 
induction. Coughing and gagging during 
intubation is avoided by ﬁ rst achieving 
a deep level of anesthesia and profound 
paralysis . 
 The postretrobulbar block apnea 
syndrome is probably due to injection 
of local anesthetic into the optic nerve 
sheath, with spread into the cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid . 
 Regardless of the technique employed 
for intravenous sedation, ventilation 
and oxygenation must be monitored, 
and equipment to provide positive-
pressure ventilation must be immediately 
available . 
6
7
8
9
760 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
deliberate hypotension, arteriosclerotic involvement 
of the retinal artery) may jeopardize retinal perfu-
sion and cause retinal ischemia. 
 When the globe is open by surgical incision 
( Table 36–2 ) or traumatic perforation, intraocular 
pressure approaches atmospheric pressure.  Any 
factor that increases intraocular pressure in the 
setting of an open globe may cause drainage of aque-
ous or extrusion of vitreous through the wound. Th e 
1
 Ophthalmic surgery poses unique problems, includ-
ing regulation of intraocular pressure, control of 
intraocular gas expansion, prevention of the oculo-
cardiac refl ex and management of its consequenc-
es, management of systemic eff ects of ophthalmic 
drugs, and frequent utilization of only mild to mod-
erate sedation. A thorough understanding of poten-
tially complicating issues, in addition to the mastery 
of general, regional, local, and sedation anesthesia 
techniques for ophthalmic surgery, will favorably in-
fl uence perioperative outcome in these cases. 
 INTRAOCULAR 
PRESSURE DYNAMICS 
 Physiology of Intraocular Pressure 
 Th e eye can be considered a hollow sphere with a 
rigid wall. If the contents of the sphere increase, 
the  intraocular pressure (normal: 12–20 mm Hg) 
must rise. For example, glaucoma is caused by an 
obstruction to aqueous humor outfl ow. Similarly, 
intraocular pressure will rise if the volume of blood 
within the globe is increased. A rise in venous pres-
sure will increase intraocular pressure by decreasing 
aqueous drainage and increasing choroidal blood 
volume. Extreme changes in arterial blood pressure 
and ventilation can also aff ect intraocular pressure 
( Table 36–1 ). Any event that alters these parameters 
(eg, laryngoscopy, intubation, airway obstruction, 
coughing, Trendelenburg position) can aff ect intra-
ocular pressure. 
 Alternatively, decreasing the size of the globe 
without a proportional change in the volume of its 
contents will increase intraocular pressure. Pressure 
on the eye from a tightly fi tted mask, improper prone 
positioning, or retrobulbar hemorrhage can lead to a 
marked increase in intraocular pressure. 
 Intraocular pressure helps to maintain the 
shape, and therefore the optical properties, of the 
eye. Temporary variations in pressure are usually 
well tolerated in normal eyes. For example, blinking 
raises intraocular pressure by 5 mm Hg, and squint-
ing (forced contraction of the orbicularis oculi 
muscles) may increase intraocular pressure greater 
than 50 mm Hg. However, even transient episodes 
of increased intraocular pressure in patients with 
underlying low ophthalmic artery pressure (eg, 
 TABLE 362 Open-eye surgical procedures. 
Cataract extraction
Corneal laceration repair
Corneal transplant (penetrating keratoplasty)
Peripheral iridectomy
Removal of foreign body
Ruptured globe repair
Secondary intraocular lens implantation
Trabeculectomy (and other filtering procedures)
Vitrectomy (anterior and posterior)
Wound leak repair
 TABLE 361 The eﬀ ect of cardiac and respira-
tory variables on intraocular pressure (IOP). 1 
Variable
Eﬀ ect on IOP
Central venous pressure
Increase
Decrease
↑↑↑
↓↓↓
Arterial blood pressure
Increase
Decrease
↑
↓
Pa CO 2 
Increase (hypoventilation)
Decrease (hyperventilation)
↑↑
↓↓
Pa O 2 
Increase
Decrease
0
↑
1 ↓, decrease (mild, moderate, marked); ↑, increase (mild, moderate, 
marked); 0, no eﬀ ect.
 
CHAPTER 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery
761
skeletal muscle, extraocular muscles contain myo-
cytes with multiple neuromuscular junctions, and 
repeated depolarization of these cells by succinyl-
choline causes the prolonged contracture. Th e result-
ing increase in intraocular pressure may have several 
eff ects. It will cause spurious measurements of intra-
ocular pressure during examinations under anes-
thesia in glaucoma patients, potentially leading to 
unnecessary surgery. Lastly, prolonged contracture 
of the extraocular muscles may result in an abnor-
mal forced duction test, a maneuver utilized in stra-
bismus surgery to evaluate the cause of extraocular 
muscle imbalance and determine the type of surgical 
correction. Nondepolarizing neuromuscular block-
ers (NMBs) do not increase intraocular pressure. 
 THE OCULOCARDIAC REFLEX 
 Traction on extraocular muscles, pressure on 
the eyeball, administration of a retrobulbar 
block, and trauma to the eye can elicit a wide variety 
of cardiac dysrhythmias ranging from bradycardia 
and ventricular ectopy to sinus arrest or ventricu-
lar fi brillation. Th is refl ex consists of a trigemi-
nal (V1) aff erent and a vagal eff erent pathway. Th e 
oculocardiac refl ex is most commonly encountered 
in pediatric patients undergoing strabismus surgery, 
although it can be evoked in all age groups and dur-
ing a variety of ocular procedures, including cata-
ract extraction, enucleation, and retinal detachment 
repair. In awake patients, the oculocardiac refl ex 
may be accompanied by nausea. 
 Routine prophylaxis for the oculocardiac refl ex 
is controversial. Anticholinergic medication is oft en 
helpful in preventing the oculocardiac refl ex, and 
intravenous atropine or glycopyrrolate immedi-
ately prior to surgery is more eff ective than intra-
muscular premedication. However, anticholinergic 
medication should be administered with caution to 
any patient who has, or may have, coronary artery 
disease, because of the potential for increase in 
heart rate suffi  cient to induce myocardial ischemia. 
Ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fi brillation 
following administration of anticholinergic medica-
tion has also been reported. Retrobulbar blockade 
or deep inhalational anesthesia may also be of value 
in preempting the oculocardiac refl ex, although 
3
latter is a serious complication that can permanently 
worsen vision. 
 Eﬀ ect of Anesthetic Drugs 
on Intraocular Pressure 
 Most anesthetic drugs either lower intraocular pres-
sure or have no eff ect ( Table 36–3 ). Inhalational 
anesthetics decrease intraocular pressure in propor-
tion to the depth of anesthesia. Th e decrease has 
multiple causes: a drop in blood pressure reduces 
choroidal volume, relaxation of the extraocular mus-
cles lowers wall tension, and pupillary constriction 
facilitates aqueous outfl ow. Intravenous anesthetics 
also decrease intraocular pressure, with the excep-
tion of ketamine, which usually raises arterial blood 
pressure and does not relax extraocular muscles. 
 Topically administered anticholinergic drugs 
result in pupillary dilation (mydriasis), which may 
precipitate or worsen angle-closure glaucoma. 
Systemically administered atropine or glycopyrrolate 
for premedication are not associated with intraocu-
lar hypertension, even in patients with glaucoma. 
 Succinylcholine increases intraocular pressure 
by 5–10 mm Hg for 5–10 min aft er adminis-
tration, principally through prolonged contracture 
of the extraocular muscles. However, in studies of 
hundreds of patients with open eye injuries, no 
patient experienced extrusion of ocular contents 
aft er administration of succinylcholine. Unlike other 
2
 TABLE 363 The eﬀ ect of anesthetic agents 
on intraocular pressure (IOP). 1 
Drug
Eﬀ ect on IOP
Inhaled anesthetics
Volatile agents
Nitrous oxide
↓↓
↓
Intravenous anesthetics
Propofol
Benzodiazepines
Ketamine
Opioids
↓↓
↓↓
?
↓
Muscle relaxants
Succinylcholine
Nondepolarizers
↑↑
0/↓
1 ↓, decrease (mild, moderate); ↑, increase (mild, moderate); 0↓, no 
change or mild decrease; ?, conﬂ icting reports.
762 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
will lead to reabsorption of the bubble, which has 
become a mixture of nitrous oxide and sulfur hexa-
fl uoride. Th e consequent fall in intraocular pressure 
may precipitate another retinal detachment. 
 Complications involving the intraocular 
expansion of gas bubbles can be avoided by dis-
continuing nitrous oxide at least 15 min prior to the 
injection of air or sulfur hexafl uoride, or by avoid-
ing the use of nitrous oxide entirely. Th e amount of 
time required to eliminate nitrous oxide from the 
blood will depend on several factors, including fresh 
gas fl ow rate and adequacy of alveolar ventilation. 
Depth of anesthesia should be maintained by substi-
tuting other anesthetic agents. Nitrous oxide should 
be avoided until the bubble is absorbed (5  days 
aft er air and 10 days aft er sulfur hexafl uoride injec-
tion). Many ophthalmologists routinely request that 
nitrous oxide not be used in their patients. 
 SYSTEMIC EFFECTS 
OF OPHTHALMIC DRUGS 
 Topically applied eye drops are systemically absorbed 
by vessels in the conjunctival sac and the nasolacri-
mal duct mucosa (see Case Discussion, Chapter 13). 
One drop (typically, approximately 1/20 mL) of 10% 
phenylephrine contains approximately 5 mg of drug. 
Compare this dose with the intravenous dose of 
phenylephrine (0.05–0.1 mg) used to treat an adult 
patient with acute hypotension.  Medications 
applied topically to mucosa are absorbed sys-
temically at a rate intermediate between absorption 
following intravenous and subcutaneous injection 
(the toxic subcutaneous dose of phenylephrine is 
10 mg). Children and the elderly are at particular 
risk of the toxic eff ects of topically applied medica-
tions and should receive at most a 2.5% phenyleph-
rine solution ( Table 36–4 ). Coincidentally, these 
patients are most apt to require eye surgery. 
 Echothiophate is an irreversible cholinesterase 
inhibitor used in the treatment of glaucoma. 
Topical application leads to systemic absorption 
and a reduction in plasma cholinesterase activity. 
Because succinylcholine is metabolized by this 
enzyme, echothiophate will prolong its dura-
tion of action . Paralysis usually does not exceed 
20–30 min, however, and postoperative apnea is 
4
5
6
administration of a retrobulbar block may itself ini-
tiate the oculocardiac refl ex. 
 Management of the oculocardiac refl ex when 
it occurs includes: (1) immediate notifi cation of the 
surgeon and temporary cessation of surgical stimu-
lation until heart rate increases; (2) confi rmation 
of adequate ventilation, oxygenation, and depth 
of anesthesia; (3) administration of intravenous 
atropine (10 mcg/kg) if bradycardia persists; and 
(4) in recalcitrant episodes, infi ltration of the rectus 
muscles with local anesthetic. Th e refl ex eventually 
fatigues (self-extinguishes) with repeated traction 
on the extraocular muscles. 
 INTRAOCULAR GAS 
EXPANSION 
 A gas bubble may be injected by the ophthalmologist 
into the posterior chamber during vitreous surgery. 
Intravitreal air injection will tend to fl atten a detached 
retina and allow anatomically correct healing. Th e air 
bubble is absorbed within 5 days by gradual diff usion 
through adjacent tissue into the bloodstream. Th e 
bubble will increase in size if nitrous oxide is admin-
istered, because nitrous oxide is 35 times more solu-
ble than nitrogen in blood (see Chapter 8). Th us, it 
tends to diff use into an air bubble more rapidly than 
nitrogen (the major component of air) is absorbed by 
the bloodstream. If the bubble expands aft er the eye 
is closed, intraocular pressure will rise. 
 Sulfur hexafl uoride is an inert gas that is less 
soluble in blood than is nitrogen—and much less 
soluble than nitrous oxide. Its longer duration of 
action (up to 10 days) compared with an air bubble 
can provide a therapeutic advantage. Th e bubble size 
doubles within 24 hr aft er injection, because nitrogen 
from inhaled air enters the bubble more rapidly than 
the sulfur hexafl uoride diff uses into the bloodstream. 
Even so, unless high volumes of pure sulfur hexafl uo-
ride are injected, the slow bubble expansion does not 
typically raise intraocular pressure. If the patient is 
breathing nitrous oxide, however, the bubble will 
rapidly increase in size and may lead to intraocular 
hypertension. A 70% inspired nitrous oxide concen-
tration will almost triple the size of a 1-mL bubble 
and may double the pressure in a closed eye within 
30 min. Subsequent discontinuation of nitrous oxide 
 
CHAPTER 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery
763
local anesthesia due to fear of being awake during the 
operation, fear of the eye block procedure, or unpleas-
ant recall of a previous eye block or local eye proce-
dure. General anesthesia is indicated in children and 
uncooperative patients, as even small head move-
ments can prove disastrous during microsurgery. 
 PREMEDICATION 
 Patients undergoing eye surgery may be apprehen-
sive, particularly if they have undergone multiple 
procedures or there is a possibility of permanent 
blindness. However, premedication must be admin-
istered with caution and only aft er careful consider-
ation of the patient’s medical status. Adult patients 
are oft en elderly, with myriad systemic illnesses, 
such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and coro-
nary artery disease. Pediatric patients may have 
associated congenital disorders. 
 INDUCTION 
 Th e choice of induction technique for eye surgery 
usually depends more on the patient’s other medical 
problems than on the patient’s eye disease or the 
specifi c operation contemplated. One exception is 
the patient with a ruptured globe.  Th e key to 
inducing anesthesia in a patient with an open 
7
unlikely. Th e inhibition of cholinesterase activity 
lasts for 3–7 weeks aft er discontinuation of echo-
thiophate drops. Muscarinic side eff ects of echothio-
phate, such as bradycardia during induction, can be 
prevented with intravenous anticholinergic drugs 
(eg, atropine, glycopyrrolate). 
 Epinephrine eye drops can cause hypertension, 
tachycardia, and ventricular dysrhythmias; the dys-
rhythmogenic eff ects are potentiated by halothane. 
Direct instillation of epinephrine into the anterior 
chamber of the eye has not been associated with car-
diovascular toxicity. 
 Timolol, a nonselective β-adrenergic antagonist, 
reduces intraocular pressure by decreasing produc-
tion of aqueous humor. Topically-applied timolol eye 
drops, commonly used to treat glaucoma, will oft en 
result in reduced heart rate. In rare cases, it has been 
associated with atropine-resistant bradycardia, hypo-
tension, and bronchospasm during general anesthesia. 
 General Anesthesia for 
Ophthalmic Surgery 
 Th e choice between general and local anesthesia 
should be made jointly by the patient, anesthesiolo-
gist, and surgeon. Patients may refuse to consider 
 TABLE 364 Systemic eﬀ ects of ophthalmic medications. 
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Eﬀ ect
Acetylcholine
Cholinergic agonist (miosis)
Bronchospasm, bradycardia, hypotension
Acetazolamide
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (decreases IOP 1 )
Diuresis, hypokalemic metabolic acidosis
Atropine
Anticholinergic (mydriasis)
Central anticholinergic syndrome 2 
Cyclopentolate
Anticholinergic (mydriasis)
Disorientation, psychosis, convulsions
Echothiophate
Cholinesterase inhibitor (miosis, decreases IOP)
Prolongation of succinylcholine and mivacurium 
paralysis, bronchospasm
Epinephrine
Sympathetic agonist (mydriasis, decreases IOP)
Hypertension, bradycardia, tachycardia, headache
Phenylephrine
α-Adrenergic agonist (mydriasis, vasoconstriction)
Hypertension, tachycardia, dysrhythmias
Scopolamine
Anticholinergic (mydriasis, vasoconstriction)
Central anticholinergic syndrome 2 
Timolol
β-Adrenergic blocking agent (decreases IOP)
Bradycardia, asthma, congestive heart failure
1 IOP, intraocular pressure.
2 See Case Discussion, Chapter 13.
764 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
the pulse tone is audible. In contrast to most other 
types of pediatric surgery, infant body temperature 
may rise during ophthalmic surgery because of 
head-to-toe draping and insignifi cant body surface 
exposure. End-tidal CO 2 analysis helps to diff erenti-
ate this phenomenon from malignant hyperthermia. 
 Th e pain and stress evoked by eye surgery are 
considerably less than during a major intraabdominal 
or intrathoracic procedure. A lighter level of anesthe-
sia would be satisfactory if the consequences of patient 
movement were not so potentially catastrophic. Th e 
lack of cardiovascular stimulation inherent in most 
eye procedures combined with the need for adequate 
anesthetic depth can result in hypotension in elderly 
individuals. Th is problem is usually avoided by ensur-
ing adequate intravenous hydration and administer-
ing small doses of ephedrine or phenylephrine. Th e 
practice of substituting muscle relaxation with non-
depolarizing muscle relaxants for suffi  cient depth of 
anesthesia requires constant attention to the level of 
neuromuscular blockade to avoid patient movement, 
injury to the eye, and a malpractice claim. 
 Emesis caused by vagal stimulation is a common 
postoperative problem following eye surgery, partic-
ularly with strabismus repair. Th e Valsalva eff ect and 
the increase in central venous pressure that accom-
pany vomiting can be detrimental to the surgical result 
and will increase the risk of aspiration. Intraoperative 
intravenous administration of a 5-HT 3 antagonist (eg, 
ondansetron) decreases the incidence of postopera-
tive nausea and vomiting (PONV). Dexamethasone 
(8–10 mg in adults) should also be considered for 
patients with a strong history of PONV. 
 EXTUBATION & EMERGENCE 
 A smooth emergence from general anesthesia is very 
important in order to minimize the risk of postop-
erative wound dehiscence. Coughing or gagging 
due to stimulus from the endotracheal tube can be 
minimized by extubating the patient at a moderately 
deep level of anesthesia. As the end of the surgical 
procedure approaches, muscle relaxation is reversed, 
and spontaneous respiration is allowed to return. 
Anesthetic agents may be continued during gentle 
suction of the airway. Nitrous oxide, if used, is then 
discontinued, and intravenous lidocaine (1.5 mg/
kg) can be given to blunt cough refl exes temporar-
ily. Extubation proceeds 1–2 min aft er the lidocaine 
eye injury is controlling intraocular pressure with a 
smooth induction. Specifi cally, coughing during 
intubation must be avoided by achieving a deep level 
of anesthesia and profound paralysis. Th e intraocu-
lar pressure response to laryngoscopy and endotra-
cheal intubation can be moderated by prior 
administration of intravenous lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) 
or an opioid (eg, remifentanil 0.5–1 mcg/kg or alfen-
tanil 20 mcg/kg). A nondepolarizing muscle relax-
ant or succinylcholine may be used. Despite 
theoretical concerns, succinylcholine has not been 
shown to increase the likelihood of vitreous loss 
with open eye injuries. Many patients with open 
globe injuries have full stomachs and require a 
rapid-sequence induction technique because of the 
risk of aspiration (see Case Discussion below). 
 MONITORING & MAINTENANCE 
 Eye surgery necessitates positioning the anesthesia 
provider away from the patient’s airway, making 
close monitoring of pulse oximetry and the cap-
nograph particularly important. Endotracheal tube 
kinking, breathing circuit disconnection, and unin-
tentional extubation may be more likely because of 
the surgeon working near the airway. Kinking and 
obstruction can be minimized by using a wire-rein-
forced or preformed oral RAE ® (Ring-Adair-Elwyn) 
endotracheal tube (see  Figure 36–1 ). Th e possibil-
ity of arrhythmias caused by the oculocardiac refl ex 
increases the importance of constantly scrutinizing 
the electrocardiogram (ECG) and making sure that 
 FIGURE 361  An oral RAETM endotracheal tube has 
a preformed right-angle bend at the level of the teeth so 
that it exits the mouth away from the surgical ﬁ eld during 
ophthlamic or nasal surgery. 
 
CHAPTER 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery 
765 
utilized  peribulbar or sub-Tenon’s (episcleral) 
block . All of these techniques are most com-
monly combined with intravenous sedation. Local 
anesthesia is preferred to general anesthesia for 
eye surgery because local anesthesia involves less 
physiologic trespass and is less likely to be associ-
ated with PONV. However, eye block procedures 
have potential complications and may not provide 
adequate akinesia or analgesia of the eye. Some 
patients may be unable to lie perfectly still for the 
duration of the surgery. For these reasons, appro-
priate equipment and qualifi ed personnel required 
to treat the complications of local anesthesia 
and to induce general anesthesia must be readily 
available. 
 RETROBULBAR BLOCKADE 
 In this technique, local anesthetic is injected 
behind the eye into the cone formed by the extra-
ocular muscles ( Figure 36–2 ), and a facial nerve 
block is utilized to prevent blinking ( Figure 36–3 ). 
A blunt-tipped 25-gauge needle penetrates the 
lower lid at the junction of the middle and lateral 
administration and during spontaneous respira-
tion with 100% oxygen. Proper airway maintenance 
is crucial until the patient’s cough and swallowing 
refl exes return. Obviously, this technique is not 
appropriate in patients at increased risk of aspiration 
(see Case Discussion at end of chapter). 
 Severe discomfort is unusual following eye sur-
gery. Scleral buckling procedures, enucleation, and 
ruptured globe repair are the most painful opera-
tions. Modest incremental doses of intravenous opi-
oid (eg, fentanyl 25 mcg or hydromorphone 0.25 mg 
for an adult) usually provide suffi  cient analgesia. Th e 
surgeon should be alerted if severe pain is noted fol-
lowing emergence from general anesthesia, as it may 
signal intraocular hypertension, corneal abrasion, or 
other surgical complications. 
 Regional Anesthesia 
for Ophthalmic Surgery 
 Options for local anesthesia for eye surgery include 
topical application of local anesthetic or placement 
of a  retrobulbar block or the more commonly 
B
A
 FIGURE 362  A : During administration of a 
retrobulbar block, the patient looks supranasally as a 
needle is advanced 1.5 cm along the inferotemporal wall 
of the orbit.  B : The needle is then redirected upward and 
nasally toward the apex of the orbit and advanced until its 
tip penetrates the muscle cone. 
766 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
oculocephalic refl ex (ie, a blocked eye does not 
move during head turning). 
 Complications of retrobulbar injection of local 
anesthetics include retrobulbar hemorrhage, perfo-
ration of the globe, optic nerve atrophy, intravascu-
lar injection with resultant convulsions, oculocardiac 
refl ex, trigeminal nerve block, respiratory arrest, 
and, rarely, acute neurogenic pulmonary edema. 
Forceful injection of local anesthetic into the oph-
thalmic artery causes retrograde fl ow toward the 
brain and may result in an instantaneous seizure. 
 Th e postretrobulbar block apnea syndrome is 
probably due to injection of local anesthetic 
into the optic nerve sheath, with spread into the 
cerebrospinal fl uid. Th e central nervous system is 
exposed to high concentrations of local anesthetic, 
leading to mental status changes that may include 
unconsciousness. Apnea occurs within 20 min 
and resolves within an hour. Treatment is support-
ive, with positive-pressure ventilation to prevent 
hypoxia, bradycardia, and cardiac arrest. Adequacy 
of ventilation must be constantly monitored in 
patients who have received retrobulbar anesthesia. 
 Retrobulbar injection is usually not performed 
in patients with bleeding disorders because of the 
risk of retrobulbar hemorrhage, extreme myo-
pia because the elongated globe increases the risk 
of perforation, or an open eye injury because the 
pressure from injecting fl uid behind the eye may 
cause extrusion of intraocular contents through the 
wound. 
 PERIBULBAR BLOCKADE 
 In contrast to retrobulbar blockade, in the peribul-
bar blockade technique, the needle does not pen-
etrate the cone formed by the extraocular muscles. 
Advantages of the peribulbar technique include less 
risk of penetration of the globe, optic nerve, and 
artery, and less pain on injection. Disadvantages 
include a slower onset and an increased likelihood 
of ecchymosis. Both techniques will have equal suc-
cess at producing akinesia of the eye. 
 Th e peribulbar block is performed with the 
patient supine and looking directly ahead (or pos-
sibly under a brief period of deep sedation). Aft er 
topical anesthesia of the conjunctiva, one or two 
8
one-third of the orbit (usually 0.5 cm medial to the 
lateral canthus). Awake patients are instructed to 
stare supranasally as the needle is advanced 3.5 cm 
toward the apex of the muscle cone. Commonly, 
patients undergoing such eye blocks will receive 
a brief period of deep sedation during the block 
(using such agents as etomidate, propofol, and 
remifentanil). Aft er aspiration to preclude intra-
vascular injection, 2–5 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected, and the needle is removed. Choice of local 
anesthetic varies, but lidocaine 2% or bupivacaine 
0.75% are most common. Ropivacaine may be 
used instead of bupivacaine. Addition of epineph-
rine (1:200,000 or 1:400,000) may reduce bleed-
ing and prolong the anesthesia. Hyaluronidase 
(3–7 U/mL), a hydrolyzer of connective tissue 
polysaccharides, is frequently added to enhance 
the retrobulbar spread of the local anesthetic. 
A successful retrobulbar block is accompanied 
by anesthesia, akinesia, and abolishment of the 
 FIGURE 363  Facial nerve block techniques: van Lint 
(1), Atkinson (2), and O’Brien (3). 
1
2
3
 
CHAPTER 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery 
767 
fascia that follows the contour of the globe and 
extends past the equator. While the eye is still fi xed 
with forceps, the cannula is inserted, and 3–4 mL of 
local anesthetic are injected. Complications with the 
sub-Tenon blocks are signifi cantly less than with ret-
robulbar and peribulbar techniques. Globe perfora-
tion, hemorrhage, cellulitis, permanent visual loss, 
and local anesthetic spread into cerebrospinal fl uid 
have been reported. 
 FACIAL NERVE BLOCK 
 A facial nerve block prevents squinting of the eye-
lids during surgery and allows placement of a lid 
speculum. Th ere are several techniques of facial 
nerve block: van Lint, Atkinson, and O’Brien 
( Figure 36–3 ). Th e major complication of these 
blocks is subcutaneous hemorrhage. Another proce-
dure, Nadbath’s technique, blocks the facial nerve as 
it exits the stylomastoid foramen under the external 
auditory canal, in close proximity to the vagus and 
glossopharyngeal nerves. Th is block is not recom-
mended because it has been associated with vocal 
cord paralysis, laryngospasm, dysphagia, and respi-
ratory distress. 
 TOPICAL ANESTHESIA 
OF THE EYE 
 Simple topical local anesthetic techniques have 
evolved for anterior chamber (eg, cataract) and 
glaucoma operations, and, increasingly, the trend 
has been to eliminate local anesthetic injections 
entirely. A typical regimen for topical local anes-
thesia consists of application of 0.5% proparacaine 
(also known as proxymetacaine chlorhydrate) local 
anesthetic drops, repeated at 5-min intervals for 
fi ve applications, followed by topical application of 
a local anesthetic gel (lidocaine chlorhydrate plus 
2% methyl-cellulose) with a cotton swab to the infe-
rior and superior conjunctival sacs. Ophthalmic 
0.5% tetracaine may also be utilized. Topical anes-
thesia is not appropriate for posterior chamber sur-
gery (eg, retinal detachment repair with a buckle), 
and it works best for faster surgeons with a gentle 
surgical technique that does not require akinesia 
of the eye. 
transconjunctival injections are given ( Figure 36–4 ). 
As the eyelid is retracted, an inferotemporal injec-
tion is given halfway between the lateral canthus 
and the lateral limbus. Th e needle is advanced under 
the globe, parallel to the orbital fl oor; when it passes 
the equator of the eye, it is directed slightly medial 
(20°) and cephalad (10°), and 5 mL of local anes-
thetic is injected. To ensure akinesia, a second 5-mL 
injection may be given through the conjunctiva on 
the nasal side, medial to the caruncle, and directed 
straight back parallel to the medial orbital wall, 
pointing slightly cephalad (20°). 
 Sub-Tenon’s (Episcleral) Block 
 Tenon’s fascia surrounds the globe and extraocular 
muscles. Local anesthetic injected beneath it into the 
episcleral space spreads circularly around the sclera 
and to the extraocular muscle sheaths ( Figure 36–4 ). 
A special blunt 25-mm or 19-gauge curved cannula 
is used for a sub-Tenon block. Aft er topical anesthe-
sia, the conjunctiva is lift ed along with Tenon’s fascia 
in the inferonasal quadrant with forceps. A small 
nick is then made with blunt-tipped scissors, which 
are then slid underneath to create a path in Tenon’s 
1
2
3
4
5
 FIGURE 364  Anatomic landmarks for the 
introduction of a needle or catheter in most frequently 
employed eye blocks: (1) medial canthus peribulbar 
anesthesia, (2) lacrimal caruncle, (3) semilunaris fold of the 
conjunctiva, (4) medial canthus episcleral anesthesia, and 
(5) inferior and temporal peribulbar anesthesia. 
768 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
oral intake before or after the injury should be 
established as accurately as possible. The patient 
must be considered to have a full stomach if the 
injury occurred within 8 hr after the last meal, even 
if the patient did not eat for several hours after the 
injury: gastric emptying is delayed by the pain and 
anxiety that follow trauma . 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of a full stomach in a 
patient with an open globe injury? 
 Managing patients who have sustained pen-
etrating eye injuries provides a challenge to anes-
thesia providers because of the need to develop 
an anesthetic plan that is consistent with at least 
two conﬂ icting objectives: (1) prevent further dam-
age to the eye by avoiding increases in intraocular 
pressure and (2) prevent pulmonary aspiration in a 
patient with a full stomach . 
 Many of the common strategies used to 
achieve these objectives are in direct conﬂ ict with 
one another, however ( Tables 36–5 and  36–6 ). For 
example, although regional anesthesia (eg, retro-
bulbar block) minimizes the risk of aspiration pneu-
monia, it is relatively contraindicated in patients 
with penetrating eye injuries because injecting 
local anesthetic behind the globe increases intra-
ocular pressure and may lead to expulsion of intra-
ocular contents. Therefore, these patients require 
general anesthesia—despite the increased risk of 
aspiration pneumonia . 
 INTRAVENOUS SEDATION 
 Many techniques of intravenous sedation are avail-
able for eye surgery, and the particular drug used 
is less important than the dose. Deep sedation, 
although sometimes used during placement of oph-
thalmic nerve blocks, is almost never used intraoper-
atively because of the risks of apnea, aspiration, and 
unintentional patient movement during surgery. An 
intraoperative light sedation regimen that includes 
midazolam (1–2 mg), with or without fentanyl (25–
50 mcg) or sufentanil (2.5–5 mcg), is recommended. 
Doses vary considerably among patients, but should 
be administered in small increments. Concomitant 
use of more than one type of drug (benzodiazepine, 
hypnotic, and opioid) potentiates the eff ects of other 
agents, and doses must be reduced accordingly. 
 Administration of eye blocks can be quite 
uncomfortable, and many anesthesia providers will 
administer small incremental doses of etomidate or 
propofol to produce a brief state of unconscious-
ness during the regional block. Some will substitute 
a bolus of opioid (remifentanil 0.1–0.5 mcg/kg or 
alfentanil 375–500 mcg) to produce a brief period 
of intense analgesia during the eye block procedure. 
 Administration of an antiemetic should be con-
sidered if an opioid is used.  Regardless of the 
technique employed, ventilation and oxygen-
ation must be monitored, and equipment to provide 
positive-pressure ventilation must be immediately 
available. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
An Approach to a Patient with 
an Open Eye & a Full Stomach 
 A 12-year-old boy arrives at the emergency 
room after being shot in the eye with a pellet 
gun. A brief examination by the ophthalmolo-
gist reveals intraocular contents presenting at 
the wound. The boy is scheduled for emergency 
repair of the ruptured globe . 
 What should be stressed in the preoperative 
evaluation of this patient? 
 Aside from taking a routine history and per-
forming a physical examination, the time of last 
9
 TABLE 365 Strategies to prevent increases 
in intraocular pressure (IOP). 
Avoid direct pressure on the globe
Patch eye with Fox shield
No retrobulbar or peribulbar injections
Careful face mask technique
Avoid increases in central venous pressure
Prevent coughing during induction and intubation
Ensure a deep level of anesthesia and relaxation prior to 
laryngoscopy 1 
Avoid head-down positions
Extubate under deep anesthesia 1 
Avoid pharmacological agents that increase IOP
1 These strategies are not recommended in patients with full stomachs.
 
CHAPTER 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery 
769 
intragastric volume. Nonparticulate antacids (prep-
arations of sodium citrate, potassium citrate, and 
citric acid) lose eﬀ ectiveness within 30–60 min and 
should be given immediately prior to induction 
(15–30 mL orally) . 
 Which induction agents are recommended in 
patients with penetrating eye injuries? 
 The ideal induction agent for patients with full 
stomachs would provide a rapid onset of action 
in order to minimize the risk of regurgitation. 
Ketamine, propofol, and etomidate have essen-
tially equally rapid onsets of action (ie, one-arm-to-
brain circulation time) . 
 Furthermore, the ideal induction agent would 
not increase the risk of ocular expulsion by rais-
ing intraocular pressure. (In fact, most intrave-
nous induction agents lower intraocular pressure.) 
Although investigations of the eﬀ ects of ketamine 
on intraocular pressure have provided conﬂ icting 
results, ketamine is not recommended in penetrat-
ing eye injuries, owing to the high rate of blepharo-
spasm and nystagmus . 
 Although etomidate may prove valuable in 
some patients with cardiac disease, it is associ-
ated with an incidence of myoclonus ranging from 
10% to 60%. An episode of severe myoclonus may 
have contributed to complete retinal detachment 
and vitreous prolapse in one patient with an open 
globe injury and limited cardiovascular reserve . 
 Propofol has a rapid onset of action and 
decreases intraocular pressure; however, it does 
not entirely prevent the hypertensive response to 
laryngoscopy and intubation or entirely prevent 
the increase in intraocular pressure that accom-
panies laryngoscopy and intubation. Prior admin-
istration of fentanyl (1–3 mcg/kg), remifentanil 
(0.5–1 mcg/kg), alfentanil (20 mcg/kg), esmolol 
(0.5–1 mg/kg), or lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) attenuates 
this response with varying degrees of success . 
 How does the choice of muscle relaxant diﬀ er 
between these patients and other patients at risk 
of aspiration? 
 The choice of muscle relaxant in patients with 
penetrating eye injuries has been controversial. 
Succinylcholine deﬁ nitely increases intraocular 
 What preoperative preparation should be 
considered in this patient? 
 The goal of preoperative preparation is to mini-
mize the risk of aspiration pneumonia by decreas-
ing gastric volume and acidity (see Case Discussion, 
Chapter 17). Aspiration in patients with eye injuries 
is prevented by proper selection of pharmacologi-
cal agents and anesthetic techniques. Evacuation 
of gastric contents with a nasogastric tube may 
lead to coughing, retching, and other responses 
that can dramatically increase intraocular pressure . 
 Metoclopramide increases lower esophageal 
sphincter tone, speeds gastric emptying, lowers 
gastric ﬂ uid volume, and exerts an antiemetic eﬀ ect. 
It should be given intravenously (10 mg) as soon as 
possible and repeated every 2–4 hr until surgery . 
 Ranitidine (50 mg intravenously), cimetidine 
(300 mg intravenously), and famotidine (20 mg 
intravenously) are H 2 -histamine–receptor antago-
nists that inhibit gastric acid secretion. Because 
they have no eﬀ ect on the pH of gastric secretions 
present in the stomach prior to their administra-
tion, they have limited value in patients presenting 
for emergency surgery . 
 Unlike H 2 -receptor antagonists, antacids have 
an immediate eﬀ ect. Unfortunately, they increase 
 TABLE 366 Strategies to prevent aspiration 
pneumonia. 
Regional anesthesia with minimal sedation 1 
Premedication
Metoclopramide
Histamine H 2 -receptor antagonists
Nonparticulate antacids
Evacuation of gastric contents
Nasogastric tube 1 
Rapid-sequence induction
Cricoid pressure
Rapid induction with rapid onset of paralysis
Avoidance of positive-pressure ventilation via mask
Intubation as soon as possible
Extubation awake
 1 These strategies are not recommended for patients with penetrating 
eye injuries.
770 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
for establishing an intravenous line for a rapid-
sequence induction. Although diﬃ  cult to achieve, 
an ideal strategy would be to administer enough 
sedation painlessly to allow the placement of an 
intravenous line, yet maintain a level of conscious-
ness adequate to protect airway reﬂ exes. However, 
the most prudent strategy is to do everything rea-
sonable to avoid aspiration—even at the cost of 
further eye damage . 
 Are there special considerations during 
extubation and emergence? 
 Patients at risk of aspiration during induc-
tion are also at risk during extubation and emer-
gence. Therefore, extubation must be delayed 
until the patient is awake and has intact airway 
reﬂ exes (eg, spontaneous swallowing and cough-
ing on the endotracheal tube). Deep extubation 
increases the risk of vomiting and aspiration. 
Intraoperative administration of antiemetic medi-
cation and nasogastric or orogastric tube suction-
ing may decrease the incidence of emesis during 
emergence, but they do not guarantee an empty 
stomach . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Budd M, Brown JPR, Th omas J, et al: A comparison of 
sub-Tenon’s with peribulbar anaesthesia in patients 
undergoing sequential bilateral cataract surgery. 
Anaesthesia 2009;64:19-22. 
 Clarke JP, Plummer J: Adverse events associated with 
regional ophthalmic anaesthesia in an Australian 
teaching hospital. Anaesth Intens Care 2011;39:61. 
 El-Hindy N, Johnston RL, Jaycock P, et al: Th e cataract 
national dataset electronic multi-centre audit of 
55,567 operations: anaesthetic techniques and 
complications. Eye 2009;23:50. 
 Gayer S, Kumar CM: Ophthalmic regional anesthesia 
techniques. Minerva Anestesiol 2008;74:23. 
 Goldberg M: Complications of anesthesia for ocular 
surgery. Ophthalmol Clin N Am 2006;19:293. 
 Greenhalgh DL, Kumar CM: Sedation during ophthalmic 
surgery. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2008;25:701. 
 Kallio H, Rosenberg PH: Advances in ophthalmic 
regional anaesthesia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 
2005;19:215. 
pressure. Although there is conﬂ icting research, 
it is probably most prudent to conclude that this 
rise in pressure is not consistently and reliably 
prevented by pretreatment with a nondepolariz-
ing agent, self-taming doses of succinylcholine, or 
lidocaine. Contradictory ﬁ ndings by various inves-
tigators using diﬀ erent regimens are probably due 
to diﬀ erences in doses and timing of the pretreat-
ment drugs . 
 Some anesthesiologists argue that the rela-
tively small and transient rise in intraocular pres-
sure caused by succinylcholine is insigniﬁ cant 
when compared with changes caused by laryngos-
copy and intubation. They claim that a slight rise in 
intraocular pressure is a small price to pay for two 
distinct advantages that succinylcholine oﬀ ers: 
a rapid onset of action that decreases the risk of 
aspiration, and profound muscle relaxation that 
decreases the chance of a Valsalva response during 
intubation. Furthermore, advocates of succinylcho-
line usually point to the lack of case reports docu-
menting further eye injury when succinylcholine 
has been used and to 12s documenting 
safe use of succinylcholine with open eye injuries . 
 Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants do not 
increase intraocular pressure. Regardless of the 
muscle relaxant chosen, intubation should not be 
attempted until a level of paralysis is achieved that 
will deﬁ nitely prevent coughing on the endotra-
cheal tube . 
 How do induction strategies vary in pediatric 
patients without an intravenous line? 
 A hysterical child with a penetrating eye injury 
and a full stomach provides an anesthetic chal-
lenge for which there is no perfect solution. Once 
again, the dilemma is due to the need to avoid 
increases in intraocular pressure yet minimize the 
risk of aspiration. For example, screaming and cry-
ing can lead to tremendous increases in intraocular 
pressure. Attempting to sedate children with rectal 
suppositories or intramuscular injections, however, 
often heightens their state of agitation and may 
worsen the eye injury. Similarly, although preop-
erative sedation may increase the risk of aspiration 
by obtunding airway reﬂ exes, it is often necessary 
 
CHAPTER 36 Anesthesia for Ophthalmic Surgery 
771 
 Swetha V, Jeganathan E, Prajna Jeganathan V: Sub-
Tenon’s anaesthesia: a well tolerated and eff ective 
procedure for ophthalmic surgery. Curr Opin 
Ophthalmol 2009;20:205. 
 Vann MA, Ogunnaike BO, Joshi GP: Sedation and 
anesthesia care for ophthalmologic surgery 
during local/regional anesthesia. Anesthesiology 
2007;107:502. 
 Warltier DC: Sedation and anesthesia care for 
ophthalmologic surgery during local/regional 
anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2007;107:502. 
 Woo JH, Au Eong KG, Kumar CM: Conscious sedation 
during ophthalmic surgery under local anesthesia. 
Minerva Anestesiol 2009;75:211. 
 Kumar C, Dowd T: Ophthalmic regional anaesthesia. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008;21:632. 
 Kumar CM, Dowd TC: Complications of ophthalmic 
regional blocks: their treatment and prevention. 
Ophthalmologica 2006;220:73-82. 
 Lee LA, Posner KL, Cheney FW, et al: Complications 
associated with eye blocks and peripheral nerve 
blocks: an American Society of Anesthesiologists 
closed claims analysis. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2008;33:416. 
 Nouvellon E, Cuvillon P, Ripart J: Regional anesthesia 
and eye surgery. Anesthesiology 2010;113:1236. 
 Ripart J, Nouvellon E, Chaumeron A: Regional anesthesia 
for eye surgery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2005;30:72. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 773
37
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for 
Otorhinolaryngologic 
Surgery 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The anesthetic goals for laryngeal 
endoscopy include profound muscle 
paralysis to provide masseter muscle 
relaxation for introduction of the suspension 
laryngoscope and an immobile surgical 
ﬁ eld, adequate oxygenation and ventilation 
during surgical manipulation of the airway, 
and cardiovascular stability during periods 
of rapidly varying surgical stimulation . 
 During jet ventilation, it is crucial to monitor 
chest wall motion and to allow suﬃ  cient 
time for exhalation in order to avoid air 
trapping and barotrauma . 
 The greatest concern during laser airway 
surgery is an endotracheal tube ﬁ re. This 
risk can be minimized by using a technique 
of ventilation that does not involve a 
ﬂ ammable tube or catheter (eg, intermittent 
apnea or jet ventilation through the 
laryngoscope side port), or by using a laser-
resistant endotracheal tube and lowering 
the fraction of inspired oxygen  (ideally, as 
close to 21% as possible, consistent with 
adequate tissue oxygenation, as monitored 
by pulse oximetry) and not using nitrous 
oxide . 
 Techniques to minimize intraoperative 
blood loss include the use of cocaine or an 
epinephrine-containing local anesthetic 
for vasoconstriction, maintaining a slightly 
head-up position, and providing a mild 
degree of controlled hypotension . 
1
2
3
4
 As always, if there is serious preoperative 
concern regarding potential airway 
problems, an intravenous induction may 
be avoided in favor of awake direct or 
ﬁ beroptic laryngoscopy (cooperative 
patient) or an inhalational induction while 
maintaining spontaneous ventilation 
(uncooperative patient). In any case, the 
appropriate equipment and qualiﬁ ed 
personnel required for an emergency 
tracheostomy must be immediately 
available . 
 The surgeon may request the omission 
of neuromuscular blockers during neck 
dissection or parotidectomy to identify 
nerves (eg, spinal accessory, facial nerves) 
by direct stimulation and to preserve 
them . 
 Manipulation of the carotid sinus and 
stellate ganglion during radical neck 
dissection (the right side more than 
the left) has been associated with wide 
swings in blood pressure, bradycardia, 
dysrhythmias, sinus arrest, and prolonged 
QT intervals. Inﬁ ltration of the carotid 
sheath with local anesthetic will usually 
ameliorate these problems. Bilateral neck 
dissection may result in postoperative 
hypertension and loss of hypoxic drive 
because of denervation of the carotid 
sinuses and bodies . 
5
6
7
—Continued next page
774 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Continued—
available for review. Many patients will have under-
gone preoperative indirect laryngoscopy or fi berop-
tic nasopharyngoscopy, and the information gained 
from these procedures may be of critical importance. 
 Important initial questions that must be 
answered are whether the patient can be provided 
with positive-pressure ventilation with a face mask 
and rebreathing bag, and whether the patient can 
be intubated using conventional direct or video 
laryngoscopy. If the answer to either question is not 
“yes,” the patient’s airway should be secured prior to 
induction using an alternative technique (eg, use of 
a fi beroptic bronchoscope or a tracheostomy under 
local anesthesia; see Case Discussion, Chapter 19). 
However, even the initial securing of an airway with 
tracheostomy does not prevent intraoperative air-
way obstruction due to surgical manipulation and 
techniques. 
 Sedative premedication should be avoided in 
a patient with medically important upper airway 
obstruction. Glycopyrrolate (0.2–0.3 mg intramus-
cularly) 1 hr before surgery may prove helpful by 
minimizing secretions, thereby facilitating airway 
visualization. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 Th e anesthetic goals for laryngeal endoscopy 
include an immobile surgical fi eld and ade-
quate masseter muscle relaxation for introduction of 
the suspension laryngoscope (typically the result of 
profound muscle paralysis), adequate oxygenation 
and ventilation, and cardiovascular stability despite 
rapidly varying levels of surgical stimulation. 
1
 In few other circumstances are cooperation and 
communication between surgeon and anesthesiolo-
gist more important than during airway surgery. Es-
tablishing, maintaining, and protecting an airway in 
the face of abnormal anatomy and simultaneous sur-
gical intervention are demanding tasks. An under-
standing of airway anatomy (see Chapter 19) and an 
appreciation of common otorhinolaryngologic and 
maxillofacial procedures are invaluable in handling 
these anesthetic challenges. 
 ENDOSCOPY 
 Endoscopy 
includes 
laryngoscopy 
(diagnostic 
and operative), microlaryngoscopy (laryngoscopy 
aided by an operating microscope), esophagos-
copy, and bronchoscopy (discussed in Chapter 25). 
Endoscopic procedures may be accompanied by 
laser surgery. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients presenting for endoscopic surgery are oft en 
being evaluated for voice disorders (oft en present-
ing as hoarseness), stridor, or hemoptysis. Possible 
diagnoses include foreign body aspiration, trauma to 
the aerodigestive tract, papillomas, tracheal stenosis, 
tumors, or vocal cord dysfunction. Th us, a preopera-
tive medical history and physical examination, with 
particular attention to potential airway problems, 
must precede any decisions regarding the anes-
thetic plan. In some patients, fl ow–volume loops 
(Chapter  6) or radiographic, computed tomogra-
phy, or magnetic resonance imaging studies may be 
 If there is a chance of postoperative edema 
involving structures that could obstruct 
the airway (eg, tongue), the patient should 
be carefully observed and perhaps should 
be left intubated . 
 Nitrous oxide is either entirely avoided 
during tympanoplasty or discontinued prior 
to graft placement . 
9
10
 Patients undergoing maxillofacial 
reconstruction or orthognathic surgical 
procedures often pose the greatest airway 
challenges to the anesthesiologist. If there 
are any anticipated signs of problems with 
mask ventilation or tracheal intubation, the 
airway should be secured prior to induction 
of general anesthesia . 
8
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
775
 A. Muscle Relaxation 
 Intraoperative muscle relaxation can be achieved 
by intermittent boluses or infusion of intermediate-
duration nondepolarizing neuromuscular block-
ing agents (NMBs) (eg, rocuronium, vecuronium, 
cisatracurium), or with a succinylcholine infusion. 
However, profound degrees of nondepolarizing 
block may prove diffi  cult to reverse and may delay 
return of protective airway refl exes and extubation. 
Given that profound relaxation is oft en needed until 
the very end of the surgery, endoscopy remains one 
of the few remaining indications for succinylcholine 
infusions. Rapid recovery is important, as endos-
copy is oft en an outpatient procedure. 
 B. Oxygenation & Ventilation 
 Several methods have successfully been used to 
provide oxygenation and ventilation during endos-
copy, while simultaneously minimizing interference 
with the operative procedure. Most commonly, the 
patient is intubated with a small-diameter endo-
tracheal tube through which conventional posi-
tive-pressure ventilation is administered. Standard 
tracheal tubes of smaller diameters, however, are 
designed for pediatric patients, and therefore are too 
short for the adult trachea and have a low-volume 
cuff  that will exert high pressure against the tra-
cheal mucosa. A 4.0-, 5.0-, or 6.0-mm specialized 
microlaryngeal tracheal tube (Mallinckrodt MLT ® , 
Mallinckrodt Critical Care) is the same length as an 
adult tube, has a disproportionately large high-vol-
ume low-pressure cuff , and is stiff er and less prone 
to compression than is a conventional tracheal tube 
of the same diameter. Th e advantages of intubation 
in endoscopy include protection against aspiration 
and the ability to administer inhalational anesthetics 
and to continuously monitor end-tidal CO 2 . 
 In some cases (eg, those involving the poste-
rior commissure or vocal cords), intubation with 
a tracheal tube may interfere with the surgeon’s 
visualization or performance of the procedure. A 
simple alternative is insuffl  ation of high fl ows of 
oxygen through a small catheter placed in the tra-
chea. Although oxygenation may be maintained in 
patients with good lung function, ventilation will be 
inadequate for longer procedures unless the patient 
is allowed to breathe spontaneously. 
 Another option is the intermittent apnea tech-
nique, in which ventilation with oxygen by face 
mask or endotracheal tube is alternated with peri-
ods of apnea, during which the surgical procedure is 
performed. Th e duration of apnea, usually 2–3 min, 
is determined by how well the patient maintains 
oxygen saturation, as measured by pulse oximetry. 
Risks of this technique include hypoventilation with 
hypercarbia, failure to reestablish the airway, and 
pulmonary aspiration. 
 Another attractive alternative approach involves 
connecting a manual jet ventilator to a side port of 
the laryngoscope. During inspiration (1–2 s), a 
high-pressure (30–50 psi) jet of oxygen is directed 
through the glottic opening and entrains a mix-
ture  of oxygen and room air into the lungs 
(Venturi eff ect). Expiration (4–6 s duration) is pas-
sive.  It is crucial to monitor chest wall motion 
and to allow suffi  cient time for exhalation to 
avoid air trapping and barotrauma. Th is technique 
requires total intravenous anesthesia. A variation of 
this technique is high-frequency jet ventilation, 
which utilizes a small cannula or tube in the trachea, 
through which gas is injected 80–300 times per min-
ute (see Chapter 57). Capnography will not provide 
an accurate estimate of end-tidal CO 2 during jet ven-
tilation due to constant and sizable dilution of alveo-
lar gases. 
 C. Cardiovascular Stability 
 Blood pressure and heart rate oft en fl uctuate strik-
ingly during endoscopic procedures for two rea-
sons. First, some of these patients are elderly and 
have a long history of heavy tobacco and alcohol 
use that predisposes them to cardiovascular dis-
eases. In  addition, the procedure is, in essence, a 
series of physiologically stressful laryngoscopies 
and interventions, separated by varying periods of 
minimal surgical stimulation. Attempting to main-
tain a constant level of anesthesia invariably results 
in alternating intervals of hypertension and hypo-
tension. Providing a modest baseline level of anes-
thesia allows supplementation with short-acting 
anesthetics (eg, propofol, remifentanil) or sympa-
thetic antagonists (eg, esmolol), as needed, dur-
ing periods of increased stimulation. Alternatively, 
some anesthesia providers use regional nerve block 
2
776 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
of the glossopharyngeal nerve and superior laryn-
geal nerve to help minimize intraoperative swings in 
blood pressure (see Case Discussion, Chapter 19). 
 Laser Precautions 
 Laser light diff ers from ordinary light in three ways: 
it is monochromatic (possesses one wavelength), 
coherent (oscillates in the same phase), and colli-
mated (exists as a narrow parallel beam). Th ese char-
acteristics off er the surgeon excellent precision and 
hemostasis with minimal postoperative edema or 
pain. Unfortunately, lasers introduce several major 
hazards into the operating room environment. 
 Th e uses and side eff ects of a laser vary with its 
wavelength, which is determined by the medium in 
which the laser beam is generated. For example, a 
CO 2 laser produces a long wavelength (10,600 nm), 
whereas a yttrium–aluminum–garnet (YAG) laser 
produces a shorter wavelength (1064- or 1320-nm). 
As the wavelength increases, absorption by water 
increases, and tissue penetration decreases. Th us, 
the eff ects of the CO 2 laser are much more localized 
and superfi cial than are those of the YAG laser. 
 General laser precautions include the evacuation 
of toxic fumes (laser plume) from tissue vaporiza-
tion; these have the potential to transmit microbio-
logical diseases. When signifi cant laser plume is 
generated, fi tted respiratory fi lter masks compliant 
with Occupation Safety and Health Administration 
standards should be worn by all operating room 
 personnel. In addition, during laser procedures, all 
 operating room personnel should wear laser eye 
 protection, and the patient’s eyes should be taped 
shut. 
 Th e greatest risk of laser airway surgery (if an 
endotracheal tube is used) is an airway fi re. 
Th is risk can be moderated by using a technique of 
ventilation that minimizes the fraction of inspired 
oxygen (F io 2 ) and can be eliminated if there is no 
combustible material (eg, no fl ammable tube or 
catheter) in the airway. If an endotracheal tube is 
used, it must be relatively resistant to laser igni-
tion ( Table 37–1 ). Th ese tubes not only resist laser 
beam strikes, but they also possess double cuff s that 
should be infl ated with saline instead of air in order 
to better absorb thermal energy and reduce the risk 
of ignition. If the proximal cuff  is struck by the laser 
3
and the saline escapes, the distal cuff  will continue 
to seal the airway. Alternatively, endotracheal tubes 
can be wrapped with a variety of metallic tapes; 
however, this is a suboptimal practice and should be 
avoided whenever use of a specialized, commercially 
available, fl exible, stainless steel laser-resistant endo-
tracheal tube is possible ( Table 37–2 ). 
 Although specialized, laser-resistant endotra-
cheal tubes may be used, it must be emphasized that 
no endotracheal tube or currently available endotra-
cheal tube protection device is reliably laser-proof. 
Th erefore, whenever laser airway surgery is being 
performed with an endotracheal tube in place, the 
following precautions should be observed: 
•  Inspired oxygen concentration should be as low 
as possible by utilizing air in the inspired gas 
mixture (many patients tolerate an F io 2 of 21%). 
 TABLE 371 Advantages and disadvantages 
of various tracheal tubes for laser airway 
surgery. 
Type of Tube
Advantages
Disadvantages
Polyvinyl 
chloride
Inexpensive, 
nonreflective
Low melting point, 
highly combustible 1 
Red rubber
Puncture-resistant, 
maintains structure, 
nonreflective
Highly combustible 1 
Silicone 
rubber
Nonreflective
Combustible, 1 
turns to toxic ash
Metal
Combustion-
resistant, 1 
kink-resistant
Thick-walled 
flammable cuff, 
transfers heat, reflects 
laser, cumbersome
1 Combustibility depends on fraction of inspired oxygen and laser energy.
 TABLE 372 Disadvantages of wrapping 
a tracheal tube with metallic tape. 
No cuff protection
Adds thickness to tube
Not a device approved by the US Food and Drug 
 Administration
Protection varies with type of metal foil
Adhesive backing may ignite
May reflect laser onto nontargeted tissue
Rough edges may damage mucosal surfaces
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
777 
•  Nitrous oxide supports combustion and should 
be avoided. 
•  Th e endotracheal tube cuff s should be fi lled 
with saline. Some practitioners add methylene 
blue to signal cuff  rupture. A well-sealed cuff ed 
tube will minimize oxygen concentration in 
the pharynx. 
•  Laser intensity and duration should be limited 
as much as possible. 
•  Saline-soaked pledgets (completely saturated) 
should be placed in the airway to limit risk 
of endotracheal tube ignition and damage to 
adjacent tissue. 
•  A source of water (eg, 60-mL syringe) should 
be immediately available in case of fi re. 
 Th ese precautions limit, but do not eliminate, 
the risk of an airway fi re; anesthesia providers must 
proactively address the hazard of fi re whenever 
laser or electrocautery is utilized near the airway 
( Table 37–3 ). 
 If an airway fi re should occur, all air/oxygen 
should immediately be turned off  at the anesthe-
sia gas machine, and burning combustible material 
(eg, an endotracheal tube) should be removed from 
the airway. Th e fi re can be extinguished with saline, 
and the patient’s airway should be examined to be 
certain that all combustible fragments have been 
removed. 
 NASAL & SINUS SURGERY 
 Common nasal and sinus surgeries include polyp-
ectomy, endoscopic sinus surgery, maxillary sinus-
otomy (Caldwell–Luc procedure), rhinoplasty, and 
septoplasty. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients undergoing nasal or sinus surgery may have 
a considerable degree of preoperative nasal obstruc-
tion caused by polyps, a deviated septum, or muco-
sal congestion from infection. Th is may make face 
mask ventilation diffi  cult, particularly if combined 
with other causes of diffi  cult ventilation (eg, obesity, 
maxillofacial deformities). 
 Nasal polyps are oft en associated with allergic 
disorders, such as asthma. Patients who also have 
a history of allergic reactions to aspirin should not 
be given any nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory drugs 
(including ketorolac) for postoperative analgesia. 
Nasal polyps are a common feature of cystic fi brosis. 
 Because of the rich vascular supply of the nasal 
mucosa, the preoperative interview should concen-
trate on questions concerning medication use (eg, 
aspirin, clopidogrel) and any history of bleeding 
problems. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 Many nasal procedures can be satisfactorily per-
formed under local anesthesia with sedation. Th e 
anterior ethmoidal nerve and sphenopalatine 
nerves ( Figure 19–3 ) provide sensory innervation 
to the nasal septum and lateral walls. Both can be 
blocked by packing the nose with gauze or cotton-
tipped applicators soaked with local anesthetic. 
Th e topical anesthetic should be allowed to remain 
in place at least 10 min before instrumentation is 
attempted. Supplementation with submucosal injec-
tions of local anesthetic is oft en required. Use of an 
epinephrine-containing solution or cocaine (usually 
a 4% or 10% solution) will shrink the nasal mucosa 
and potentially decrease intraoperative blood loss. 
Intranasal cocaine (maximum dose, 3 mg/kg) is rap-
idly absorbed (reaching peak levels in 30 min) and 
may be associated with cardiovascular side eff ects 
(see Chapter 16). 
 General anesthesia is oft en preferred for 
nasal surgery because of the discomfort and incom-
plete block that may accompany topical anesthesia. 
Special considerations during and shortly following 
induction include using an oral airway during 
face mask ventilation to mitigate the eff ects of nasal 
obstruction; intubating with a reinforced or pre-
formed Mallinckrodt oral RAE ® (Ring–Adair–Elwyn) 
 TABLE 373 Airway ﬁ re protocol. 
1.  Stop ventilation and remove tracheal tube.
2.  Turn off oxygen and disconnect circuit from machine.
3.  Submerge tube in water.
4.  Ventilate with face mask and reintubate.
5.  Assess airway damage with bronchoscopy, serial chest 
x-rays, and arterial blood gases.
6.  Consider bronchial lavage and steroids.
778 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
endotracheal tube ( Figure 36–1 ); and tucking the 
patient’s padded arms, with protection of the fi ngers, 
to the side. Because of the proximity of the surgical 
fi eld, it is important to tape the patient’s eyes closed 
to avoid a corneal abrasion. One exception to this 
occurs during dissection in endoscopic sinus sur-
gery, when the surgeon may wish to periodically 
check for eye movement because of the close prox-
imity of the sinuses and orbit ( Figure 37–1 ); none-
theless, the eyes should remain protected until the 
surgeon is ready to observe them. NMBs are oft en 
utilized because of the potential neurological or 
ophthalmic complications that might arise if the 
patient moves during sinus instrumentation. 
 Techniques to minimize intraoperative blood 
loss include supplementation with cocaine 
or an epinephrine-containing local anesthetic, 
maintaining a slightly head-up position, and pro-
viding a mild degree of controlled hypotension. A 
posterior pharyngeal pack is oft en placed to limit 
the risk of aspiration of blood. Despite these pre-
cautions, the anesthesiologist must be prepared for 
major blood loss, particularly during the resection 
of vascular tumors (eg, juvenile nasopharyngeal 
angiofi broma). 
 Coughing or straining during emergence from 
anesthesia and extubation should be avoided, as 
4
these events will increase venous pressure and 
increase postoperative bleeding. Unfortunately, rela-
tively deep extubation strategies that are commonly 
and appropriately utilized to accomplish this goal 
also may increase the risk of aspiration. 
 HEAD & NECK 
CANCER SURGERY 
 Surgery for cancer of the head and neck includes 
laryngectomy, glossectomy, pharyngectomy, paroti-
dectomy, hemimandibulectomy, and radical neck 
dissection. An endoscopic examination following 
induction of anesthesia oft en precedes these surgical 
procedures. Timing of a tracheostomy, if planned, 
depends upon the patient’s preoperative airway 
compromise. Some procedures may include exten-
sive reconstructive surgery, such as the transplanta-
tion of a free microvascular muscle fl ap. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Th e typical patient presenting for head and neck 
cancer surgery is older and oft en has had many years 
of heavy tobacco and alcohol use. Common coexist-
ing medical conditions include chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease, hyper-
tension, diabetes, alcoholism, and malnutrition. 
 FIGURE 371  Orbital fracture is a risk of endoscopic 
sinus surgery because of the proximity of the sinuses to 
the orbit ( A , frontal view;  B , coronal section). (Reproduced 
and modiﬁ ed, with permission, from Snell RS, Katz J:  Clinical Anatomy 
for Anesthesiologists . Appleton & Lange, 1988.) 
Frontal sinus
Anterior ethmoidal sinuses
Middle ethmoidal sinuses
Posterior
ethmoidal sinuses
Sphenoid
sinus
Orbit
Crista galli
Superior concha
Ethmoidal sinuses
Middle concha
Inferior concha
Maxillary sinus
Nasal septum
Hard
palate
A
B
Maxillary sinus
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
779
 Airway management may be complicated by 
abnormal airway anatomy, an obstructing lesion, or 
by preoperative radiation therapy that has fi brosed, 
immobilized, and distorted the patient’s airway 
structures.  If there is concern regarding poten-
tial airway problems, intravenous induction 
may be avoided in favor of awake direct or fi beroptic 
laryngoscopy (cooperative patient) or direct or 
fi beroptic intubation following an inhalational 
induction, maintaining spontaneous ventilation 
(uncooperative patient). Elective tracheostomy 
under local anesthesia prior to induction of general 
anesthesia is oft en a prudent option. In any case, the 
appropriate equipment and qualifi ed personnel 
required for an emergency tracheostomy must be 
immediately available. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 A. Monitoring 
 Because many of these procedures are lengthy and 
associated with substantial blood loss, and because 
of the prevalence of coexisting cardiopulmonary 
disease, arterial cannulation is oft en utilized for 
blood pressure monitoring and frequent laboratory 
analyses. If central venous access is deemed neces-
sary, the surgeon should be consulted to ascertain 
that planned internal jugular or subclavian venous 
access will not interfere with the intended surgical 
procedures; in such cases, if both internal jugular 
and both subclavian veins are unavailable, antecu-
bital or femoral veins are reasonable alternatives. 
Arterial lines and intravenous cannulas should 
not be placed in the operative arm if a radial fore-
arm fl ap is planned. A minimum of two large-bore 
intravenous lines and a urinary catheter (preferably 
with temperature-monitoring capability) should 
be placed. A forced-air warming blanket should be 
positioned over the lower extremities to help main-
tain normal body temperature. Intraoperative hypo-
thermia and consequent vasoconstriction can be 
detrimental to perfusion of a microvascular free fl ap. 
 Intraoperative nerve monitoring is increasingly 
utilized by surgeons in anterior neck operations 
to help preserve the superior laryngeal, recur-
rent laryngeal, and vagus nerves ( Figure 37–2 ), 
and the anesthesia provider may be asked to place 
5
a specialized nerve integrity monitor endotracheal 
tube (Medtronic Xomed NIM ® endotracheal tube) 
to facilitate this process ( Figure 37–3 ). 
 B. Tracheostomy 
 Head and neck cancer surgery oft en includes tra-
cheostomy. Immediately prior to surgical entry 
into the trachea, the endotracheal tube and hypo-
pharynx should be thoroughly suctioned to limit 
the risk of aspiration of blood and secretions. If 
electrocautery is used during the surgical dissec-
tion, the F io 2 should be lowered to 30% or less, if 
possible, in order to minimize the risk of fi re as the 
trachea is surgically entered. In any case, the easiest 
way to avoid an airway fi re in this circumstance is 
for the surgeon NOT to use the cautery to enter the 
trachea. Aft er dissection down to the trachea, the 
tracheal tube cuff  is defl ated to avoid perforation 
by the scalpel. When the tracheal wall is transected, 
the endotracheal tube is withdrawn so that its tip is 
immediately cephalad to the incision. Ventilation 
during this period is diffi  cult because of the large 
leak through the tracheal incision. A sterile wire-
reinforced endotracheal tube or L-shaped cuff ed 
laryngectomy tube is placed in the trachea, the 
cuff  is infl ated, and the tube is connected to a ster-
ile breathing circuit. As soon as correct position 
is confi rmed by capnography and bilateral chest 
auscultation, the original endotracheal tube is 
removed. An increase in peak inspiratory pressure 
immediately aft er tracheostomy usually indicates a 
malpositioned endotracheal tube, bronchospasm, 
debris or secretions in the trachea, or, rarely, 
pneumothorax. 
 C. Maintenance of Anesthesia 
 Th e surgeon may request the omission of 
NMBs during neck dissection or parotidec-
tomy to identify nerves (eg, spinal accessory, facial 
nerves) by direct stimulation and to preserve them. 
If a nerve integrity monitor endotracheal tube is 
utilized, succinylcholine (or propofol with no relax-
ant) may be used to facilitate intubation. Moderate 
controlled hypotension may be helpful in limiting 
blood loss; however, cerebral perfusion may be com-
promised with moderate hypotension when a tumor 
invades the carotid artery or jugular vein (the latter 
may increase cerebral venous pressure). If head-up 
6
780 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 FIGURE 372  The  vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) 
originates in the medulla oblongata and then ramiﬁ es 
in the superior and inferior vagal ganglia in the neck. Its 
ﬁ rst major branch is the pharyngeal plexus of the vagus. 
The  superior laryngeal nerve divides into the external 
and internal laryngeal nerves. The  internal branch 
supplies sensory innervation of the laryngeal mucosa 
above the vocal cords, and the  external branch innervates 
the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles and the 
cricothyroid muscle of the larynx. Cricothyroid muscle 
contraction increases the voice pitch by lengthening, 
tensing, and adducting the vocal folds. The superior 
laryngeal nerve is at risk of damage during operations 
of the anterior neck, especially thyroid surgery, and 
injury to this nerve may result in hoarseness and loss 
of vocal volume. The next branch of the vagus is the 
 recurrent laryngeal nerve , which innervates all of the 
muscles of the larynx except the cricothyroid, and is 
responsible for phonation and glottic opening. The 
recurrent laryngeal nerve runs immediately behind 
the thyroid gland and thus is the nerve of greatest risk 
for injury during thyroid surgery. Unilateral recurrent 
laryngeal nerve damage may result in vocal changes or 
hoarseness, and bilateral nerve damage may result in 
aphonia and respiratory distress. Inferior to this nerve, 
the vagus nerve provides autonomic motor and sensory 
nerve ﬁ bers to the thoracic and abdominal viscera. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Dillon FX: Electromyographic 
(EMG) neuromonitoring in otolaryngology-head and neck surgery. 
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:423). 
Superior ganglion (X)
Sensory nerve
to external ear
Inferior ganglion (X)
Vagus (X)
Thoracic
viscera:
Heart
Lungs
Common carotid artery
Liver Spleen Pancreas
Stomach Duodenum
Jejeunum Ileum
Large intestine to splenic flexure
Abdominal
viscera:
Dorsal nucleus of the Vagus (X)
Nucleus ambiguus (IX, X)
Medulla oblongata
Pharyngeal
plexus of the Vagus (X)
Superior pharyngeal constrictor
Sensory nerve to pharynx
Pharynx:
Cricothyroid muscle
Inferior pharyngeal constrictor
Sensory nerve to larynx
Superior
laryngeal
nerve:
Posterior cricoarytenoid muscle
Lateral cricoarytenoid muscle
Transverse arytenoid muscle
Oblique arytenoid muscle
Vocalis muscle
Thyroarytenoid muscle
Larynx:
Recurrent
laryngeal nerve
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
781 
 FIGURE 373  A: The Medtronic Xomed NIM ® 
electromyographic (EMG) nerve integrity monitoring 
endotracheal tube. Succinylcholine (or no relaxant at 
all) should be used for intubation, and the tube should 
be secured in the midline. If lubricant is used, it must 
not contain local anesthetics.  B: A slightly larger tube 
size should be used to facilitate mucosal contact with 
the electrodes, and the blue band of the NIM ® tube 
must be positioned at the level of the vocal cords. 
 C: Nerve integrity is continuously monitored via EMG 
activity (Medtronic Xomed NIM-Response ® 3.0 Nerve 
Integrity Monitor). Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants are 
contraindicated because they preclude EMG monitoring. 
(Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Medtronic Xomed.) 
B
C
Setup
Thyroid With APS *
Stim1
Stim2
Events
1.0
Vocalis Left
Vocalis Right
500 µV
25 mS
GUI v2011.2.9.1344  DSP v2011.2.9.1359
03/18/2011 01:23 PM
1
2
Monitoring
Reports
0.00 mA
100 µV
Activate
Threshold
Snapshot
Volume
50
+
-
+
-
339 µV
14 µV
Control Panel
APS
A
782 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
tilt is utilized, it is important that the arterial blood 
pressure transducer be zeroed at the level of the 
brain (external auditory meatus) in order to most 
accurately determine cerebral perfusion pressure. 
In addition, head-up tilt may increase the chance of 
venous air embolism. 
 Following reanastomosis of a microvascular 
free fl ap, blood pressure should be maintained at 
the patient’s baseline level. Th e use of vasoconstric-
tive agents (eg, phenylephrine) to maintain systemic 
blood pressure should be minimized because of 
potential decrease in fl ap perfusion due to vaso-
constriction. Similarly, the use of vasodilators (eg, 
sodium nitroprusside or hydralazine) should be 
avoided in order to minimize any decrease in graft  
perfusion pressure. 
 D. Transfusion 
 Transfusion decisions must balance the patient’s 
immediate surgical risks with the possibility of an 
increased cancer recurrence rate resulting from trans-
fusion-induced immune suppression. Rheological 
factors make a relatively low hematocrit (eg, 27% 
to 30%) desirable when microvascular free fl aps are 
performed. Excessive diuresis should be avoided dur-
ing microvascular-free fl ap surgery in order to allow 
adequate graft  perfusion in the postoperative period. 
 E. Cardiovascular Instability 
 Manipulation of the carotid sinus and stellate 
ganglion during radical neck dissection (the 
right side more than the left ) has been associated 
with wide swings in blood pressure, bradycardia, 
arrhythmias, sinus arrest, and prolonged QT inter-
vals. Infi ltration of the carotid sheath with local 
anesthetic will usually moderate these problems. 
Bilateral neck dissection may result in postoperative 
hypertension and loss of hypoxic drive due to dener-
vation of the carotid sinuses and carotid bodies. 
 MAXILLOFACIAL 
RECONSTRUCTION & 
ORTHOGNATHIC SURGERY 
 Maxillofacial reconstruction is oft en required to 
correct the eff ects of trauma (eg, LeFort fractures) 
or developmental malformations, for radical cancer 
7
surgeries (eg, maxillectomy or mandibulectomy), 
or for obstructive sleep apnea. Orthognathic pro-
cedures (eg, LeFort osteotomies, mandibular oste-
otomies) for skeletal malocclusion share many of the 
same surgical and anesthetic techniques. 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients undergoing maxillofacial reconstruc-
tion or orthognathic surgical procedures oft en 
pose airway challenges. Particular attention should 
be focused on jaw opening, mask fi t, neck mobility, 
micrognathia, retrognathia, maxillary protrusion 
(overbite), macroglossia, dental pathology, nasal 
patency, and the existence of any intraoral lesions 
or debris. If there are any anticipated signs of prob-
lems with mask ventilation or tracheal intubation, 
the airway should be secured prior to induction of 
general anesthesia. Th is may involve fi beroptic nasal 
intubation, fi beroptic oral intubation, or tracheos-
tomy with local anesthesia facilitated with cautious 
sedation. Nasal intubation with a straight tube with 
a fl exible angle connector ( Figure 37–4A ) or a pre-
formed nasal RAE ® ( Figure 37–4B ) tube is usually 
preferred in dental and oral surgery. Th e endotra-
cheal tube can then be directed cephalad over the 
patient’s forehead. With any nasal intubation, care 
should be taken to prevent the endotracheal tube 
from putting pressure on the tissues of the nasal 
opening, as this situation may result in local tissue 
pressure necrosis in the setting of a lengthy surgical 
procedure. Nasal intubation should be considered 
with caution in LeFort II and III fractures because 
of the possibility of a coexisting basilar skull fracture 
( Figure 37–5 ). 
 Intraoperative Management 
 Maxillofacial reconstructive and orthognathic sur-
geries can be lengthy and associated with substantial 
blood loss. An oropharyngeal (“throat”) pack is oft en 
placed to minimize the amount of blood and other 
debris reaching the larynx and trachea. Strategies to 
minimize bleeding include a slight head-up posi-
tion, controlled hypotension, and local infi ltration 
with epinephrine solutions. Because the patient’s 
arms are typically tucked at the side, two intrave-
nous lines may be established prior to surgery. An 
arterial line may be placed. If head-up tilt is utilized, 
8
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
783
it is important that the arterial blood pressure trans-
ducer be zeroed at the level of the brain (external 
auditory meatus) in order to most accurately deter-
mine cerebral perfusion pressure. In addition, the 
anesthesia provider must be alert to the increased 
risk of venous air embolism in the setting of head-
up tilt. 
 Because of the proximity of the airway to the 
surgical fi eld, the anesthesiologist’s location is more 
remote than usual. Th is increases the likelihood of 
serious intraoperative airway problems, such as 
endotracheal tube kinking, disconnection, or perfo-
ration by a surgical instrument. Monitoring of end-
tidal CO 2 , peak inspiratory pressures, and breath 
sounds via an esophageal stethoscope assume 
greater importance in such cases. If the operative 
procedure is near the airway, the use of electocau-
tery or laser increases the risk of fi re. At the end of 
surgery, the oropharyngeal pack must be removed 
and the pharynx suctioned. Bloody debris is typi-
cally found during initial suctioning, but should 
diminish with repeat eff orts.  If there is a pos-
sibility of postoperative tissue edema involv-
ing structures that could potentially obstruct the 
airway (eg, tongue, pharynx), the patient should be 
carefully observed or left  intubated. In such uncer-
tain situations, extubation may be performed over 
an endotracheal tube exchanger (Cook Airway 
Exchange Catheter with Rapi-Fit ® Adapter, Cook 
Medical), which can facilitate reintubation and pro-
vide oxygenation in the setting of immediate 
9
 FIGURE 374  A: A regular straight endotracheal 
tube can be cut at the level of the nares, and a ﬂ exible 
connector attached.  B: Alternatively, a nasal RAETM tube 
has a preformed right-angle bend at the level of the nose 
so that the tube is directed over the forehead. 
A
B
I
II
III
 FIGURE 375 Diagrammatic representation of LeFort I, II, and III fractures. LeFort II and III fractures may coexist with a 
basilar skull fracture, a contraindication to nasal intubation.
784 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
postextubation respiratory obstruction. In addition, 
the operating team should be prepared for emer-
gent tracheotomy or cricothyrotomy. Otherwise, 
extubation can be attempted once the patient is 
fully awake and there are no signs of continued 
bleeding. Patients with intermaxillary fi xation 
(eg, maxillomandibular wiring)  must have suction 
and appropriate wire cutting tools continuously at 
the bedside in case of vomiting or other airway 
emergencies. Extubating a patient whose jaws are 
wired shut and whose oropharyngeal pack has not 
been removed can lead to life threatening airway 
obstruction. 
 EAR SURGERY 
 Frequently performed ear surgeries include sta-
pedectomy or stapedotomy, tympanoplasty, and 
mastoidectomy. Myringotomy with insertion of 
tympanostomy tubes is the most common pediatric 
surgical procedure and is discussed in Chapter 42. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 A. Nitrous Oxide 
 Nitrous oxide is not oft en used in anesthesia for ear 
surgery. Because nitrous oxide is more soluble than 
nitrogen in blood, it diff uses into air-containing 
cavities more rapidly than nitrogen (the major com-
ponent of air) can be absorbed by the bloodstream 
(see Chapter 8). Normally, changes in middle ear 
pressures caused by nitrous oxide are well tolerated 
as a result of passive venting through the eustachian 
tube. However, patients with a history of chronic 
ear problems (eg, otitis media, sinusitis) oft en suff er 
from obstructed eustachian tubes and may, on rare 
occasion, experience hearing loss or tympanic mem-
brane rupture from administration of nitrous oxide 
anesthesia. 
 During tympanoplasty, the middle ear is open to 
the atmosphere, and there is no pressure build-up. 
Once the surgeon has placed a tympanic membrane 
graft , the middle ear becomes a closed space. If 
nitrous oxide is allowed to diff use into this space, 
middle ear pressure will rise, and the graft  may 
be displaced. Conversely, discontinuing nitrous oxide 
aft er graft  placement will create a negative middle ear 
pressure that could also cause graft   dislodgment. 
10
 Therefore, nitrous oxide is either entirely 
avoided during tympano plasty or discontinued 
prior to graft  placement. Obviously, the exact amount 
of time required to wash out the nitrous oxide 
depends on many factors,  including alveolar ven-
tilation and fresh gas fl ows (see Chapter  8), but 
15–30 min is  usually recommended. 
 B. Hemostasis 
 As with any form of microsurgery, even small 
amounts of blood can obscure the operating fi eld. 
Techniques to minimize blood loss during ear sur-
gery include mild (15°) head elevation, infi ltration 
or topical application of epinephrine (1:50,000–
1:200,000), and moderate controlled hypotension. 
Because coughing on the endotracheal tube during 
emergence (particularly during head bandaging) 
will increase venous pressure and may cause bleed-
ing (as well as increased middle ear pressure), deep 
extubation is oft en utilized. 
 C. Facial Nerve Identiﬁ cation 
 Preservation of the facial nerve is an important 
consideration during some types of ear surgery (eg, 
resection of a glomus tumor or acoustic neuroma). 
During these cases, intraoperative paralysis with 
NMBs may confuse the interpretation of facial nerve 
stimulation and should not be used unless requested 
by the surgeon. 
 D. Postoperative Vertigo, 
Nausea and Vomiting 
 Because the inner ear is intimately involved with the 
sense of balance, ear surgery may cause postopera-
tive dizziness (vertigo) and postoperative nausea and 
vomiting (PONV). Induction and maintenance with 
propofol have been shown to decrease PONV in 
patients undergoing middle ear surgery. Prophylaxis 
with decadron prior to induction, and a 5-HT 3
blocker prior to emergence, should be considered. 
Patients undergoing ear surgery should be carefully 
assessed for vertigo postoperatively in order to mini-
mize the risk of falling during ambulation secondary 
to an unsteady gait. 
 Oral Surgical Procedures 
 Most minor oral surgical procedures are performed 
in a clinic or offi  ce setting utilizing local anesthesia, 
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
785 
augmented with varying degrees of oral or intrave-
nous sedation. If intravenous sedation is employed, 
or if the procedure is complex, a qualifi ed anesthesia 
provider should be present. Typically, a bite block 
and an oropharyngeal throat pack protect the airway. 
For light to moderate levels of sedation, the oropha-
ryngeal pack prevents irrigating fl uids and dental 
fragments from entering the airway. Deep sedation 
and general anesthesia require an increased level of 
airway control by the anesthesia provider. Regardless 
of whether deep sedation or general anesthesia is 
inadvertent or intended, appropriate equipment, 
supplies, and medications  must be immediately 
available to help insure that any anticipated or unex-
pected anesthesia-related problem occurring in an 
offi  ce or clinic setting can be safely addressed with 
the same standard of care that is required in the hos-
pital or ambulatory surgery center. 
 Minor oral surgical procedures, such as exodon-
tias, typically last no more than 1 hr. Th e surgical 
fi eld is amenable to a nerve block or infi ltration by 
a local anesthetic. In adults, most oral surgeons use 
2% lidocaine with 1/100,000 epinephrine or 0.5% 
bupivacaine with 1/200,000 epinephrine in quanti-
ties no greater than 12 mL and 8 mL, respectively. 
Th e anesthesia provider must be informed by the 
surgeon of the local anesthetic used and its con-
centration and volume injected so that the allowed 
dosage based on weight is not exceeded. Pediatric 
patients, in particular, are at risk of local anesthesia 
toxicity due to an actual overdose or an accidental 
intravascular injection. 
 Intravenous sedation during oral surgical 
procedures greatly increases the patient’s com-
fort and facilitates surgery. A combination of fen-
tanyl (1–3 mcg/kg) and midazolam (20–50 mcg/
kg) is usually adequate prior to injection of the 
local anesthetic. Th e sedation can be further aug-
mented by additional small dosages of fentanyl, 
midazolam, or propofol. Propofol (20–30 mg is 
a typical incremental dose for an adult) is a good 
standby drug, if the surgeon requires a brief epi-
sode of unconsciousness. 
 Th ese techniques require a high level of coop-
eration and participation by both the surgeon 
and anesthesiologist. If there is the possibility of 
increased risk due to preexisting medical conditions, 
less than ideal airway, or extent of contemplated sur-
gical procedure, it is safer to perform the procedure 
in a hospital or ambulatory surgery center setting 
with general endotracheal anesthesia. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Bleeding Following Sinus Surgery 
 A 50-year-old man has a paroxysm of cough-
ing in the recovery room while awakening fol-
lowing uneventful endoscopic sinus surgery. 
Immediately afterward, his respirations seem 
labored with a loud inspiratory stridor . 
 What is the diﬀ erential diagnosis of inspiratory 
stridor? 
 The acute onset of inspiratory stridor in a post-
operative patient may be due to laryngospasm, 
laryngeal edema, foreign body aspiration, or vocal 
cord dysfunction .  Laryngospasm, an involuntary 
spasm of the laryngeal musculature, may be trig-
gered by blood or secretions stimulating the supe-
rior laryngeal nerve (see Chapter 19). Laryngeal 
edema may be caused by an allergic drug reac-
tion, hereditary or iatrogenic angioedema, or a 
traumatic intubation. Vocal cord dysfunction could 
be due to residual muscle relaxant eﬀ ect, hypocal-
cemic alkalotic tetany, intubation trauma, or para-
doxical vocal cord motion (ie, hysterical stridor) . 
 Another paroxysm of coughing is accompanied 
by hemoptysis. What is your immediate 
management? 
 Bleeding after nose or throat surgery can 
be very serious. Patients who are not fully awake 
may continue to gag and cough on the secre-
tions, increasing venous pressure and worsen-
ing the bleeding. Furthermore, they may aspirate 
blood and other secretions. Fortunately, because 
of its physiological pH, aspiration of blood is not 
as serious as aspiration of acidic gastric contents. 
Nonetheless, the airway should be immediately 
secured in the obtunded patient. This may be 
accomplished with an awake intubation or a rapid-
sequence induction . 
786 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Describe extubation. 
 Because this patient is still at risk of aspira-
tion, extubation should not be attempted until 
the patient has fully awakened and regained 
airway reﬂ exes. Although it is desirable to limit 
coughing and “bucking” on the endotracheal 
tube during emergence, this may be diﬃ  cult to 
achieve in the awakening patient. Intravenous 
lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg) may be helpful in this 
situation . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Atkins JH, Mirza N: Anesthetic considerations and 
surgical caveats for awake airway surgery. Anesthesiol 
Clin 2010;28:555. 
 Biro P: Jet ventilation for surgical interventions in the 
upper airway. Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:397. 
 Chi JJ, Mandel JE, Weinstein GS, et al: Anesthetic 
considerations for transoral robotic surgery. 
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:411. 
 Collins CE: Anesthesia for pediatric airway surgery: 
recommendations and review from a pediatric referral 
center. Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:505. 
 Cordoba Amorocho MR, Sordillo A: Anesthesia for 
functional endoscopic sinus surgery: a review. 
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:497. 
 Dillon FX: Electromyographic (EMG) neuromonitoring 
in otolaryngology-head and neck surgery. Anesthesiol 
Clin 2010;28:423. 
 Dralle H, Sekulla C, Lorenz K, et al: Intraoperative 
monitoring of the recurrent laryngeal nerve in thyroid 
surgery. World J Surg 2008;32:1358. 
 Green JS, Tsui BCH: Applications of ultrasonography 
in ENT: airway assessment and nerve blockage. 
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:541. 
 Guay J: Regional anesthesia for carotid surgery. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol 2008;21:638. 
 Hillman DR, Platt PR, Eastwood PR: Anesthesia, sleep, 
and upper airway collapsibility. Anesthesiol Clin 
2010;28:443. 
 Jourdy DN, Kacker A: Regional anesthesia for offi  ce-
based procedures in otorhinolaryngology. Anesthesiol 
Clin 2010;28:457. 
 Liang S, Irwin MG: Review of anesthesia for middle ear 
surgery. Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:519. 
 Lu I-C, Chu K-S, Tsai C-J, et al: Optimal depth of 
NIM EMG endotracheal tube for intraoperative 
 If the patient is awake and alert enough to 
cough and swallow and does not seem to be aspi-
rating blood, the ﬁ rst priority should be to decrease 
the bleeding as quickly as possible. Immediate 
measures that should be considered include 
raising the head of the bed to decrease venous 
and arterial pressures at the site of bleeding and 
aggressively treating any degree of systolic hyper-
tension with intravenous antihypertensive agents. 
Sedation should be avoided so that airway reﬂ exes 
are not compromised . 
 Despite these measures, the bleeding continues, 
and surgical intervention seems to be necessary. 
Describe your strategy for induction of 
anesthesia in this patient. 
 Before induction of general anesthesia in a 
bleeding patient, hypovolemia should be cor-
rected with isotonic crystalloid, or colloid if the 
patient does not respond to crystalloid. The degree 
of hypovolemia is diﬃ  cult to assess because 
much of the blood may be swallowed, but it may 
be estimated by changes in vital signs, postural 
hypotension, and hematocrit. Cross-matched 
blood should be readily available, and a second 
large-bore intravenous line secured. It must be 
appreciated that from an anesthetic standpoint, 
this is an entirely diﬀ erent patient than the one 
who presented for surgery initially: the patient 
now has a full stomach, is hypovolemic, and may 
prove to be a more diﬃ  cult intubation . 
 The preferred technique in this patient is a 
rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pressure. 
Drug choice (eg, ketamine, etomidate) and dosage 
should anticipate the possibility of hypotension 
from persistent hypovolemia. Qualiﬁ ed person-
nel and appropriate equipment for an emergency 
tracheostomy should be immediately available. An 
orogastric tube should be passed to decompress 
the stomach . 
 Which arteries supply blood to the nose? 
 The arterial supply of the nose is provided 
by the internal maxillary artery and the anterior 
ethmoid artery. These may have to be ligated in 
uncontrollable epistaxis . 
 
CHAPTER 37 Anesthesia for Otorhinolaryngologic Surgery  
787 
a systematic review of complications. Br J Anaesth 
2007;99:159. 
 Sabour S, Manders E, Steward DL: Th e role of rapid 
PACU parathyroid hormone in reducing post-
thyroidectomy hypocalcemia. Otolaryngol–Head 
Neck Surg 2009;141:727. 
 Sheinbein DS, Loeb RG: Laser surgery and fi re hazards 
in ear, nose, and throat surgeries. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2010;28:485. 
 Xiao P, Zhang X: Adult laryngotracheal surgery. 
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:529. 
neuromonitoring of the recurrent laryngeal nerve 
during thyroidectomy. World J Surg 2008;32:1935. 
 Mandel JE: Laryngeal mask airways in ear, nose, and 
throat procedures. Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:469. 
 Mobley SR, Miller BT, Astor FC, et al: Prone positioning 
for head and neck reconstructive surgery. Head & 
Neck 2007;29:1041. 
 O’Neill JP, Fenton JE: Th e recurrent laryngeal nerve in 
thyroid surgery. Surgeon 2008;6:373. 
 Pandit JJ, Satya-Krishna R, Gration P: Superfi cial or deep 
cervical plexus block for carotid endarterectomy: 
This page intentionally left blank 
 789
platelet reactivity, attenuated postoperative 
increase in factor VIII and von Willebrand 
factor, attenuated postoperative decrease 
in antithrombin III, and alterations in stress 
hormone release . 
 For patients receiving prophylactic low-
molecular-weight heparin once daily, 
neuraxial techniques may be performed (or 
neuraxial catheters removed) 10–12 h after 
the previous dose, with a 4-h delay before 
administering the next dose . 
 Flexion and extension lateral radiographs 
of the cervical spine should be obtained 
preoperatively in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis severe enough to require steroids, 
immune therapy, or methotrexate. 
If atlantoaxial instability is present, 
intubation should be performed with inline 
stabilization utilizing video or ﬁ beroptic 
laryngoscopy . 
 Eﬀ ective communication between the 
anesthesiologist and surgeon is essential 
during bilateral hip arthroplasty. If major 
hemodynamic instability occurs during the 
ﬁ rst hip replacement procedure, the second 
arthroplasty should be postponed . 
 Adjuvants such as opioids, clonidine, 
ketorolac, and neostigmine when added to 
local anesthetic solutions for intraarticular 
6
7
8
9
 Anesthesia for 
Orthopedic Surgery 
 Edward R. Mariano, MD, MAS 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
38
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Clinical manifestations of bone cement 
implantation syndrome include hypoxia 
(increased pulmonary shunt), hypotension, 
arrhythmias (including heart block and sinus 
arrest), pulmonary hypertension (increased 
pulmonary vascular resistance), and 
decreased cardiac output . 
 Use of a pneumatic tourniquet on an 
extremity creates a bloodless ﬁ eld that 
greatly facilitates the surgery. However, 
tourniquets can produce potential 
problems of their own, including 
hemodynamic changes, pain, metabolic 
alterations, arterial thromboembolism, 
and pulmonary embolism . 
 Fat embolism syndrome classically presents 
within 72 h following long-bone or 
pelvic fracture, with the triad of dyspnea, 
confusion, and petechiae . 
 Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism can cause morbidity and 
mortality following orthopedic operations 
on the pelvis and lower extremities . 
 Neuraxial anesthesia alone or combined 
with general anesthesia may reduce 
thromboembolic complications by several 
mechanisms, including sympathectomy-
induced increases in lower extremity venous 
blood ﬂ ow, systemic antiinﬂ ammatory 
eﬀ ects of local anesthetics, decreased 
1
2
3
4
5
—Continued next page
790 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 PERIOPERATIVE 
MANAGEMENT 
CONSIDERATIONS IN 
ORTHOPEDIC SURGERY 
 Bone Cement 
 Bone cement,  polymethylmethacrylate , is fre-
quently required for joint arthroplasties. Th e cement 
interdigitates within the interstices of cancellous 
bone and strongly binds the prosthetic device to the 
patient’s bone. Mixing polymerized methylmethac-
rylate powder with liquid methylmethacrylate 
monomer causes polymerization and cross-linking 
of the polymer chains. Th is exothermic reaction 
leads to hardening of the cement and expansion 
against the prosthetic components. Th e resultant 
intramedullary hypertension (>500 mm Hg) can 
cause embolization of fat, bone marrow, cement, and 
air into venous channels. Systemic absorption of 
residual methylmethacrylate monomer can produce 
vasodilation and a decrease in systemic vascular 
resistance. Th e release of tissue thromboplastin may 
trigger platelet aggregation, microthrombus forma-
tion in the lungs, and cardiovascular instability as a 
result of the circulation of vasoactive substances. 
 Th e clinical manifestations of bone cement 
implantation 
syndrome 
include 
hypoxia 
(increased pulmonary shunt), hypotension, arrhyth-
mias (including heart block and sinus arrest), pulmo-
nary hypertension (increased pulmonary vascular 
resistance), and decreased cardiac output. Emboli 
most frequently occur during insertion of a femoral 
prosthesis for hip arthroplasty. Treatment strategies 
1
 Orthopedic surgery challenges the anesthesia pro-
vider. Th e comorbidities of these patients vary 
widely based on age group. Patients may present 
as neonates with congenital limb deformities, as 
teenagers with sports-related injuries, as adults for 
procedures ranging from excision of minor soft -
tissue mass to joint replacement, or at any age with 
bone cancer. Th is chapter focuses on perioperative 
care issues specifi c to patients undergoing com-
mon orthopedic surgical procedures. For example, 
patients with long bone fractures are predisposed 
to fat embolism syndrome. Patients are at increased 
risk for venous thromboembolism following pelvic, 
hip, and knee operations. Use of bone cement dur-
ing arthroplasties can cause hemodynamic instabil-
ity. Limb tourniquets limit blood loss but introduce 
additional risks. 
 Neuraxial and other regional anesthetic tech-
niques play an important role in decreasing the 
incidence of perioperative thromboembolic com-
plications, providing postoperative analgesia, and 
facilitating early rehabilitation and hospital discharge. 
Advances in surgical techniques, such as minimally 
invasive approaches to knee and hip replacement, are 
necessitating modifi cations in anesthetic and periop-
erative management to facilitate overnight or even 
same-day discharge of patients who formerly required 
days of hospitalization. It is impossible to cover the 
anesthetic implications of diverse orthopedic opera-
tions in one chapter; hence, the focus here on peri-
operative management considerations and strategies 
for the anesthetic management of patients undergoing 
select orthopedic surgical procedures. Anesthesia for 
surgery on the spine is discussed in Chapter 27. 
Continued—
 The interscalene brachial plexus block 
using ultrasound or electrical stimulation 
is ideally suited for shoulder procedures. 
Even when general anesthesia is employed, 
an interscalene block can supplement 
anesthesia and provide eﬀ ective 
postoperative analgesia . 
11
injection have been used in various 
combinations to extend the duration of 
analgesia following knee arthroscopy . 
 Eﬀ ective postoperative analgesia facilitates 
early physical rehabilitation to maximize 
postoperative range of motion and prevent 
joint adhesions following knee replacement . 
10
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery
791
 Awake patients predictably experience tour-
niquet pain with infl ation pressures of 100 mm 
Hg above systolic blood pressure for more than a 
few minutes. Th e mechanism and neural pathways 
for this severe aching and burning sensation defy 
precise explanation.  Tourniquet pain gradually 
becomes so severe over time that patients may 
require substantial supplemental analgesia, if not 
general anesthesia, despite a regional block that 
is adequate for surgical anesthesia . Even during 
general anesthesia, stimulus from tourniquet com-
pression oft en manifests as a gradually increasing 
mean arterial blood pressure beginning approxi-
mately 1 h aft er cuff  infl ation. Signs of progressive 
sympathetic activation include marked hyperten-
sion, tachycardia, and diaphoresis. Th e likelihood of 
tourniquet pain and its accompanying hypertension 
may be infl uenced by many factors, including anes-
thetic technique (regional anesthesia versus general 
anesthesia), extent of dermatomal spread of regional 
anesthetic block, choice of local anesthetic and dose 
(“intensity” of block), and supplementation with 
adjuvants either intravenously or in combination 
with local anesthetic solutions when applicable. 
 Cuff  defl ation invariably and immediately 
relieves tourniquet pain and associated hyperten-
sion. In fact, cuff  defl ation may be accompanied by 
a precipitous decrease in central venous and arterial 
blood pressure. Heart rate usually increases and core 
temperature decreases. Washout of accumulated 
metabolic wastes in the ischemic extremity increases 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood 
(Pa co 2 ), end-tidal carbon dioxide (E tco 2 ), and 
serum lactate and potassium levels.  Th ese meta-
bolic alterations can cause an increase in minute 
ventilation in the spontaneously breathing patient 
and, rarely, arrhythmias . Tourniquet-induced isch-
emia of a lower extremity may lead to the develop-
ment of deep venous thrombosis. Transesophageal 
echocardiography can detect subclinical pulmonary 
embolism (miliary emboli in the right atrium and 
ventricle) following tourniquet defl ation even in 
minor cases such as diagnostic knee arthroscopy. 
Rare episodes of massive pulmonary embolism dur-
ing total knee arthroplasty have been reported dur-
ing leg exsanguination, aft er tourniquet infl ation, 
and following tourniquet defl ation. Tourniquets 
for this complication include increasing inspired 
oxygen concentration prior to cementing, monitor-
ing to maintain euvolemia, creating a vent hole in 
the distal femur to relieve intramedullary pressure, 
performing high-pressure lavage of the femoral shaft  
to remove debris (potential microemboli), or using 
a femoral component that does not require cement. 
 Another source of concern related to the use 
of cement is the potential for gradual loosening of 
the prosthesis over time. Newer cementless implants 
are made of a porous material that allows natural 
bone to grow into them. Cementless prostheses 
generally last longer and may be advantageous for 
younger, active patients; however, healthy active 
bone formation is required and recovery may be 
longer compared to cemented joint replacements. 
Th erefore, cemented prostheses are preferred for 
older (>80 years) and less active patients who oft en 
have osteoporosis or thin cortical bone. Practices 
continue to evolve regarding selection of cemented 
versus cementless implants, depending on the joint 
aff ected, patient, and surgical technique. 
 Pneumatic Tourniquets 
 Use of a pneumatic tourniquet on an extremity 
creates a bloodless fi eld that greatly facilitates 
surgery. However, tourniquets can produce poten-
tial problems of their own, including hemodynamic 
changes, pain, metabolic alterations, arterial throm-
boembolism, and pulmonary embolism. Infl ation 
pressure is usually set approximately 100 mm Hg 
higher than the patient’s baseline systolic blood 
pressure. Prolonged infl ation (>2 h) routinely leads 
to transient muscle dysfunction from ischemia and 
may produce rhabdomyolysis or permanent periph-
eral nerve damage. Tourniquet infl ation has also 
been associated with increases in body temperature 
in pediatric patients undergoing lower extremity 
surgery. 
 Exsanguination of a lower extremity and tour-
niquet infl ation cause a rapid shift  of blood volume 
into the central circulation. Although not usually 
clinically important, bilateral lower extremity exsan-
guination can cause an increase in central venous 
pressure and arterial blood pressure that may not 
be well tolerated in patients with noncompliant ven-
tricles and diastolic dysfunction. 
2
792 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
arterial oxygen saturation and a rise in pulmonary 
artery pressures. Electrocardiography may show 
ischemic-appearing ST-segment changes and a pat-
tern of right-sided heart strain. 
 Management is two-fold: preventative and sup-
portive. Early stabilization of the fracture decreases 
the incidence of fat embolism syndrome and, in par-
ticular, reduces the risk of pulmonary complications. 
Supportive treatment consists of oxygen therapy 
with continuous positive airway pressure ventila-
tion to prevent hypoxia and with specifi c ventilator 
strategies in the event of ARDS. Systemic hypoten-
sion will require appropriate pressor support, and 
vasodilators may aid the management of pulmonary 
hypertension. High-dose corticosteroid therapy is 
not supported by randomized clinical trials. 
 Deep Venous Thrombosis 
& Thromboembolism 
 Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary 
embolism (PE) can cause morbidity and mor-
tality following orthopedic operations on the pelvis 
and lower extremities. Risk factors include obesity, 
age greater than 60 years, procedures lasting more 
than 30 min, use of a tourniquet, lower extremity 
fracture, and immobilization for more than 4 days. 
Patients at greatest risk include those undergoing 
hip surgery and knee replacement or major opera-
tions for lower extremity trauma. Such patients will 
experience DVT rates of 40–80% without prophy-
laxis. Th e incidence of clinically important PE fol-
lowing hip surgery in some studies is reported to 
be as high as 20%, whereas that of fatal PE may be 
1–3%. Underlying pathophysiological mechanisms 
include venous stasis with hypercoagulable state due 
to localized and systemic infl ammatory responses to 
surgery. 
 Pharmacological prophylaxis and the routine 
use of mechanical devices such as intermittent pneu-
matic compression (IPC) have been shown to 
decrease the incidence of DVT and PE. While 
mechanical thromboprophylaxis should be consid-
ered for every patient, the use of pharmacological 
anticoagulants must be balanced against the risk of 
major bleeding. For patients at increased risk for 
DVT but having “normal” bleeding risk, low-dose 
4
have been safely used in patients with sickle cell dis-
ease, although particular attention should be paid to 
maintaining oxygenation, normocarbia or hypocar-
bia, hydration, and normothermia. 
 Fat Embolism Syndrome 
 Some degree of fat embolism probably occurs with 
all long-bone fractures.  Fat embolism syndrome is 
less frequent but potentially fatal (10–20% mortality). 
 It classically presents within 72 h following 
long-bone or pelvic fracture, with the triad of 
dyspnea, confusion, and petechiae. Th is syndrome 
can also be seen following cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation, parental feeding with lipid infusion, and lipo-
suction. Th e most popular theory for its pathogenesis 
holds that fat globules are released by the disruption 
of fat cells in the fractured bone and enter the circu-
lation through tears in medullary vessels. An alter-
native theory proposes that the fat globules are 
chylomicrons resulting from the aggregation of cir-
culating free fatty acids caused by changes in fatty 
acid metabolism. Regardless of their source, the 
increased free fatty acid levels can have a toxic eff ect 
on the capillary–alveolar membrane leading to the 
release of vasoactive amines and prostaglandins and 
the development of acute respiratory distress syn-
drome (ARDS; see Chapter 57). Neurological mani-
festations (eg, agitation, confusion, stupor, or coma) 
are the probable result of capillary damage in the 
cerebral circulation and cerebral edema. Th ese signs 
may be exacerbated by hypoxia. 
 Th e diagnosis of fat embolism syndrome is sug-
gested by petechiae on the chest, upper extremities, 
axillae, and conjunctiva. Fat globules occasionally 
may be observed in the retina, urine, or sputum. 
Coagulation abnormalities such as thrombocyto-
penia or prolonged clotting times are occasion-
ally present. Serum lipase activity may be elevated 
but does not predict disease severity. Pulmonary 
involvement typically progresses from mild hypoxia 
and a normal chest radiograph to severe hypoxia or 
respiratory failure with radiographic fi ndings of dif-
fuse pulmonary opacities. Most of the classic signs 
and symptoms of fat embolism syndrome occur 1–3 
days aft er the precipitating event. During general 
anesthesia, signs may include a decline in E tco 2 and 
3
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery
793
suggests that these recommendations be applied to 
deep peripheral nerve and plexus blocks and cathe-
ters (see Suggested Reading). Revisions to these 
guidelines occur regularly. 
 Hip Surgery 
 Common hip procedures performed in adults inc-
lude repair of hip fracture, total hip arthroplasty, and 
closed reduction of hip dislocation. 
 FRACTURE OF THE HIP 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Most patients presenting for hip fractures are frail 
and elderly. An occasional young patient will have 
sustained major trauma to the femur or pelvis. 
Studies have reported mortality rates following hip 
fracture of up to 10% during the initial hospital-
ization and over 25% within 1 year. Many of these 
patients have concomitant diseases such as coro-
nary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, or diabetes. 
 Patients presenting with hip fractures are fre-
quently dehydrated from inadequate oral intake. 
Depending on the site of the hip fracture, occult 
blood loss may be signifi cant, further compromis-
ing intravascular volume. In general, intracapsular 
(subcapital, transcervical) fractures are associated 
with less blood loss than extracapsular (base of the 
femoral neck, intertrochanteric, subtrochanteric) 
fractures ( Figure 38–1 ). A normal or borderline-
low preoperative hematocrit may be deceiving when 
hemoconcentration masks occult blood loss. 
 Another characteristic of hip fracture patients 
is the frequent presence of preoperative hypoxia 
that may, at least in part, be due to fat embolism; 
other factors can include bibasilar atelectasis from 
immobility, pulmonary congestion (and eff usion) 
from congestive heart failure, or consolidation due 
to infection. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 Th e choice between regional (spinal or epidural) 
and general anesthesia has been extensively evalu-
ated for hip fracture surgery. A meta-analysis of 
subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (LUFH), war-
farin, or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) 
may be employed in addition to mechanical prophy-
laxis. Patients at signifi cantly increased risk of bleed-
ing may be managed with mechanical prophylaxis 
alone until bleeding risk decreases. In general, anti-
coagulants are started the day of surgery in patients 
without indwelling epidural catheters. Warfarin may 
be started the night before surgery depending on the 
particular orthopedic surgeon’s routine. 
 Neuraxial anesthesia alone or combined with 
general anesthesia may reduce thromboem-
bolic complications by several mechanisms. Th ese 
include sympathectomy-induced increases in lower 
extremity venous blood fl ow, systemic antiinfl am-
matory eff ects of local anesthetics, decreased plate-
let reactivity, attenuated postoperative increases in 
factor VIII and von Willebrand factor, attenuated 
postoperative decreases in antithrombin III, and 
alterations in stress hormone release. 
 According to the Th ird Edition of the American 
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 
Evidence-Based Guidelines on regional anesthesia 
and anticoagulation, patients currently receiving 
antiplatelet agents (eg, ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and 
intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors), throm-
bolytics, fondaparinux, direct thrombin inhibitors, 
or therapeutic regimens of LMWH present an unac-
ceptable risk for spinal or epidural hematoma fol-
lowing neuraxial anesthesia. Performance of 
neuraxial block (or removal of a neuraxial catheter) 
is not contraindicated with subcutaneous LUFH 
when the total daily dose is 10,000 units or less; there 
are no data on the safety of neuraxial anesthesia 
when larger doses are given.  For patients 
receiving prophylactic LMWH, the guidelines 
vary based on regimen. With once-daily dosing, 
neuraxial techniques may be performed (or neurax-
ial catheters removed) 10–12 h aft er the previous 
dose, with a 4-h delay before administering the next 
dose. With twice-daily dosing, neuraxial catheters 
should not be left  in situ and should be removed 2 h 
before the fi rst dose of LMWH. Patients on warfarin 
therapy should not receive a neuraxial block unless 
the international normalized ratio (INR) is normal, 
and catheters should be removed when the INR is 
1.5 or lower. Th e Th ird Edition of the guidelines also 
5
6
794 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
or cannulated screw fi xation with the patient in the 
supine position. A hip compression screw and side 
plate are most oft en employed for intertrochanteric 
fractures. Displaced intracapsular fractures may 
require internal fi xation, hemiarthroplasty, or total 
hip replacement ( Figure 38–2 ). Surgical treatment 
of extracapsular hip fractures is accomplished with 
either an extramedullary implant (eg, sliding screw 
and plate) or intramedullary implant (eg, Gamma 
nail). 
 Hemiarthroplasty and total hip replacement are 
longer, more invasive operations than other proce-
dures. Th ey are usually performed with patients in 
the lateral decubitus position, are associated with 
greater blood loss, and, potentially, result in greater 
hemodynamic changes, particularly if cement is 
used. Th erefore, one should secure suffi  cient venous 
access to permit rapid transfusion. 
15 randomized clinical trials showed a decrease in 
postoperative DVT and 1-month mortality with 
regional anesthesia, but these advantages do not 
persist beyond 3 months. Th e incidence of postop-
erative delirium and cognitive dysfunction may be 
lower following regional anesthesia if intravenous 
sedation can be minimized. 
 A neuraxial anesthetic technique, with or with-
out concomitant general anesthesia, provides the 
additional advantage of postoperative pain control. 
If a spinal anesthetic is planned, hypobaric or iso-
baric local anesthesia facilitates positioning since 
the patient can remain in the same position for both 
block placement and surgery. Intrathecal opioids 
such as morphine can extend postoperative analge-
sia but require close postoperative monitoring for 
delayed respiratory depression. 
 Consideration should also be given to the type of 
reduction and fi xation to be used. Th is is dependent 
on the fracture site, degree of displacement, preop-
erative functional status of the patient, and surgeon 
preference. Undisplaced fractures of the proximal 
femur may be treated with percutaneous pinning 
 
 
 FIGURE 382  Uncemented total hip arthroplasty. 
 
Subcapital
Intertrochanteric
Subtrochanteric
Transcervical
Base of neck
 
 FIGURE 381  Blood loss from hip fracture depends 
on the location of the fracture (subtrochanteric, 
intertrochanteric > base of femoral neck > transcervical, 
subcapital) because the capsule restricts blood loss by 
acting like a tourniquet. 
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery
795
protrusion of the odontoid process into the foramen 
magnum during intubation, compromising vertebral 
blood fl ow and compressing the spinal cord or brain-
stem ( Figure 38–3 ).  Flexion and extension lat-
eral radiographs of the cervical spine should be 
obtained preoperatively in patients with RA severe 
enough to require steroids, immune therapy, or 
methotrexate. If atlantoaxial instability is present, 
tracheal intubation should be performed with inline 
stabilization utilizing video or fi beroptic laryngos-
copy. Involvement of the temporomandibular joint 
can limit jaw mobility and range of motion to such a 
degree that conventional orotracheal intubation may 
be impossible. Hoarseness or inspiratory stridor may 
signal a narrowing of the glottic opening caused by 
cricoarytenoid arthritis. Th is condition may lead to 
postextubation airway obstruction even when a 
smaller diameter tracheal tube has been used. 
 Patients with RA or osteoarthritis commonly 
receive 
nonsteroidal 
antiinfl ammatory 
drugs 
(NSAIDs) for pain management. Th ese drugs can 
have serious side eff ects such as gastrointestinal 
bleeding, renal toxicity, and platelet dysfunction. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 Total hip replacement (THR) involves several surgi-
cal steps, including positioning of the patient (usu-
ally in the lateral decubitus position), dislocation 
and removal of the femoral head, reaming of the 
acetabulum and insertion of a prosthetic acetabular 
cup (with or without cement), and reaming of the 
femur and insertion of a femoral component (femo-
ral head and stem) into the femoral shaft  (with or 
without cement). THR is also associated with three 
potentially life-threatening complications: bone 
cement implantation syndrome, intra- and postop-
erative hemorrhage, and venous thromboembolism. 
Th us, invasive arterial monitoring may be justifi ed 
for select patients undergoing these procedures. 
Neuraxial administration of opioids such as mor-
phine in the perioperative period extends the dura-
tion of postoperative analgesia. 
 A. Hip Resurfacing Arthroplasty 
 Th e increasing number of younger patients presenting 
for hip arthroplasty and of other patients who require 
revision of standard (metal-on-polyethylene) total 
7
 TOTAL HIP ARTHROPLASTY 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Most patients undergoing total hip replacement 
suff er from osteoarthritis (degenerative joint dis-
ease), autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), or avascular necrosis. Osteoarthritis 
is a degenerative disease aff ecting the articular sur-
face of one or more joints (most commonly the hips 
and knees). Th e etiology of osteoarthritis appears to 
involve repetitive joint trauma. Because osteoarthri-
tis may also involve the spine, neck manipulation 
during tracheal intubation should be minimized to 
avoid nerve root compression or disc protrusion. 
 RA is characterized by immune-mediated joint 
destruction with chronic and progressive infl am-
mation of synovial membranes, as opposed to the 
articular wear and tear of osteoarthritis. RA is a 
systemic disease aff ecting multiple organ systems 
( Table 38–1 ). RA oft en aff ects the small joints of 
the hands, wrists, and feet causing severe deformity; 
when this occurs, intravenous and radial artery can-
nulation can be challenging. 
 Extreme cases of RA involve almost all synovial 
membranes, including those in the cervical spine and 
temporomandibular joint. Atlantoaxial subluxation, 
which can be diagnosed radiologically, may lead to 
 TABLE 381 Systemic manifestations of 
rheumatoid arthritis. 
Organ System
Abnormalities
Cardiovascular
Pericardial thickening and eﬀ usion, 
myocarditis, coronary arteritis, 
conduction defects, vasculitis, cardiac 
valve ﬁ brosis (aortic regurgitation)
Pulmonary
Pleural eﬀ usion, pulmonary nodules, 
interstitial pulmonary ﬁ brosis
Hematopoietic
Anemia, eosinophilia, platelet 
dysfunc tion (from aspirin therapy), 
thrombocytopenia
Endocrine
Adrenal insuﬃ  ciency (from 
glucocorticoid therapy), impaired 
immune system
Dermatological
Thin and atrophic skin from the disease 
and immunosuppressive drugs
796 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Prospective studies have not shown a diff erence in 
gait or postural balance at 3 months postoperatively. 
A recent meta-analysis favored resurfacing in terms 
of functional outcome and blood loss despite com-
parable results for postoperative pain scores and 
patient satisfaction. Of particular concern is the 
fi nding that patients who undergo resurfacing are 
nearly twice as likely to require revision surgery as 
those receiving traditional hip arthroplasty. Th ere is 
a higher incidence of aseptic component loosening 
(possibly from metal hypersensitivity) and femo-
ral neck fracture, particularly in women. Finally, 
the presence of metal debris in the joint space 
hip arthroplasty implants has led to redevelopment 
of hip resurfacing arthroplasty techniques. Compared 
with traditional hip arthroplasty implants, hip resur-
facing maintains patients’ native bone to a greater 
degree. Metal-on-metal hybrid implants are usually 
employed. Surgical approaches can be anterolateral 
or posterior, with the posterior approach theoreti-
cally providing greater preservation of the blood sup-
ply to the femoral head. With the posterior approach, 
patients are placed in the lateral decubitus position 
similar to traditional hip arthroplasty. 
 Outcomes data related to hip resurfacing versus 
traditional total hip arthroplasty are controversial. 
 FIGURE 383  Because instability of the cervical spine 
may be asymptomatic, lateral radiographs are mandatory 
in patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis.  A : Radiograph 
of a normal lateral cervical spine.  B : Lateral cervical spine 
of a patient with rheumatoid arthritis; note the severe 
C1–C2 instability. 
A
B
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery
797
considered. Preoperative administration of vitamins 
(B 12 and K) and iron can treat mild forms of chronic 
anemia. Alternatively (and more expensively), 
recombinant human erythropoietin (600 IU/kg 
subcutaneously weekly beginning 21 days before 
surgery and ending on the day of surgery) may also 
decrease the need for perioperative allogeneic blood 
transfusion. Erythropoietin increases red blood cell 
production by stimulating the division and diff eren-
tiation of erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow. 
Maintaining normal body temperature during hip 
replacement surgery reduces blood loss. 
 D. Minimally Invasive Arthroplasty 
 Computer-assisted surgery (CAS) may improve 
surgical outcomes and promote early rehabilitation 
through minimally invasive techniques employ-
ing cementless implants. Computer soft ware can 
accurately reconstruct three-dimensional images 
of bone and soft  tissue based on radiographs, fl uo-
roscopy, computed tomography, or magnetic reso-
nance imaging. Th e computer matches preoperative 
images or planning information to the position of 
the patient on the operating room table. Tracking 
devices are attached to target bones ( Figure 38–4 ) 
and instruments used during surgery, and the navi-
gation system utilizes optical cameras and infrared 
light-emitting diodes to sense their positions. CAS 
thus allows accurate placement of implants through 
(from metal-on-metal contact) has led to a marked 
narrowing of indications for the prostheses and the 
procedure. 
 B. Bilateral Arthroplasty 
 Bilateral hip arthroplasty can be safely performed in 
fi t patients as a combined procedure, assuming the 
absence of signifi cant pulmonary embolization aft er 
insertion of the fi rst femoral component. Monitoring 
may include echocardiography.  Eff ective com-
munication between the anesthesia provider 
and surgeon is essential. If major hemodynamic 
instability occurs during the fi rst hip replacement 
procedure, the second arthroplasty should be 
postponed. 
 C. Revision Arthroplasty 
 Revision of a prior hip arthroplasty may be associated 
with much greater blood loss than in the initial pro-
cedure. Blood loss depends on many factors, includ-
ing the experience and skill of the surgeon. Some 
studies suggest that blood loss may be decreased 
during hip surgery if a regional anesthesia technique 
is used (eg, spinal or epidural anesthesia) compared 
with general anesthesia even at similar mean arte-
rial blood pressures. Th e mechanism is unclear. 
Because the likelihood of perioperative blood trans-
fusion is high, preoperative autologous blood dona-
tion and intraoperative blood salvage should be 
8
 
Tracking devices
3-in. incision
 
 FIGURE 384  Minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty: lateral approach. Note the small 3-in. incision and tracking 
devices for the CAS navigation system. 
798 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 KNEE ARTHROSCOPY 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Arthroscopy has revolutionized surgery of many 
joints, including the hip, knee, shoulder, ankle, 
elbow, and wrist. Joint arthroscopies are usually 
performed as outpatient procedures. Although the 
typical patient undergoing knee arthroscopy is oft en 
thought of as being a healthy young athlete, knee 
arthroscopies are frequently performed in elderly 
patients with multiple medical problems. 
 Intraoperative Management 
 A bloodless fi eld greatly facilitates arthroscopic sur-
gery. Fortunately, knee surgery lends itself to the 
use of a pneumatic tourniquet. Th e surgery is per-
formed as an outpatient procedure with the patient 
in a supine position under general anesthesia or 
neuraxial anesthesia. Alternative anesthetic tech-
niques include peripheral nerve blocks, periarticu-
lar injections, or intraarticular injections employing 
local anesthetic solutions with or without adjuvants 
combined with intravenous sedation. 
 Comparing neuraxial anesthesia techniques, 
success and patient satisfaction appear to be equal 
between epidural and spinal anesthesia. However, 
for ambulatory surgery, time to discharge following 
neuraxial anesthesia may be prolonged compared 
with general anesthesia. 
 Postoperative Pain Management 
 Successful outpatient recovery depends on early 
ambulation, adequate pain relief, and minimal nau-
sea and vomiting. Techniques that avoid large doses 
of 
systemic 
opioids 
have 
obvious 
appeal. 
Intraarticular local anesthetics (bupivacaine or ropi-
vacaine) usually provide satisfactory analgesia for 
several hours postoperatively.  Adjuvants such 
as opioids, clonidine, ketorolac, epinephrine, 
and neostigmine when added to local anesthetic 
solutions for intraarticular injection have been used 
in various combinations to extend the duration of 
analgesia. Other multimodal pain management 
strategies include systemic NSAIDs, gabapentin, 
and single or continuous peripheral nerve blocks for 
arthroscopic ligament reconstruction. 
9
small incisions, and the resulting reduction in tissue 
and muscle damage could lead to less pain and early 
rehabilitation. Th e lateral approach utilizes a single 
3-in. incision with the patient in the lateral decubitus 
position ( Figure 38–4 ); an anterior approach utilizes 
two separate 2-in. incisions (one for the acetabular 
component and another for the femoral compo-
nent) with the patient supine. Minimally invasive 
techniques can reduce hospitalization to 24 h or less. 
Anesthetic techniques should promote rapid recov-
ery and can include neuraxial regional anesthesia or 
total intravenous general anesthesia. 
 E. Hip Arthroscopy 
 In recent years, hip arthroscopy has increased in 
popularity as a minimally invasive alternative to 
open arthrotomy for a variety of surgical indications 
such as femoroacetabular impingement (FAI), ace-
tabular labral tears, loose bodies, and osteoarthritis. 
At present, there is fair evidence in the published lit-
erature (small, randomized controlled trials) to sup-
port hip arthroscopy for FAI, but evidence is lacking 
for other indications. 
 CLOSED REDUCTION 
OF HIP DISLOCATION 
 Th ere is a 3% incidence of hip dislocation following 
primary hip arthroplasty and a 20% incidence fol-
lowing total hip revision arthroplasty. Because less 
force is required to dislocate a prosthetic hip, patients 
with hip implants require special precautions dur-
ing positioning for subsequent surgical procedures. 
Extremes of hip fl exion, internal rotation, and adduc-
tion increase the risk of dislocation. Hip dislocations 
may be corrected with closed reduction facilitated by 
use of a brief general anesthetic. Temporary paraly-
sis can be provided by succinylcholine, if necessary, 
to facilitate the reduction when the hip musculature 
is severely contracted. Successful reduction should 
be confi rmed radiologically prior to the patient’s 
emergence. 
 Knee Surgery 
 Th e two most frequently performed knee surgeries 
are arthroscopy and total or partial joint replacement. 
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery 
799 
is  limited by the use of a tourniquet. Cooperative 
patients usually tolerate a neuraxial anesthetic 
technique with intravenous sedation. Bone cement 
implantation syndrome following insertion of a 
femoral prosthesis is possible but is less likely than 
during hip arthroplasty. Subsequent release of 
emboli into the systemic circulation may exaggerate 
any tendency for hypotension following tourniquet 
release. 
 Preoperative placement of a lumbar epidural 
or perineural catheter can be very helpful in 
 TOTAL KNEE REPLACEMENT 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 Patients presenting for total knee replacement 
( Figure 38–5 ) have similar comorbidities to 
those undergoing total hip replacement (eg, RA, 
osteoarthritis). 
 Intraoperative Management 
 During total knee arthroplasty, patients remain 
in a supine position, and intraoperative blood loss 
 FIGURE 385  Total ( A ) and partial ( B ) knee replacement. 
A
B
800 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
and ambulation goals, and may allow for discharge 
within 24 h following surgery if outpatient physical 
therapy is arranged. Anesthetic management and 
postoperative analgesia should accommodate and 
facilitate the accelerated recovery schedule. Single 
or continuous peripheral nerve blocks, alone or 
in combination, can provide target-specifi c pain 
control and facilitate early rehabilitation.  In ran-
domized clinical trials, continuous peripheral 
nerve block catheters with subsequent perineu-
ral local anesthetic infusions have been shown 
to decrease time to meet discharge criteria for 
total knee arthroplasty . Th e management of peri-
neural catheters takes a hands-on team approach 
and can be incorporated into integrated clinical 
pathways involving surgery, nursing, and physi-
cal therapy. Among the complications of lower 
extremity perineural local anesthetic infusions, 
those involving patient falls are of greatest con-
cern, and  comprehensive fall prevention programs 
need to be in place wherever these techniques are 
employed. 
 Surgery on the 
Upper Extremity 
 Procedures on the upper extremities include 
those for disorders of the shoulder (eg, subacro-
mial impingement or rotator cuff  tears), traumatic 
fractures, nerve entrapment syndromes (eg, car-
pal tunnel syndrome), and joint arthroplasties 
(eg, rheumatoid arthritis). 
 SHOULDER SURGERY 
 Shoulder operations may be open or arthroscopic. 
Th ese procedures are performed either in a sitting 
(“beach chair”) or, less commonly, the lateral decu-
bitus position.  Th e beach chair position may be 
associated with decreases in cerebral perfusion as 
measured by tissue oximetry; cases of blindness, 
stroke, and even brain death have been described, 
emphasizing the need to accurately measure blood 
pressure at the level of the brain . When using non-
invasive blood pressure monitoring, the cuff  should 
managing postoperative pain, which is typically 
more severe than pain following hip replacement 
surgery.  Eff ective postoperative analgesia facil-
itates early physical rehabilitation to maximize 
postoperative range of motion and prevent joint 
adhesions following knee replacement. It is impor-
tant to balance pain control with the need for an alert 
and cooperative patient during physical therapy. 
Epidural analgesia is useful in bilateral knee replace-
ments.  For unilateral knee replacement, lumbar 
epidural and femoral perineural catheters provide 
equivalent analgesia while femoral perineural 
catheters produce fewer side eff ects (eg, pruritus, 
nausea and vomiting, urinary retention, or ortho-
static lightheadedness). Preoperative place ment in 
a “block room” can prevent operating room delays 
and ensure that patients receive this benefi cial anal-
gesic technique ( Figure 38–6 ). 
 Partial knee replacement (unicompartmental 
or patellofemoral) and minimally invasive knee 
arthroplasty with muscle-sparing approaches have 
been described. With strict patient selection, these 
techniques may reduce quadriceps muscle damage, 
facilitating earlier achievement of range-of-motion 
10
 FIGURE 386  A “block room” can be located 
in a preoperative holding area, induction room, or 
postanesthesia care unit and should oﬀ er standard 
monitoring (as outlined by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists) and ample storage for regional 
anesthesia supplies and equipment. 
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery
801
 For operations lasting more than 1 h or more 
invasive procedures involving bones or joints, a bra-
chial plexus block is the preferred regional anesthetic 
technique. Multiple approaches can be used to anes-
thetize the brachial plexus for distal upper extrem-
ity surgery (see Chapter 46). Selection of brachial 
plexus block technique should take into account the 
planned surgical site and location of the pneumatic 
tourniquet, if applicable. Continuous peripheral 
nerve blocks may be appropriate for inpatient and 
select outpatient procedures to extend the duration 
of analgesia further into the postoperative period 
or facilitate physical therapy. Brachial plexus blocks 
do not anesthetize the intercostobrachial nerve dis-
tribution (arising from the dorsal rami of T1 and 
sometimes T2); hence, subcutaneous infi ltration 
of local anesthetic may be required for procedures 
involving the medial upper arm. 
 Anesthetic considerations for distal upper 
extremity surgery should include patient position-
ing and use of a pneumatic tourniquet. Most proce-
dures can be performed with the patient supine; the 
operative arm abducted 90° and resting on a hand 
table; and the operating room table rotated 90° to 
position the operative arm in the center of the room. 
Exceptions to this rule oft en involve surgery around 
the elbow, and certain operations may require the 
patient be in lateral decubitus or even prone posi-
tion. Because patients are oft en scheduled for 
same-day discharge, perioperative management 
should focus on ensuring rapid emergence and pre-
venting severe postoperative pain and nausea (see 
Chapter 44). 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Managing Blood Loss in Jehovah’s 
Witnesses 
 A 58-year-old Jehovah’s Witness presents for 
hemipelvectomy to resect a malignant bone 
tumor (osteogenic sarcoma). The patient has 
received chemotherapy over the last 2 months 
with multiple drugs, including doxorubicin. The 
patient has no other medical problems, and the 
preoperative hematocrit is 47% . 
be applied on the upper arm because systolic blood 
pressure readings from the calf can be 40 mm Hg 
higher than brachial readings on the same patient. If 
a surgeon requests controlled hypotension, an arte-
rial catheter for invasive blood pressure monitoring 
is recommended, and the transducer should be 
positioned at least at the level of the heart or, prefer-
ably, the brainstem (external meatus of the ear). 
 Th e interscalene brachial plexus block using 
ultrasound or electrical stimulation is ideally 
suited for shoulder procedures. Th e supraclavicular 
approach also can be used. Even when general anes-
thesia is employed, an interscalene block can supple-
ment anesthesia and provide eff ective postoperative 
analgesia. Intense muscle relaxation is usually 
required for major shoulder surgery during general 
anesthesia, particularly when not combined with a 
brachial plexus block. 
Preoperative insertion of an indwelling peri-
neural catheter with subsequent infusion of a 
dilute local anesthetic infusion solution allows 
postoperative analgesia for 48–72 h with most 
fi xed-reservoir 
disposable 
pumps 
following 
arthroscopic or open shoulder operations (see 
Chapter 46) . Alternatively, surgeons may insert a 
subacromial catheter to provide continuous infu-
sion of local anesthetic for postoperative analgesia. 
Direct placement of intraarticular catheters into the 
glenohumeral joint with infusion of bupivacaine 
has been associated with postarthroscopic gleno-
humeral chondrolysis in retrospective human and 
prospective animal studies and is not currently rec-
ommended. Multimodal analgesia, including sys-
temic NSAIDs (if no contraindications) and local 
anesthetic infusions in the perioperative period, can 
help reduce postoperative opioid requirements. 
 DISTAL UPPER 
EXTREMITY SURGERY 
 Distal upper extremity surgical procedures generally 
take place on an outpatient basis. Minor soft  tissue 
operations of the hand (eg, carpal tunnel release) of 
short duration may be performed with local infi ltra-
tion or with intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA, 
or Bier block). Th e limiting factor with IVRA is 
tourniquet tolerance. 
11
802 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 How would the inability to transfuse blood 
aﬀ ect intraoperative monitoring decisions? 
 Hemipelvectomy involves radical resection 
that can lead to massive blood loss. This is particu-
larly true for large tumors removed using the more 
invasive internal approach. Invasive arterial blood 
pressure and central venous pressure monitors 
would be indicated in most patients undergoing 
this procedure. Techniques that minimize intra-
operative blood loss (eg, controlled hypotension, 
aprotinin) should be considered. In a Jehovah’s 
Witness, the management of life-threatening ane-
mia (Hb <5 g/dL) may be improved by monitor-
ing cardiac output, oxygen delivery, and oxygen 
consumption. Continuous electrocardiographic 
ST-segment analysis may signal myocardial 
ischemia . 
 What physiological eﬀ ects result from severe 
anemia? 
 Assuming the maintenance of normovolemia 
and the absence of preexisting major end-organ 
dysfunction, most patients tolerate severe anemia 
surprisingly well. Decreased blood viscosity and 
vasodilation lower systemic vascular resistance 
and increase blood ﬂ ow. Augmentation of stroke 
volume increases cardiac output, allowing arterial 
blood pressure and heart rate to remain relatively 
unchanged. Coronary and cerebral blood ﬂ ows 
increase in the absence of coronary artery disease 
and carotid artery stenosis. A decrease in venous 
oxygen saturation reﬂ ects an increase in tissue oxy-
gen extraction. Oozing from surgical wounds as a 
result of dilutional coagulopathy may accompany 
extreme degrees of anemia . 
 What are some of the anesthetic implications of 
preoperative doxorubicin therapy? 
 This anthracycline chemotherapeutic agent 
has well-recognized cardiac side eﬀ ects, rang-
ing from transient arrhythmias and electrocar-
diographic changes (eg, ST-segment and T-wave 
abnormalities) to irreversible cardiomyopathy 
and congestive heart failure. The risk of cardio-
myopathy appears to increase with a cumulative 
 How does the care of Jehovah’s 
Witnesses particularly challenge the 
anesthesiologist? 
 Jehovah’s Witnesses, a fellowship of more than 
1 million Americans, object to the administration of 
blood for any indication. This objection stems from 
their interpretation of the Bible (“to keep abstain-
ing from . . . blood,” Acts 15:28,29) and not for medi-
cal reasons (eg, the fear of hepatitis). Physicians are 
obliged to honor the principle of autonomy, which 
upholds that patients have ﬁ nal authority over 
what is done to them. Witnesses typically sign a 
waiver releasing physicians of liability for any con-
sequences of blood refusal . 
 Which intravenous ﬂ uids will Witnesses 
accept? 
 Witnesses abstain from blood and blood 
products (eg, packed red blood cells, fresh frozen 
plasma, platelets) but not non–blood-containing 
solutions. They accept crystalloids, hetastarch, and 
dextran replacement solutions. Witnesses often 
view albumin, erythropoietin (because of the use 
of albumin), immune globulins, and hemophiliac 
preparations as a gray area that requires a personal 
decision by the believer . 
 Do they allow the use of autologous blood? 
 According to their religion, any blood that is 
removed from the body should be discarded (“You 
should pour it out upon the ground as water,” 
Deuteronomy 12:24) and not stored. Thus, the 
usual practice of autologous preoperative collec-
tion and storage would not be allowed. Techniques 
of acute normovolemic hemodilution and intraop-
erative blood salvage have been accepted by some 
Witnesses, however, as long as their blood main-
tains continuity with their circulatory systems at all 
times. For example, up to 4 units of blood could be 
drawn from the patient immediately before surgery 
and kept in anticoagulant-containing bags that 
maintain a constant link to the patient’s body. The 
blood could be replaced by an acceptable colloid 
or crystalloid solution then reinfused as needed 
during surgery . 
 
CHAPTER 38 Anesthesia for Orthopedic Surgery 
803 
dose greater than 550 mg/m 2 , prior radiotherapy, 
and concurrent cyclophosphamide treatment. 
Mild degrees of cardiomyopathy can be detected 
preoperatively with endomyocardial biopsy, echo-
cardiography, or exercise radionuclide angiogra-
phy. The other important toxicity of doxorubicin is 
myelosuppression manifesting as thrombocytope-
nia, leukopenia, and anemia . 
 Are there any special considerations regarding 
postoperative pain management in the 
Jehovah’s Witness? 
 Witnesses generally refrain from any mind-
altering drugs or medications, although opioids 
prescribed by a physician for severe pain are 
accepted by some believers. Insertion of an epi-
dural catheter can provide pain relief with local 
anesthetics, with or without opioids . 
 GUIDELINES 
 Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, et al: Regional 
Anesthesia in the Patient Receiving Antithrombotic or 
Th rombolytic Th erapy: American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Evidence-Based 
Guidelines, 3rd ed. American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia, 2010. Available at: http://www.asra.com/
12s-anticoagulation-3rd-edition-2010.php. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Amanatullah DF, Cheung Y, Di Cesare PE: Hip 
resurfacing arthroplasty: A review of the evidence 
for surgical technique, outcome, and complications. 
Orthop Clin North Am 2010;41:263. 
 Busfi eld BT, Romero DM: Pain pump use aft er shoulder 
arthroscopy as a cause of glenohumeral chondrolysis. 
Arthroscopy 2009;25:647. 
 Hebl JR, Dilger JA, Byer DE, et al: A preemptive 
multimodal pathway featuring peripheral nerve 
block improves perioperative outcomes aft er 
major orthopedic surgery. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2008;33:510. 
 Ilfeld BM, Enneking FK: Continuous peripheral 
nerve blocks at home: A review. Anesth Analg 
2005;100:1822. 
 Ilfeld BM, Ball ST, Gearen PF, et al: Ambulatory 
continuous posterior lumbar plexus nerve blocks aft er 
hip arthroplasty: A dual-center, randomized, triple-
masked, placebo-controlled trial. Anesthesiology 
2008;109:491. 
 Ilfeld BM, Duke KB, Donohue MC: Th e association 
between lower extremity continuous peripheral 
nerve blocks and patient falls aft er knee and hip 
arthroplasty. Anesth Analg 2010;111:1552. 
 Ilfeld BM, Le LT, Meyer RS, et al: Ambulatory 
continuous femoral nerve blocks decrease time 
to discharge readiness aft er tricompartment 
total knee arthroplasty: A randomized, triple-
masked, placebo-controlled study. Anesthesiology 
2008;108:703. 
 Khanna A, Gougoulias N, Longo UG, et al: Minimally 
invasive total knee arthroplasty: A systematic review. 
Orthop Clin N Am 2009;40:479. 
 Lafont ND, Kalonji MK, Barre J, et al: Clinical 
features and echocardiography of embolism 
during cemented hip arthroplasty. Can J Anaesth. 
1997;44:112. 
 Lisowska B, Rutkowska-Sak L, Maldyk P, et al: 
Anaesthesiological problems in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis undergoing orthopaedic 
surgeries. Clin Rheumatol 2008;27:553. 
 Liu SS, Strodtbeck WM, Richman JM, Wu CL: A 
comparison of regional versus general anesthesia 
for ambulatory anesthesia: A meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Anesth Analg 
2005;101:1634. 
 Mariano ER, Afra R, Loland VJ, et al: Continuous 
interscalene brachial plexus block via an ultrasound-
guided posterior approach: A randomized, triple-
masked, placebo-controlled study. Anesth Analg 
2009;108:1688. 
 Mariano ER, Loland VJ, Sandhu NS, et al: A trainee-
based randomized comparison of stimulating 
interscalene perineural catheters with a new technique 
using ultrasound guidance alone. J Ultrasound Med 
2010;29:329. 
 Mason SE, Noel-Storr A, Ritchie CW: Th e impact of 
general and regional anesthesia on the incidence 
of post-operative cognitive dysfunction and post-
operative delirium: A systematic review with meta-
analysis. J Alzheimers Dis 2010;22(Suppl 3):67. 
 Neal JM, Gerancher JC, Hebl JR, et al: Upper extremity 
regional anesthesia: Essentials of our current 
understanding, 2008. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2009;34:134. 
804 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
warming on allogenic blood requirements in patients 
undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty. Anesth Analg 
1998;86:387. 
 Smith TO, Nichols R, Donell ST, et al: Th e clinical and 
radiological outcomes of hip resurfacing versus total 
hip arthroplasty: A meta-analysis and systematic 
review. Acta Orthop 2010;81:684. 
 Urwin SC, Parker MJ, Griffi  ths R: General versus 
regional anaesthesia for hip fracture surgery: A 
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Br J Anaesth 
2000;84:450. 
 Zaric D, Boysen K, Christiansen C, et al: A comparison 
of epidural analgesia with combined continuous 
femoral-sciatic nerve blocks aft er total knee 
replacement. Anesth Analg 2006;102:1240. 
 Pietak S, Holmes J, Matthews R, et al: Cardiovascular 
collapse aft er femoral prosthesis surgery for acute hip 
fracture. Can J Anaesth 1997;44:198. 
 Pohl A, Cullen DJ: Cerebral ischemia during shoulder 
surgery in the upright position: A case series. J Clin 
Anesth 2005;17:463. 
 Pollock JE, Mulroy MF, Bent E, et al: A comparison of 
two regional anesthetic techniques for outpatient knee 
arthroscopy. Anesth Analg 2003;97:397. 
 Rathmell JP, Pino CA, Taylor R, et al: Intrathecal 
morphine for postoperative analgesia: A randomized, 
controlled, dose-ranging study aft er hip and knee 
arthroplasty. Anesth Analg 2003;97:1452. 
 Schmied H, Schiferer A, Sessler DI, et al: Th e eff ects 
of red-cell scavenging, hemodilution, and active 
 805
39
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Anesthesia for Trauma 
& Emergency Surgery 
 Brian P. McGlinch, MD 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 All trauma patients should be presumed 
to have “full” stomachs and an increased 
risk for pulmonary aspiration of gastric 
contents. 
 Cervical spine injury is presumed in any 
trauma patient complaining of neck 
pain, or with any signiﬁ cant head injury, 
neurological signs or symptoms suggestive 
of cervical spine injury, or intoxication or 
loss of consciousness. 
 In the multiple-injury patient, providers 
should maintain a high level of suspicion 
for pulmonary injury that could evolve into 
a tension pneumothorax when mechanical 
ventilation is initiated. 
 In up to 25% of major trauma patients, 
trauma-induced coagulopathy is present 
shortly after injury and before any 
resuscitative eﬀ orts have been initiated. 
 Administering blood products in equal 
ratios early in resuscitation has become an 
accepted approach to correction of trauma-
induced coagulopathy. This balanced 
approach to transfusion, 1:1:1 (red blood 
cell:fresh frozen plasma:platelet), is termed 
damage control resuscitation . 
 Noninfectious transfusion reactions are now 
the leading complication of transfusion and 
represent a more than 10-fold greater risk 
than blood-borne infection. Transfusion-
related acute lung injury is the leading cause 
of transfusion-related death. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
 The  assessment of blood consumption (ABC) 
score is an attempt to predict which patients 
are likely to require a massive transfusion 
protocol. The ABC score assigns 1 point 
for the presence of each of four possible 
variables: (1) penetrating injury; (2) systolic 
blood pressure less than 90 mmHg; (3) heart 
rate greater than 120 beats per minute; and 
(4) positive results of a  focused assessment 
with sonography for trauma evaluation. 
Patients with ABC scores of 2 or higher are 
likely to require massive transfusion. 
 Any trauma patient with altered level of 
consciousness must be considered to 
have a traumatic brain injury (TBI) until 
proven otherwise. The most reliable 
clinical assessment tool in determining 
the signiﬁ cance of TBI in a nonsedated, 
nonparalyzed patient is the Glasgow coma 
scale. 
 Acute subdural hematoma is the most 
common condition warranting emergency 
neurosurgery and is associated with the 
highest mortality. 
 Systemic hypotension (systolic blood 
pressures <90 mm Hg), hypoxemia 
(Pa O 2 <60 mm Hg), hypercapnia 
(Pa CO 2 >50 mm Hg), and hyperthermia 
(temperature >38.0°C) have a negative 
impact on morbidity and mortality 
following head injuries, likely because of 
7
8
9
10
—Continued next page
806 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Continued—
their contributions to increasing cerebral 
edema and intracranial pressure (ICP). 
 Current guidelines recommend maintaining 
cerebral perfusion pressure between 50 and 
70 mm Hg and ICP at less than 20 mm Hg for 
patients with severe head injury. 
 Maintaining supranormal mean arterial 
blood pressures to assure spinal cord 
perfusion in areas of reduced blood ﬂ ow 
due to cord compression or vascular 
compromise is likely to be of more beneﬁ t 
than steroid administration. 
 Major burns (a second- or third-degree 
burn involving >20% total body 
surface area [TBSA]) induce a unique 
hemodynamic response. Cardiac output 
declines by up to 50% within 30 minutes 
in response to massive vasoconstriction, 
inducing a state of normovolemic 
hypoperfusion ( burn shock ). 
11
12
13
 In contrast to ﬂ uid management for 
blunt and penetrating trauma, which 
discourages use of crystalloid ﬂ uids, 
burn ﬂ uid resuscitation emphasizes the 
use of crystalloids, particularly lactated 
Ringer’s solution, in preference to albumin, 
hydroxyethyl starch, hypertonic saline, 
and blood. 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning should be 
considered in all serious burn injury cases, 
as well as with lesser TBSA burns occurring 
in enclosed spaces. Unconsciousness or 
decreased levels of consciousness following 
burn injuries should be presumed to 
represent carbon monoxide poisoning. 
 Beyond 48 h after a major burn, 
succinylcholine administration is likely 
to produce potentially lethal elevation 
of serum potassium levels. 
14
15
16
 PRIMARY SURVEY 
 Airway 
 Increasingly, 
emergency 
medical 
technician–
paramedics and fl ight nurses are trained to intu-
bate patients in the prehospital environment. More 
providers capable of airway management in the 
critically ill or injured patient are now available to 
intervene in the hospital setting as well. As a result, 
the anesthesiologist’s role in providing initial trauma 
resuscitation has diminished in North America. Th is 
also means that when called upon to assist in airway 
management in the emergency department, anes-
thesia providers must expect a challenging airway, as 
routine airway management techniques likely have 
already proved unsuccessful. 
 Th ere are three important aspects of airway 
management in the initial evaluation of a trauma 
patient: (1) the need for basic life support; (2) the 
presumed presence of a cervical spinal cord injury 
 Trauma is a leading cause of morbidity and mor-
tality in all age groups, and is the leading cause 
of death in the young. All aspects of trauma care, 
from that provided at the scene, through transport, 
resuscitation, surgery, intensive care, and rehabili-
tation, must be coordinated if the patient is to have 
the greatest chance for full recovery. Th e Advanced 
Trauma Life Support (ATLS) program developed 
by the American College of Surgeons’ (ACS) 
Committee on Trauma has, over time, resulted 
in an increasingly consistent approach to trauma 
resuscitation. Th e development of criteria for level 
one trauma centers has also improved trauma care 
by directing severely injured patients to facilities 
with appropriate resources. 
 Although trauma anesthesia is sometimes 
thought of as a unique topic, many of the principles 
for managing trauma patients are relevant to any 
unstable or hemorrhaging patient. Th us, many com-
mon issues are addressed in this chapter. 
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery
807
available. Th e front portion of the C-collar can be 
removed to facilitate tracheal intubation as long as 
the head and neck are maintained in neutral posi-
tion by a designated assistant maintaining manual 
in-line stabilization. 
 Alternative devices for airway management 
(eg, esophageal–tracheal Combitube, King supra-
laryngeal device) may be used if direct laryngos-
copy has failed, or in the prehospital environment. 
Th ese devices, blindly placed into the airway, isolate 
the glottic opening between a large infl atable cuff 
positioned at the base of the tongue and a distal 
cuff  that most likely rests in the proximal esopha-
gus ( Figure 39–1 ). Th e prolonged presence of these 
devices in the airway has been associated with glos-
sal engorgement resulting from the large, proximal 
cuff  obstructing venous outfl ow from the tongue, 
and in some cases, tongue engorgement has been 
suffi  ciently severe to warrant tracheostomy prior to 
their removal. Th ere is limited evidence that pre-
hospital airway management in trauma patients 
improves patient outcomes; however, failed tracheal 
intubation in the prehospital environment certainly 
exposes patients to signifi cant morbidity. 
 Airway management of the trauma patient 
is 
uneventful 
in 
most 
circumstances, 
and 
until proven otherwise; and (3) the potential for 
failed tracheal intubation. Eff ective basic life support 
prevents hypoxia and hypercapnia from contribut-
ing to the patient’s depressed level of consciousness. 
When hypercarbia produces a depressed level of 
consciousness, basic airway interventions oft en 
lessen the need for endotracheal intubation as 
arterial carbon dioxide levels return to normal. 
 Finally, all trauma patients should be pre-
sumed to have “full” stomachs and an increased 
risk for pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. 
Assisted ventilation should be performed with vol-
umes suffi  cient to provide chest rise. Some clinicians 
will apply cricoid pressure, although the effi  cacy of 
this maneuver is controversial. 
 Cervical spine injury is presumed in any 
trauma patient complaining of neck pain, or 
with any signifi cant head injury, neurological signs 
or symptoms suggestive of cervical spine injury, or 
intoxication or loss of consciousness. Th e applica-
tion of a cervical collar (“C-collar”) before trans-
port to protect the cervical spinal cord will limit 
the degree of cervical extension that is ordinarily 
expected for direct laryngoscopy and tracheal intu-
bation. Alternative devices (eg, videolaryngoscopes, 
fi beroptic bronchoscopes) should be immediately 
1
2
 FIGURE 391  The King LT supralaryngeal device. The 
glottic opening lies between the large cuﬀ  positioned at 
the base of the tongue and the smaller balloon positioned 
in the proximal esophagus. The airway is not secured but 
rather isolated between the oropharynx and the proximal 
esophagus.  (Reproduced, with permission, from King Systems 
Corporation, KLTD/KLTSD Disposable Supralaryngeal Airways Inservice 
Program, August 23, 2006, with permission.) 
Gas flow
Primary
ventilatory
outlets
Additional
side eyelets
Single
inflation
valve
Hyoid
bone
Epiglottis
Vocal cords
Trachea
Esophagus
Soft palate
Hard palate
Distal cuff
Inflates in the esophagus. 
Isolates the laryngopharynx 
from the esophagus.
Proximal cuff
Inflates at the base of the 
tongue. Isolates the 
layrngopharynx from the 
oropharynx and nasopharynx.
808 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Retrospective review of emergency thoracotomy in 
Europe failed to demonstrate resuscitation benefi t of 
this procedure following either blunt or penetrating 
trauma in the setting of cardiac arrest. In the setting 
of chest trauma without detectable blood pressure or 
palpable pulse, current practice supports reserving 
resuscitative thoracotomy for patients who experi-
ence  penetrating trauma and have preserved, orga-
nized cardiac rhythms or other signs of life. 
 In light of these recommendations, prompt 
placement of bilateral chest tubes and adminis-
tration of a 500–1000 mL fl uid bolus should be 
implemented in the pulseless victim of penetrating 
trauma. If return of spontaneous circulation does 
not occur promptly, more aggressive interventions 
are not indicated and resuscitation eff orts can be 
terminated. 
 Neurological Function 
 Once the presence of circulation is confi rmed, a brief 
neurological examination is conducted. Level of con-
sciousness, pupillary size and reaction, lateralizing 
signs suggesting intracranial or extracranial inju-
ries, and indications of spinal cord injury are quickly 
evaluated. As noted earlier, hypercarbia oft en causes 
depressed neurological responsiveness following 
trauma; it is eff ectively corrected with basic life sup-
port interventions. Additional causes of depressed 
neurological function—eg, alcohol intoxication, 
eff ects of illicit or prescribed medications, hypogly-
cemia, hypoperfusion, or brain or spinal injury—
must also be addressed. Mechanisms of injury must 
be considered as well as exclusion of other factors 
in determining the risk for central nervous system 
trauma. Persistently depressed levels of conscious-
ness should be considered a result of central nervous 
system injury until disproved by diagnostic studies. 
 Injury Assessment: 
Minimizing Risks of Exposure 
 Th e patient must be fully exposed and examined in 
order to adequately assess the extent of injury, and 
this physical exposure increases the risk of hypo-
thermia. Th e presence of shock and intravenous 
fl uid therapy also place the trauma patient at great 
risk for developing hypothermia. As a result, the 
cricothyroidotomy or tracheostomy is rarely 
required to secure the trauma airway. When trauma 
signifi cantly alters or distorts the facial or upper 
airway anatomy to the point of impeding adequate 
mask ventilation, or when hemorrhage into the air-
way precludes the patient from lying supine, elective 
cricothyroidotomy or tracheostomy should be con-
sidered before any attempts are made to anesthetize 
or administer neuromuscular blocking agents to the 
patient for orotracheal intubation. 
 Breathing 
 In the multiple-injury patient, providers 
should maintain a high level of suspicion 
for pulmonary injury that could evolve into a ten-
sion pneumothorax when mechanical ventilation 
is initiated. Attention must be paid to peak inspi-
ratory pressure and tidal volumes throughout the 
initial resuscitation. Pulmonary injury may not be 
immediately apparent upon the patient’s arrival at 
the hospital, and abrupt cardiovascular collapse 
shortly aft er instituting mechanical ventilation may 
announce the presence of a pneumothorax. Th is 
should be managed by disconnecting the patient 
from mechanical ventilation and performing bilat-
eral needle thoracostomy (accomplished by insert-
ing a 14-gauge intravenous catheter into the second 
interspace in the midclavicular line), and then by 
thoracostomy tube insertion. Inspired oxygen con-
centrations of 100% are used routinely in this early 
phase of resuscitation. 
 Circulation 
 During the primary trauma patient survey, signs of 
a pulse and blood pressure are sought. Unless the 
trauma patient arrives at the hospital other than by 
ambulance, the resuscitation team will likely have 
received information about the patient’s vital signs 
from the prehospital personnel (emergency medi-
cal technicians, fl ight nurses). Th e absence of a pulse 
following trauma is associated with dismal chances 
of survival. Th e ACS Committee on Trauma no lon-
ger endorses the use of emergency thoracotomy in 
treating patients without blood pressure or palpable 
pulse following  blunt trauma, even in the presence of 
organized cardiac activity, given the lack of evidence 
supporting survival following this intervention. 
3
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery
809
Class III hemorrhage represents the volume 
of blood loss (30–40% of circulating blood vol-
ume) that consistently results in decreased blood 
pressure. Compensatory mechanisms of vasocon-
striction and tachycardia are not suffi  cient to main-
tain perfusion and meet the metabolic demands 
of the body. Metabolic acidosis will be detected 
on arterial blood gas analysis. Blood transfusions 
are necessary to restore tissue perfusion and pro-
vide oxygen to tissues. Th e patient may transiently 
respond to fl uid boluses given in response to hem-
orrhage; however, if bleeding persists or given time 
for the fl uid bolus to redistribute, the blood pres-
sure will decline. Surgeons should be advised when 
this pattern persists, particularly during elective 
surgical cases where the development of shock is 
not expected. Class III hemorrhage may prompt an 
intervention such as a damage control procedure 
(see below). 
Class IV hemorrhage represents life-threaten-
ing hemorrhage. When more than 40% of circulating 
blood volume is lost, the patient will be unrespon-
sive and profoundly hypotensive. Rapid control of 
bleeding and aggressive blood-based resuscitation 
(ie, damage control resuscitation) will be required 
to prevent death. Patients experiencing this degree 
of hemorrhage will likely develop a trauma-induced 
coagulopathy, require massive blood transfusion, 
and experience a high likelihood of death. 
 Trauma-Induced Coagulopathy 
 Coagulation abnormalities are common following 
major trauma, and trauma-induced coagulopathy is 
an independent risk factor for death.  Recent 
prospective clinical studies suggest that in up 
to 25% of major trauma patients, trauma-induced 
coagulopathy is present shortly aft er injury and 
before any resuscitative eff orts have been initiated. In 
one report, acute traumatic coagulopathy was only 
related to the presence of a severe metabolic acidosis 
(base defi cit ≥6 mEq/L) and appeared to have a dose-
dependent relationship with the degree of tissue 
hypoperfusion; 2% of patients with base defi cits less 
than 6 mEq/L developed coagulopathy compared 
with 20% of patients with base defi cits greater than 
6 mEq/L. Although injury severity scores were likely 
high in those developing coagulopathy, only the 
4
resuscitation bay must be maintained at near body 
temperature, all fl uids should be warmed during 
administration, and the use of forced air patient 
warmers, either below or covering the patient, 
should be utilized. 
 RESUSCITATION 
 Hemorrhage 
 Certain trauma-related terminology must be 
understood and utilized in order to eff ectively 
communicate with surgeons during trauma resus-
citations or surgeries in which blood loss is occur-
ring.  Hemorrhage classifi cations I–IV ,  damage 
control resuscitation , and  damage control surgery
are terms that quickly convey critical informa-
tion between surgeons and anesthesia personnel, 
ensuring a common understanding of the various 
interventions that may be required to resuscitate 
a trauma or surgical patient experiencing bleed-
ing. Th e ACS identifi es four classes of hemorrhage. 
Understanding this classifi cation scheme promotes 
more eff ective communication between surgeons 
and anesthesiologists. 
Class I hemorrhage is the volume of blood that 
can be lost without hemodynamic consequence. Th e 
heart rate does not change and the blood pressure 
does not decrease in response to losing this volume 
of blood. In most circumstances, this volume repre-
sents less than 15% of circulating blood volume. Th e 
typical adult has a blood volume equivalent to 70 mL/
kg. A 70-kg adult can be presumed to have nearly 
5 L of circulating blood. Children are considered to 
have 80 mL/kg and infants, 90 mL/kg blood volume. 
Intravenous fl uid is not required if the bleeding is 
controlled, as in brief, controlled bleeding encoun-
tered during an elective surgical procedure. 
 Class II hemorrhage is the volume of blood, 
that, when lost, prompts sympathetic responses to 
maintain perfusion; this usually represents 15–30% 
of circulating blood volume. Th e diastolic blood 
pressure will increase (a refl ection of vasoconstric-
tion) and the heart rate will increase to maintain car-
diac output. Intravenous fl uid or colloid is usually 
indicated for blood loss of this volume. Transfusions 
may be required if bleeding continues, suggesting 
progression to class III hemorrhage. 
810 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
times; and (3) an infl uence of early trauma-induced 
coagulopathy on mortality. 
 Trauma-induced coagulopathy is not solely 
related to impaired clot formation. Fibrinolysis is 
an equally important component as a result of plas-
min activity on an existing clot. Tranexamic acid 
administration is associated with decreased bleed-
ing during cardiac and orthopedic surgeries, pre-
sumably because of its antifi brinolytic properties. A 
randomized control study involving 20,000 trauma 
patients with or at risk of signifi cant bleeding found 
a signifi cantly reduced risk for death from hemor-
rhage when tranexamic acid therapy (loading dose, 
1 g over 10 min followed by an infusion of 1 g over 
8 h) was initiated within the fi rst 3 h following major 
trauma.  Figure 39–4 demonstrates the benefi t of ini-
tiating this therapy in relation to the time of injury. 
 Hemostatic Resuscitation 
 Early coagulopathy of trauma is associated with 
increased mortality.  Administering blood 
products in equal ratios early in resuscitation 
has become an accepted approach to correction of 
trauma-induced 
coagulopathy. 
Th is 
balanced 
approach to transfusion, 1:1:1 (red blood cell:fresh 
5
presence of the metabolic acidosis correlated to 
developing trauma-induced coagulopathy. 
 Global tissue hypoperfusion appears to have 
a key role in the development of trauma-induced 
coagulopathy. During hypoperfusion, the endo-
thelium releases thrombomodulin and activated 
protein C to prevent microcirculation thrombosis. 
Th rombomodulin binds thrombin, thereby prevent-
ing thrombin from cleaving fi brinogen to fi brin. 
Th e thrombomodulin–thrombin complex activates 
protein C, which then inhibits the extrinsic coagu-
lation pathway through eff ects on cofactors V and 
VIII ( Figure 39–2 ). Activated protein C also inhibits 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 proteins, which 
increases tissue plasminogen activator, resulting in 
hyperfi brinolysis ( Figure 39–3 ). One prospective 
clinical study found the following eff ects of hypoper-
fusion on coagulation parameters: (1) progressive 
coagulopathy as base defi cit increases; (2) increas-
ing plasma thrombomodulin and falling protein 
C (indicating activation of the protein levels with 
increasing base defi cit), supporting the argument 
that the anticoagulant eff ects of these proteins in the 
presence of hypoperfusion are related to the prolon-
gation of prothrombin and partial thromboplastin 
 FIGURE 392  Mechanism of trauma-induced 
coagulopathy. During periods of tissue hypoperfusion, 
thrombomodulin (TM) released by the endothelium 
complexes with thrombin. The thrombin–TM complexes 
prevent cleavage of ﬁ brinogen to ﬁ brin and also activate 
protein C (PC), reducing further thrombin generation 
through cofactors V and VIII.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Davenport RA: Acute coagulopathy of 
trauma: mechanism, identiﬁ cation and eﬀ ect. Curr Opin Crit Care 
2007;13:680.) 
Thrombin is generated primarily 
via the ‘extrinsic’ pathway with 
multiple feed-forward loops. 
When thrombomodulin (TM) is 
presented by the endothelium, it 
complexes thrombin which is no 
longer available to cleave 
fibrinogen. This anticoagulent 
thrombin activates protein C 
which reduces further thrombin 
generation through inhibition of 
cofactors V and VIII.
Thrombin
Fibrin
Endothelium
Thrombin-TM
+
+
+
VIIa IXa
VIII
V
Xa
TM TM TM TM
PC
aPC
–
–
Platelet
+
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery 
811 
oxygen delivery to ischemic, hypoperfused tissues. 
Fresh frozen plasma provides clotting factors V and 
VIII along with fi brinogen, which improves clotting, 
possibly due to overwhelming of the thrombin–
thrombomodulin complex. Platelets and cryopre-
cipitate, although included in the 1:1:1 massive 
frozen plasma:platelet), is termed  damage control 
resuscitation . Although the 1:1:1 combination 
attempts to replicate whole blood, it results in a pan-
cytopenic solution with only a fraction of whole 
blood’s hematocrit and coagulation factor concen-
tration. Red blood cells will over time improve 
 FIGURE 393  Mechanism of hyperﬁ brinolysis in 
tissue hypoperfusion. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 
released from the endothelium during hypoperfusion 
states cleaves plasminogen to initiate ﬁ brinolysis. 
Activated protein C (aPC) consumes plasminogen 
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) when present in excess, 
and reduced PAI-1 leads to increased tPA activity and 
hyperﬁ brinolysis. FDPs, ﬁ brin degradation products; 
PC, protein C; TM, thrombomodulin.  (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Davenport RA: Acute 
coagulopathy of trauma: Mechanism, identiﬁ cation and eﬀ ect. 
Curr Opin Crit Care 2007;13:680.) 
Tissue plasminogen activator 
(tPA) is released from the 
endothelium by injury and 
hypoperfusion and cleaves 
plasminogen to initiate 
fibrinolysis. Activated protein C 
(aPC) consumes plasminogen 
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) when 
present in excess, and reduced 
PAI-1 leads to increased tPA 
acivity and hyperfibrinolysis.
Thrombin
Fibrin
Plasmin
tPA
Endothelium
Thrombin-TM
PAI-1
FDPs
+
+
+
+
VIIa IXa
VIII
V
Xa
TM TM TM TM
PC
aPC
–
–
–
Platelet
+
 FIGURE 394  Inﬂ uence of 
tranexamic acid in preventing death 
from bleeding. Outcomes ratios (OR) 
of tranexamic acid with 95% conﬁ dence 
interval ( green area ) on the  x -axis and 
time (h) to treatment on the  y -axis 
demonstrate improved survival if 
tranexamic acid therapy is initiated 
within 3 h of injury. The area of the 
curve to the left of OR 1.0 demonstrates 
the beneﬁ ts of therapy, while that to 
the right demonstrates harm from 
intervention.  (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, et al: The 
importance of early treatment with tranexamic 
acid in bleeding trauma patients: An exploratory 
analysis of the CRASH-2 randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet 2011;377:1096.) 
0
1
2
Time to treatment (hours)
3
4
5
6
7
8
0.5
1
1.5
OR of tranexamic acid with 95% Confidence Interval (green area)
2
2.5
3
812 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
requiring this therapy may be exposed to unneces-
sary additional units of blood or blood products. An 
alternative approach that relies on thromboelastog-
raphy (TEG) may allow more goal-directed transfu-
sion of blood and blood products and is increasingly 
utilized in trauma resuscitations. Th e formation and 
stability of a clot represents interactions between the 
coagulation cascades, platelets, and the fi brinolytic 
system, all of which can be demonstrated with TEG 
( Figure 39–5 ). As TEG use during trauma resus-
citation becomes more routine, the current 1:1:1 
hemostatic resuscitation ratio will likely undergo 
modifi cation to proportionately less fresh frozen 
plasma, and the use of antifi brinolytic therapy will 
likely increase. 
 Administration of blood products must be done 
with consideration for potential hazards that may 
result from transfusion. Although blood-borne dis-
eases such as acquired immunodefi ciency syndrome, 
hepatitis B, and hepatitis C are usually thought of as 
the highest transfusion-related risks, the incidence 
of such infections has decreased 10,000-fold due to 
better screening tests of donors and donated units 
(see Chapter 51).  Noninfectious transfusion 
reactions are now the leading complication of 
transfusion and represent a more than 10-fold 
greater risk than blood-borne infection. Transfusion-
related acute lung injury (TRALI) is the leading 
cause of transfusion-related death reported to the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. However, 
although the bleeding trauma patient is at risk for a 
transfusion-related reaction, that risk is minimal 
compared with the far greater likelihood of death 
from exsanguination. Th e most prudent approach 
for blood product utilization in the bleeding trauma 
patient is to administer the blood products that are 
necessary, based on laboratory studies, clinical evi-
dence of signifi cant bleeding, and the degree of 
hemodynamic instability that can be directly attrib-
uted to hemorrhage. 
 Massive Transfusion Protocols 
 Delay in obtaining blood products other than red 
blood cells is common in both civilian and military 
settings. Clinical evidence supports the need for, and 
benefi t of, established massive transfusion protocols 
(MTPs), allowing the blood bank to assemble blood 
6
transfusion protocol, are probably not necessary in 
the initial phase of resuscitation, given the normal 
platelet and fi brinogen levels noted in early coagu-
lopathy. Additional platelet transfusions may be 
benefi cial if the resuscitation is prolonged, as is typi-
cal for most major trauma resuscitations, or if a 
recalcitrant coagulopathy is noted with coagulation 
studies. Th e use of crystalloid fl uids in early trauma 
resuscitation has markedly decreased with the 
increased emphasis upon early blood product 
administration. 
 Most trauma centers have early-release type 
O-negative blood available for immediate transfu-
sion to patients with severe hemorrhage. Depending 
on the urgency of need for transfusion, administra-
tion of blood products typically progresses from 
O-negative to type-specifi c, then to crossmatched 
units as the acute need decreases. Patients admin-
istered uncrossmatched O-negative blood are those 
deemed at high risk of requiring massive trans-
fusion. As the amount of uncrossmatched blood 
administered increases beyond 8 units, attempts to 
return to the patient’s native blood type should not 
be pursued and type O blood should be continued 
until the patient is stabilized. 
 Military experience treating combat-wounded 
soldiers and civilians has provided great insight into 
trauma resuscitation and trauma-induced coagu-
lopathy. As the use of blood and blood products has 
evolved, the 1:1:1 transfusion ratio has been uni-
formly adopted to address the frequent incidence of 
trauma-induced coagulopathy. Retrospective analy-
sis of severely wounded solders found improved 
survival when this transfusion protocol was utilized. 
Consequently, hemostatic resuscitation has been 
rapidly adopted by civilian trauma centers, which 
have reported similar survival benefi ts for civilian 
patients with severe trauma. Nevertheless, using tra-
ditional defi nitions, this approach is not “evidence 
based” from randomized clinical trials. 
 Using hemostatic resuscitation (ie, damage 
control resuscitation), blood and blood products 
are administered preemptively to address a pre-
sumed coagulopathy. Oft en coagulation status is 
not assessed until the patient stabilizes. Although 
this treatment approach appears to be eff ective in 
controlling trauma-induced coagulopathy, patients 
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery
813
effi  cient and eff ective processes for utilizing critical 
blood bank resources. 
 Initiating an MTP for all trauma patients is 
impractical; however, delaying request for an MTP 
until the patient has undergone a thorough trauma 
evaluation may increase the risk of morbidity and 
mortality.  Th e  assessment of blood consump-
tion (ABC) score is an attempt to predict 
which patients are likely to require an MTP. Th e 
ABC score assigns 1 point for the presence of each 
of four possible variables: (1) penetrating injury; 
(2) systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg; (3) 
heart rate greater than 120 beats per minute; and 
(4) positive results of a  focused assessment with 
sonography for trauma (FAST) evaluation. Th e 
FAST evaluation is a bedside ultrasonography 
screening examination performed by surgeons and 
emergency department physicians to assess the 
presence or absence of free fl uid in the perihepatic 
and perisplenic spaces, pericardium, and pelvis. 
7
products in prescribed ratios to support hemostatic 
resuscitation. With MTPs in place, hemostatic resus-
citation can continue until the demand for blood 
products stops. An MTP-driven, blood-based resus-
citation, rather than a crystalloid-based resuscita-
tion, improves survival from trauma, reduces total 
blood product utilization in the fi rst 24 h follow-
ing injury, reduces acute infectious complications 
(severe sepsis, septic shock, and ventilator- associated 
pneumonia), and decreases postresuscitation organ 
dysfunction (an 80% decrease in odds of developing 
multisystem organ failure). 
 It is important to establish which personnel 
are empowered to invoke use of the MTP, given 
the expense and implications for the blood bank 
in terms of blood inventory, personnel training 
and availability, and disruption of routine blood 
bank duties. Establishing an MTP benefi ts both 
the patient, through improved survival and fewer 
complications, and the institution, through more 
 FIGURE 395  Thromboelastograph (TEG). The 
graph begins as a straight line until clot formation 
begins (the enzymatic stage of clotting). As a clot forms, 
increasing resistance develops on the strain gauge, 
creating a splaying of the graph. The pattern of the graph 
suggests the status of ﬁ brinogen stores (α angle) and 
platelet function (maximum amplitude, MA). Eventually, 
ﬁ brinolysis will occur as demonstrated by decreasing MA. 
Deﬁ ciencies of various clotting components will aﬀ ect 
each phase of the TEG whereas increased ﬁ brinolysis will 
be demonstrated by an earlier decline in the maximum 
amplitude. ACT, activated clotting time; EPL, Ly30, K, R, 
values related to rate of clot breakdown.  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Kashuk JL, Moore EE, Sawyer M, et al: Postinjury 
coagulopathy management: Goal directed resuscitation via POC 
thrombelastography. Ann Surg 2010;251:604.) 
Coagulation
B
Fibrinolysis
Maximum
amplitude (mm)
LY
Platelets (MA)
α
TEG
ACT
Enzymatic
Time (sec)
Fibrinogen
(K,α)
Thrombolysins
(Ly30, EPL)
814 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
that peripheral intravenous access is impossible. 
In this circumstance, a subclavian or an intraosse-
ous catheter should be inserted and blood-based 
resuscitation initiated. Th e subclavian vein is oft en 
preferred for central venous access in profoundly 
hypotensive patients owing to its position between 
the fi rst rib and the clavicle, which tends to stent 
the vein open. An intraosseous catheter is usually 
seated into the bone marrow of the proximal tibia or 
humerus, a process that is facilitated by use of a bone 
drilling device. Use of intraosseous access requires 
that the bone distal to the intraosseous catheter to 
be intact; otherwise; extravasation of infused fl uid 
through the fracture site, the path of least resistance, 
will occur. A pressure bag must be used for infus-
ing any fl uid through the intraosseous catheter due 
to resistance to passive fl ow from the bone marrow, 
although the intraosseous space is intimately con-
nected with the venous system and transfused blood 
readily enters the central circulation via this route. 
 Major blood loss and hemodynamic instabil-
ity create a dangerous situation for the conscious 
trauma patient and a challenging decision for the 
anesthesiologist planning the induction of general 
anesthesia. Trauma patients with severe injuries are 
poor candidates for induction with propofol, given 
the likelihood of profound hypotension following 
even modest doses (0.25–0.5 mg/kg intravenously). 
Etomidate preserves sympathetic tone, which makes 
it a modestly safer choice than propofol. Ketamine 
is also a reasonable choice, particularly if given in 
10-mg intravenous boluses until the patient becomes 
unresponsive. Scopolamine, 0.4 mg intravenously, 
should be considered as an amnestic agent for the 
hemodynamically unstable but conscious patient at 
high risk for hemodynamic collapse on induction 
of anesthesia who arrives in the operating room 
for emergency surgery. What is most important is 
not the particular intravenous anesthetic induction 
agent chosen, but recognition that the hemody-
namically unstable trauma patient will require sig-
nifi cantly less anesthetic medication than in normal 
circumstances. 
 An arterial line will be helpful but insertion 
may prove diffi  cult in the hypotensive, hypoper-
fused trauma patient. Attempts at placing invasive 
monitors can continue as the patient is prepped for 
Patients with ABC scores of 2 or higher are likely to 
require massive transfusion. Th is scoring system 
has been validated in multiple level 1 trauma cen-
ters and is now relatively commonplace in trauma 
evaluations. 
 DEFINITIVE TRAUMA 
INTERVENTIONS 
 Th e physical examination, emergency procedures, 
and evaluations used to determine the extent of 
injury, need for an MTP, and surgical intervention 
all occur outside the operating room. Th e decision 
to proceed to the operating room may be the fi rst 
point in the trauma resuscitation process at which an 
anesthesiologist is involved. Key issues in the anes-
thetic management of trauma patients include the 
need to avoid vasopressors and minimize crystalloid 
infusions until bleeding is controlled. Blood prod-
ucts are the fl uids of choice for trauma resuscitation. 
 Anesthetic Induction & Maintenance 
 Conscious and oriented trauma patients arriving 
for emergent surgery should have an abbreviated 
interview and examination, including emphasis on 
consent for blood transfusions and advice that intra-
operative awareness may occur during emergency 
surgery. Th is discussion should be documented in 
the patient’s record. 
 Th e operating room should be as warm as is 
practical. Intravenous fl uid warmers and rapid infu-
sion devices should be used. All patients arriving 
for trauma surgery should be presumed to have full 
stomachs and thus to be at increased risk for aspira-
tion. As noted earlier, the presence of a C-collar may 
increase the diffi  culty of intubation. Accordingly, 
robust suction equipment and alternative airway 
devices (eg, fi beroptic bronchoscopes, videolaryn-
goscopes) should be immediately available for use. 
 Intravenous access is usually established in the 
prehospital setting or in the emergency department. 
If the existing peripheral intravenous lines are of suf-
fi cient caliber and quality for infusing blood under 
pressure (ie, a 16-gauge or 14-gauge catheter), a cen-
tral line is usually not necessary for the initial surgi-
cal intervention. Patients may arrive in the operating 
room so profoundly hypotensive and hypovolemic 
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery
815
DCS, if the patient becomes unstable or profoundly 
hypothermic, or if transfusions are insuffi  cient in 
maintaining perfusion, the operation should be 
interrupted, the bleeding areas packed, and a deci-
sion should be made as to whether the patient can 
be transferred to the interventional radiology suite 
to treat bleeding from surgically inaccessible sites 
or transferred to the intensive care unit to allow 
warming, treatment of hemodynamic or hemostatic 
abnormalities, and continuation of resuscitation. 
 Th e interventional radiology suite is increas-
ingly utilized as part of the DCS sequence, because 
interventional radiology techniques can reach 
essentially any bleeding vessel and deposit coils or 
foam to control hemorrhage. Most notably, liver, 
kidney, and retroperitoneal injuries, pelvic ring 
fractures, and major thoracic and abdominal vas-
cular injuries are potentially controlled by inter-
ventional radiology procedures. Following DCS, 
trauma patients will frequently be transferred to the 
interventional radiology suite to assess blood fl ow 
and hemostasis of organs either injured by the ini-
tial trauma or potentially compromised as part of 
the DCS. 
 TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY 
 Any trauma patient with altered level of con-
sciousness must be considered to have a trau-
matic brain injury (TBI) until proven otherwise 
(see Chapter 27). Th e presence or suspicion of a TBI 
mandates attention to maintaining cerebral perfu-
sion and arterial oxygenation during all aspects of 
care. Th e most reliable clinical assessment tool in 
determining the signifi cance of TBI in a nonse-
dated, nonparalyzed patient is the Glasgow coma 
scale (GCS,  Table 27–2 ). A declining motor score 
is suggestive of progressing neurological deteriora-
tion, prompting urgent neurosurgical evaluation 
and possible surgical intervention. Although trauma 
patients frequently have head injuries, few head inju-
ries require emergent neurosurgical intervention. 
 TBIs are categorized as either  primary or  sec-
ondary .  Primary brain injuries are usually focal inju-
ries directly related to trauma, disrupting normal 
anatomy or physiology, or both. Four categories 
of primary brain injury are seen: (1)  subdural 
8
surgery and the surgeon begins the operation. If 
halted, attention should focus on transfusion-related 
eff orts. 
 Damage Control Surgery 
 If the trauma patient requires emergent laparotomy 
for intraabdominal hemorrhage, the trauma surgeon 
will perform an abbreviated procedure termed  dam-
age control surgery (DCS), which is intended to stop 
hemorrhage and limit gastrointestinal contamina-
tion of the abdominal compartment. Aft er making 
a midline incision, the surgeon quickly searches for 
sources of bleeding through a quadrant-by-quadrant 
examination. Communication between the surgeon 
and the anesthesiologist is essential in DCS; the sur-
geon must know if the patient is becoming unstable, 
hypothermic, or coagulopathic in spite of ongoing 
resuscitation during the operative procedure. Th e 
surgeon will usually compress or pack the area of 
bleeding if the patient is hypotensive, an interven-
tion that usually improves hemodynamics by slow-
ing hemorrhage and allowing more rapid restoration 
of circulating blood volume. If direct compression 
of the hemorrhaging intraabdominal tissue fails to 
improve hemodynamic stability, the surgeon can 
also slow the rate of hemorrhage by compressing the 
aorta. Compression of the aorta also provides tac-
tile information to the surgeon. Particularly in cir-
cumstances where invasive arterial monitoring was 
not accomplished, the surgeon’s fi ngers on the aor-
tic pulse can provide useful information regarding 
volume status: a soft , compressible aorta represents 
profound hypovolemia, whereas a fi rm, pulsatile 
aorta suggests more normal volume status. 
 Defi nitive repair of complex injuries is not part 
of DCS. Identifi cation and control of injured blood 
vessels and solid organs, as well as inspection of 
injuries in areas relatively inaccessible to midline 
approaches (eg, deep liver lacerations, retroperito-
neal hemorrhage) but potentially amenable to inter-
ventional radiology techniques, occurs during DCS 
laparotomy. Hollow viscus injuries are addressed 
with resection or stapling, or both, to prevent 
abdominal contamination, oft en leaving the intes-
tines disconnected until the patient is more stable. 
At that later time, bowel continuity can be restored 
or colostomy can be performed. At any time during 
816 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
to be associated with signifi cant edema, necrosis, 
and infarcts in the tissue surrounding the dam-
aged tissue. Intraparenchymal injury may coexist 
with a subdural hematoma. Th ere is no consensus 
regarding the surgical interventions that should be 
performed for intraparenchymal hemorrhage, but 
surgical decompression may be necessary to reduce 
dangerously sustained increased ICP. 
Diff use neuronal injury results from events 
resulting in rapid deceleration or movement of the 
brain tissue of suffi  cient force to disrupt neurons and 
axons. Th is form of brain injury is more common 
in children than in adults. Th e extent of the injury 
may not be obvious in the period soon aft er injury 
but will become apparent with serial clinical and 
radiographic (magnetic resonance imaging) exami-
nations. Th e greater the extent of diff use neuronal 
injury following trauma, the higher will be the mor-
tality and severe disability. Surgical interventions are 
not indicated for these injuries unless a decompres-
sive craniectomy is required for relief of refractory 
elevated ICP (see below). 
Secondary brain injuries are considered poten-
tially preventable injuries.  Systemic hypoten-
sion (systolic blood pressures <90 mm Hg), 
hypoxemia (Pa o 2 <60 mm Hg), hypercapnia (Pa co 2 
>50 mm Hg), and hyperthermia (temperature 
>38.0°C) have a negative impact on morbidity and 
mortality following head injuries, likely because of 
their contributions to increasing cerebral edema 
and ICP. Hypotension and hypoxia are recognized 
as major contributors to poor neurological recov-
ery from severe TBI. Hypoxia is the single most 
important parameter correlating to poor neuro-
logical outcomes following head trauma and should 
be corrected at the earliest possible opportunity. 
Hypotension (mean arterial blood pressure 
<60  mm Hg) should also be treated aggressively, 
using fl uid or vasopressors, or both, to assure cere-
bral perfusion. 
 Management Considerations 
 A. Intracranial Pressure 
 In the absence of a clot requiring evacuation, medi-
cal interventions are the primary means of treating 
elevated ICP following head trauma. 
10
hematoma; (2) epidural hematoma; (3) intraparen-
chymal hemorrhage; and (4) nonfocal, diff use neu-
ronal injury disrupting axons of the central nervous 
system. Th ese injuries potentially compromise cere-
bral blood fl ow and elevate intracranial pressure 
(ICP). Death occurring soon aft er signifi cant head 
trauma is usually a result of the primary brain injury. 
 Acute subdural hematoma is the most com-
mon condition warranting emergency neuro-
surgery and is associated with the highest mortality. 
Small bridging veins between the skull and brain 
are disrupted in deceleration or blunt force inju-
ries, resulting in blood accumulation and compres-
sion of brain tissue. Th e accumulation of blood 
raises ICP  and compromises cerebral blood fl ow. 
Morbidity and mortality are related to the size of 
the hematoma and magnitude of the midline shift  
of intracranial contents. Midline shift s of intracra-
nial contents may exceed the size of the hematoma, 
suggesting a signifi cant contribution of cerebral 
edema. Acute subdural hematomas should be sur-
gically evacuated, particularly in patients with ele-
vated ICP. 
 Epidural hematoma occurs when the middle 
cerebral artery or other cranial vessels are disrupted, 
most oft en in association with a skull fracture. Th is 
injury accounts for less than 10% of neurosurgi-
cal emergencies and has a much better prognosis 
than acute subdural hematoma. Th e patient with 
an epidural hematoma may initially be conscious-
ness, followed by progressive unresponsiveness and 
coma. Emergent surgical decompression is indi-
cated when supratentorial lesions occupy more than 
30 mL volume and infratentorial lesions occupy 
more than 10 mL volume (brainstem compression 
may occur at much lower hematoma volumes). A 
small epidural hematoma may not require imme-
diate evacuation if the patient is neurologically 
intact, if close observation and repeated neurologi-
cal examinations are possible, and if neurosurgical 
resources are available should emergent decompres-
sion become necessary. 
 Intraparenchymal injuries are caused by rapid 
deceleration of the brain within the skull, usu-
ally involving the tips of the frontal or temporal 
lobes. Th ey represent nearly 20% of neurosurgical 
emergencies following trauma. Th ese injuries tend 
9
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery
817
 Cerebral blood fl ow is related to arterial car-
bon dioxide concentration in a dose-dependent 
relationship. As arterial carbon dioxide levels 
decrease, cerebral vasoconstriction occurs, reduc-
ing ICP. Conversely, as arterial carbon dioxide levels 
rise, cerebral vasodilation occurs, increasing ICP. 
Changes in arterial carbon dioxide levels exert a 
prompt cerebral blood fl ow and ICP response, mak-
ing hyperventilation an eff ective intervention when 
brain herniation is suspected or proven. However, 
this intervention must be appreciated in the context 
of TBI: hyperventilation in the presence of systemic 
hypotension increases the risk of neurological isch-
emia and should be avoided in the early stages of 
resuscitation for patients with TBI. 
Osmotic diuretic therapy is another com-
monly used and widely accepted method for reduc-
ing elevated ICP. Intravenous mannitol doses of 
0.25–1.0 g/kg body weight are eff ective in draw-
ing intravascular fl uid into the vascular system. As 
extravascular fl uid is drawn into the vascular sys-
tem, brain edema and ICP will decrease. Because 
this intervention is very eff ective for inducing brisk 
diuresis, serum osmolarity and electrolytes (particu-
larly potassium) must be monitored. 
Barbiturate coma is an intervention that 
attempts to decrease cerebral metabolic rate, cerebral 
blood fl ow, and cerebral oxygen demand in order to 
reduce elevated ICP and suppress the metabolic rate 
of ischemic cells until cerebral perfusion improves. 
Hypotension is commonly associated with this ther-
apy, which should limit its use in the hemodynami-
cally unstable patient. Vasopressors may be used in 
order to maintain CPP between 50 and 70 mm Hg. 
Th e pentobarbital dose administered is based upon 
electroencephalographic evidence of burst suppres-
sion in order to maximally reduce the cerebral meta-
bolic rate of oxygen. 
 B. Severe TBI & Multiple Trauma 
 Th e presence of a severe head injury in the pres-
ence of other major traumatic injuries and ongo-
ing hemorrhage creates a situation in which patient 
management goals may confl ict. As noted above, 
in the head-injured patient requiring emergent 
decompression, mean blood pressures must be 
maintained between 50 and 70 mmHg to assure 
 Normal cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), the 
diff erence between mean arterial pressure (MAP, dis-
cussed in Chapter 26) and ICP (ie, MAP − ICP =
CPP), is approximately 10 mm Hg. ICP monitoring is 
not required for conscious and alert patients; in addi-
tion, patients who are intentionally anticoagulated or 
who have bleeding diathesis in response to trauma 
should not have ICP monitoring. However, an ICP 
monitor should be placed when serial neurological 
examinations and additional clinical assessments 
reveal impairment, or when there is an increased risk 
for elevated ICP ( Table 39–1 ). Interventions to 
reduce ICP are indicated when readings are higher 
than 20–25 mm Hg.  Although multiple studies 
have evaluated interventions aimed at improv-
ing CPP and managing ICP without fi nding obvious 
outcomes benefi t for any treatment scheme, current 
Brain Trauma Foundation guidelines recommend 
maintaining CPP between 50 and 70 mm Hg and 
ICP at less than 20 mm Hg for patients with severe 
head injury. 
11
 TABLE 391 Indications for intracranial ICP 
monitoring.  1 , 2  
Severe head injury (deﬁ ned as GCS score ≤8 after 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation)  plus 
 (a)  Abnormal admitting head CT scan  or 
(b)  Normal CT scan plus ≥2 of: age >40 y, systolic blood 
pressure >90 mm Hg, decerebrate or decorticate 
position 
Sedated patients; patient in induced coma after severe TBI
Multisystem injury with altered level of consciousness
Patient receiving treatment that increases risk of increased 
ICP, eg, high-volume IV ﬂ uids
Postoperatively after removal or intracranial mass
Abnormal values in noninvasive ICP monitoring, 
increased dynamics of simulated values, or abnormal 
shapes in transcranial Doppler blood ﬂ ow velocity 
waveform (increased pulsatility) with exclusion of arterial 
hypotension and hypocapnia
 1  ICP, intracranial pressure; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; CT, computed 
tomographic; TBI, traumatic brain injury.
 2  Reproduced, with permission, from Li LM, Timofeev I, Czosnyka M, 
et al: Review article: The surgical approach to the management of 
increased intracranial pressure after traumatic brain injury. Anesth 
Analg 2010;111:736.
818 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
calcaneus fractures also warrant a thorough thora-
columbar spine evaluation due to the increased inci-
dence of associated spinal fractures associated with 
this injury pattern. 
 Cervical spine injuries occurring above C2 are 
associated with apnea and death. Lesions of C3–5 
impact phrenic nerve function, impairing dia-
phragmatic breathing. High spinal injuries are oft en 
accompanied by neurogenic shock due to loss of 
sympathetic tone. Neurogenic shock may be masked 
initially in major trauma because hypotension may 
be attributed to a hemorrhagic, rather than a neu-
rologic, cause. Th e presence of profound bradycar-
dia 24–48 h aft er a high thoracic spinal cord lesion 
likely represents compromise of the cardioaccelera-
tor function found in the T1–4 region. 
 Th e principal therapeutic objectives following 
spinal cord injury are to prevent exacerbation of the 
primary structural injury and to minimize the risk 
of extending neurological injury from hypotension-
related hypoperfusion of ischemic areas of the spinal 
cord. In patients with complete spinal cord transec-
tion, very few interventions will infl uence recovery. 
In patients with incomplete spinal cord lesions, 
careful management of hemodynamic parameters 
and surgical stabilization of the spine are critical in 
preventing extension of the existing injury. 
 Methylprednisolone is oft en administered for 
spinal cord injury to reduce spinal cord edema in the 
tight confi nes of the spinal canal, although there is 
scant evidence that this intervention improves 
 outcomes following spinal cord injury in humans. 
While not considered a standard of care, it is included 
in the current clinical recommendations of the 
American Association of Neurological Surgeons as a 
treatment option.  Maintaining supranormal 
mean arterial blood pressures to assure spinal 
cord perfusion in areas of reduced blood fl ow due to 
cord compression or vascular compromise is likely 
to be of more benefi t than steroid administration. 
Hypotension must be avoided during induction of 
anesthesia and throughout surgical decompression 
and stabilization of a spinal injury. 
 Surgical decompression and stabilization of 
spinal fractures are indicated when a vertebral body 
loses more than 50% of its normal height or the 
spinal canal is narrowed by more than 30% of its 
12
adequate CPP and prevention of secondary isch-
emic neurological injuries. In patients without 
brain injury, hemorrhage is usually treated with a 
more hypotensive goal until bleeding is controlled. 
Deference is paid to the most life-threatening 
condition as the priority intervention with the 
expectation that CPP be maintained throughout, 
even if this approach results in greater transfusion 
requirements. 
 SPINAL CORD INJURY 
 Th e normal spine comprises three columns: ante-
rior, middle, and posterior. Th e anterior column 
includes the anterior two thirds of the vertebral 
body and the anterior longitudinal ligament. Th e 
middle column includes the posterior third of the 
vertebral body, the posterior longitudinal liga-
ment, and the posterior component of the annulus 
fi brosis. Th e posterior column includes the laminae 
and facets, the spinous processes, and the inter-
spinous ligaments. Spine instability results when 
two or more of the three columns are disrupted. 
Th e trauma patient with a relevant mechanism of 
injury (typically blunt force involving acceleration–
deceleration) must be approached with a high 
degree of suspicion for spine injury unless it has 
been ruled out radiographically. 
 A lateral radiograph of the cervical spine dem-
onstrating the entire cervical spine to the top of 
the T1 vertebra will detect 85–90% of signifi cant 
cervical spine abnormalities. Cervical spine radio-
graphs should be examined for the appearance 
and alignment of the vertebral bodies, narrowing 
or widening of interspinous spaces and the central 
canal, alignment along the anterior and posterior 
ligament lines, and appearance of the spinolaminar 
line and posterior spinous processes of C2 through 
C7. Th e presence of one spinal fracture is associ-
ated with a 10–15% incidence of a second spinal 
fracture. 
 Th oracolumbar injuries most commonly involve 
the T11 through L3 vertebrae as a result of fl exion 
forces. Th e presence of one thoracolumbar spinal 
injury is associated with a 40% chance of a sec-
ond fracture caudal to the fi rst, likely due to the 
force required to fracture the lower spine. Bilateral 
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery
819
body surface area to body mass ratio) and the elderly 
(whose thinner skin allows deeper burns from simi-
lar thermal insult) are at greater risk for major burn 
injury. Th e pathophysiological and hemodynamic 
responses to burn injuries are unique and warrant 
specialized burn care that can be optimally provided 
only at burn treatment centers, particularly when 
more than 20% of a patient’s body surface area is 
involved in second- or third-degree burns. A basic 
understanding of burn pathophysiology and of resus-
citation requirements, especially early initiation of 
therapies such as oxygen administration and aggres-
sive fl uid resuscitation, will improve patient survival. 
 Burns are classifi ed as fi rst, second, or third 
degree.  First-degree burns are injuries that do not 
penetrate the epidermis (eg, sunburns and superfi cial 
thermal injuries). Fluid replacement for these burns 
is not necessary, and the area of fi rst-degree burns 
should not be included in calculating fl uid replace-
ment requirements when extensive, more signifi cant 
burns are also present.  Second-degree burns are par-
tial-thickness injuries (superfi cial or deep) that pen-
etrate the epidermis, extend into the dermis for some 
depth, and are associated with blistering. Fluid 
replacement therapy is indicated for patients with 
second-degree burns when more than 20% of total 
body surface area (TBSA) is involved. Skin graft ing 
also may be necessary in some cases of second-degree 
burns, depending upon size and location of the 
wounds.  Th ird-degree burns are those in which the 
thermal injury penetrates the full thickness of the 
dermis. Nerves, blood vessels, lymphatic channels, 
and other deep structures may have been destroyed, 
creating a severe, but insensate, wound (although 
surrounding tissue may be very painful). Debridement 
and skin graft ing are nearly always required for 
recovery of patients from third-degree burns. 
 Major burns (a second- or third-degree burn 
involving >20% TBSA) induce a unique hemo-
dynamic response. Cardiac output declines by up to 
50% within 30 minutes in response to massive vaso-
constriction, inducing a state of normovolemic 
hypoperfusion ( burn shock ). Survival depends on 
restoration of circulating volume and infusion of 
crystalloid fl uids according to recommended proto-
cols (see below). Th is intense hemodynamic 
response may be poorly tolerated by patients with 
13
normal diameter. Despite outcome studies from ani-
mal models of traumatic spinal cord injury demon-
strating benefi t from early surgical intervention or 
steroid therapy, or both, current human studies have 
failed to demonstrate signifi cant benefi t from either 
intervention. Currently, the presence of a decom-
pressible lesion in the area of an incomplete spinal 
cord transection is not an indication for early opera-
tive intervention unless other, more life-threatening, 
conditions are present. 
 Th e elderly are at greater risk for spinal cord 
injury due to decreased mobility and fl exibility, a 
higher incidence of spondylosis and osteophyte 
formation in the degenerative spine, and decreased 
intracanal space accommodating spinal cord edema 
following cord trauma. Th e incidence of spinal 
injury from falls in the elderly is rapidly approaching 
that of spinal cord injury from motor vehicle acci-
dents in younger patients. Mortality following spinal 
cord injury in the elderly, particularly those over the 
age of 75 years, is higher than that in younger coun-
terparts with similar injury. 
 Th e unique injury pattern of penetrating spinal 
cord injury warrants consideration. Unlike blunt 
spinal trauma, penetrating trauma of the spinal cord 
due to bullets and shrapnel is unlikely to induce 
an unstable spine. As a result, C-collar and long-
board immobilization may not be indicated. In fact, 
C-collar placement in the presence of a cervical spine 
penetrating injury may hinder observation of soft 
tissue swelling, tracheal deviation, or other anatomic 
indications of imminent airway compromise. Unlike 
blunt trauma, penetrating injuries of the spinal cord 
induce damage at the moment of injury without risk 
of subsequent exacerbation of the injury. Like other 
spinal cord injuries, however, maintenance of spi-
nal cord perfusion using supranormal mean arterial 
pressures is indicated until spinal cord function can 
be more fully evaluated. 
 BURNS 
 Burns represent a unique but common traumatic 
injury that is second only to motor vehicle acci-
dents as the leading source of accidental death. 
Temperature and duration of heat contact determine 
the extent of burn injury. Children (because of a high 
820 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Management Considerations 
 Th e Parkland and modifi ed Brooke protocols both 
use urine output as an indicator for adequate fl uid 
resuscitation. However, circumstances may arise in 
which the volume of fl uid administered exceeds the 
intended volumes. For example, initial fl uid resusci-
tation volumes may be miscalculated if fi rst-degree 
burns are mistakenly incorporated into the TBSA 
value. Prolonged use of sedatives and sedative infu-
sions may also result in hypotension that is treated 
with additional fl uids rather than vasoconstrictors. 
Th e phenomenon of  fl uid creep occurs when intra-
venous fl uid therapy volumes are increased beyond 
intended calculations in response to various hemo-
dynamic changes. Fluid creep is associated with 
abdominal compartment syndrome and pulmo-
nary complications, which represent resuscitation 
morbidity. 
 A. Abdominal Compartment Syndrome 
 Abdominal compartment syndrome is a risk for 
pediatric patients, adults with circumferential 
abdominal burns, and patients receiving intrave-
nous fl uid volumes greater than 6 mL/kg/% TBSA. 
Intraabdominal pressure can be determined by 
measuring intraluminal bladder pressure using a 
Foley catheter. Th e transducer is connected to a 
3-way stopcock at the point where the Foley cath-
eter connects to the drainage tube. Aft er the trans-
ducer is zeroed at the pelvic brim, 20 mL of fl uid 
is instilled to distend the bladder. Intraabdominal 
pressure readings are taken 60 s aft er fl uid installa-
tion, allowing the bladder to relax. Intraabdominal 
pressures exceeding 20 mmHg warrant abdominal 
cavity decompression. However, an abdominal sur-
gical procedure places the burn patient at high risk 
for intraabdominal  Pseudomonas infection, particu-
larly if the laparotomy incision is near burned tissue. 
 B. Pulmonary Complications 
 Excessive resuscitative fl uid volumes are associated 
with an increased incidence of pneumonia. Patients 
with severe burns frequently have pulmonary injury 
related to the burn. Decreased tracheal ciliary activ-
ity, the presence of resuscitation-induced pulmo-
nary edema, reduced immunocompetence, and 
tracheal intubation predispose the burn patient to 
signifi cant underlying medical conditions. If intra-
venous fl uid therapy is provided, cardiac function 
returns to normal within 48 h of the injury, then 
typically progresses to a hyperdynamic physiology 
as the metabolic challenge of healing begins. Plasma 
volume and urine output are also reduced early on 
aft er major burn injuries. 
 In contrast to fl uid management for blunt and 
penetrating trauma, which discourages use of 
crystalloid fl uids, burn fl uid resuscitation empha-
sizes the use of crystalloids, particularly lactated 
Ringer’s solution, in preference to albumin, hydroxy-
ethyl starch, hypertonic saline, and blood. Following 
burn injuries, kidney failure is more common when 
hypertonic saline is used during initial fl uid resusci-
tation, death is higher when blood is administered, 
and outcomes are unchanged when albumin is used 
in resuscitation. 
 Fluid resuscitation is continuous over the fi rst 
24 h following injury. Two formulas are commonly 
used to guide burn injury fl uid resuscitation, the 
Parkland and the modifi ed Brooke. Both require 
an understanding of the so-called  rule of nines 
( Figure 39–6 ) to calculate resuscitation volumes. Th e 
(adult)  Parkland protocol recommends 4 mL/kg/% 
TBSA burned to be given in the fi rst 24 h, with half 
the volume given in the fi rst 8 h and the remaining 
amount over the following 16 h. Th e (adult)  modi-
fi ed Brooke protocol recommends 2 mL/kg/% TBSA, 
with administration of half the calculated volume 
beginning in the fi rst 8 h and the remainder over 
the following 16 h. Both formulas use urine output 
as a reliable indicator of fl uid resuscitation, target-
ing (adult) urine production of 0.5–1.0 mL/kg/h as 
indications of adequate circulating volume. If adult 
urine output exceeds 1.0 mL/kg/h, the infusion is 
slowed. In both protocols, an amount equal to half 
the volume administered in the fi rst 24 h is infused 
in the second 24-h period following injury, with con-
tinued attention to maintaining adult urine output at 
0.5–1.0 mL/kg/h. Th e formula for fl uid resuscitation 
of children is the same as that for adults, but children 
weighing less than 30 kg should receive 5% dextrose 
in Ringer’s lactate as their resuscitation fl uid and tar-
get urine output should be 1.0 mL/kg/h. Th e target 
urine output for infants younger than 1 year of age 
is 1–2 mL/kg/h. 
14
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery 
821 
Fluid administration that exceeds recommenda-
tions warrants careful review of the rationale for the 
increased fl uid therapy volume, including assess-
ment of possible causes for hypotension (eg, sepsis) 
or reduced urine output (eg, abdominal compart-
ment syndrome). 
pneumonia. Abdominal compartment syndrome 
can have an adverse impact on pulmonary function. 
Intravenous fl uid administration volumes must be 
monitored closely and documented to be consistent 
with American Burn Association recommendations 
(ie, the Parkland or modifi ed Brooke protocol). 
 FIGURE 396  The rule of 
nines, utilized to estimate burned 
surface area as a percentage of 
total body surface area (TBSA). 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from 
American College of Surgeons:  ATLS: 
Advanced Trauma Life Support for 
Doctors (Student Course Manual) , 
9th ed. ACS, 2012.) 
Pediatric
Adult
9%
18%
18%
4.5%
4.5%
7%
2.5%
4.5%
4.5%
4.5%
9%
4.5%
13%
18%
9%
2.5%
7%
7%
7%
4.5%
4.5%
4.5%
4.5%
9%
9%
9%
1%
822 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Mechanical ventilation should be adjusted to aff ord 
adequate oxygenation at the lowest tidal volumes. 
 Tracheal intubation in the early period follow-
ing burn injury (up to the fi rst 48 h) can be facili-
tated with succinylcholine for paralysis. In patients 
with signifi cant burns (>20% TBSA), injuries and 
disruption of neuromuscular end plates occur fol-
lowed by upregulation of acetylcholine receptors. 
 Beyond 48 h aft er a major burn, succinylcho-
line administration is likely to produce poten-
tially lethal elevation of serum potassium levels. 
 Analgesia for burn patients is challenging 
because of concerns about opioid tolerance and psy-
chosocial complications. Multimodal approaches are 
oft en advantageous. Regional analgesia may provide 
benefi t, although in the early postburn period this 
technique may mask the symptoms of compartment 
syndrome or other clinical signs and symptoms. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Beekley AC: Damage control resuscitation: A sensible 
approach to the exsanguinating surgical patient. Crit 
Care Med 2008;36:S267. 
 Bratton SL, Chestnut RM, Ghajar J, et al: Guidelines for 
the management of severe traumatic brain injury. 
IX. Cerebral perfusion thresholds. J Neurotrauma 
2007;24:S59. 
 Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Davenport RA: Acute coagulopathy 
of trauma: Mechanism, identifi cation and eff ect. Curr 
Opin Crit Care 2007;13:680. 
 Chi JH, Knudson MM, Vassar MJ, et al: Prehospital 
hypoxia aff ects outcome in patients with traumatic 
brain injury: A prospective multicenter study. 
J Trauma 2006;61:1134. 
 Cotton BA, Au BK, Nunez TC, et al: Predefi ned massive 
transfusion protocols are associated with a reduction 
in organ failure and postinjury complications. 
J Trauma 2009;66:41. 
 Cotton BA, Dossett LA, Haut ER, et al: Multicenter 
validation of a simplifi ed score to predict massive 
transfusion in trauma. J Trauma 2010;69:S33. 
 Dimar JR, Carreon LY, Riina J, et al: Early versus late 
stabilization of the spine in the polytrauma patient. 
Spine 2010;35:S187. 
 Griff ee MJ, DeLoughery TG, Th orborg PA: Coagulation 
management in massive bleeding. Curr Opin 
Anesthesiol 2010;23:263. 
 Hendrickson JE, Hillyer CD: Noninfectious serious 
hazards of transfusion. Anesth Analg 2009;108:759. 
16
 C. Carbon Monoxide Poisoning 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning should be con-
sidered in all serious burn injury cases, as well 
as with lesser TBSA burns occurring in enclosed 
spaces. Unconsciousness or decreased levels of con-
sciousness following burn injuries should be pre-
sumed to represent carbon monoxide poisoning, 
prompting endotracheal intubation and mechanical 
ventilation with high inspired concentration oxy-
gen therapy. Carbon monoxide binds to hemoglo-
bin with an affi  nity approximately 250 times that of 
oxygen. Th e resultant carboxyhemoglobin (HbCO) 
leaves less hemoglobin available to bind with oxygen 
(HbO 2 ) and shift s the O 2 –Hb dissociation curve to 
the left ; both of these processes result in impaired 
availability of oxygen molecules at the local tissue 
level. Pulse oximetry provides a falsely elevated 
indication of oxygen saturation in the setting of 
carbon monoxide exposure because of its inability 
to distinguish between HbO 2 and HbCO. If carbon 
monoxide poisoning is suspected, HbCO can be 
directly measured via arterial or venous blood gas 
analysis. HbCO concentrations below 10% are usu-
ally not clinically signifi cant. However, with high 
inspired oxygen concentrations, HbCO levels of 
20% correspond to a hemoglobin oxygen satura-
tion of 80%; intubation and mechanical ventilation 
is indicated in such circumstances to improve local 
tissue oxygenation and enhance carbon monoxide 
elimination. Death from carbon monoxide poison-
ing occurs at HbCO levels of 60%. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 A primary characteristic of all burn patients is an 
inability to regulate temperature. Th e resuscitation 
environment must be maintained near body tem-
perature through the use of radiant warming, forced 
air warming devices, and fl uid warming devices. 
 Assessment of the patient begins with inspec-
tion of the airway. Although the face may be burned 
(singed facial hair, nasal vibrissae), facial burns are 
not an indication for tracheal intubation. Th e need 
for urgent airway management, mechanical venti-
lation, and oxygen therapy is indicated by hoarse 
voice, dyspnea, tachypnea, or altered level of con-
sciousness. Arterial blood gases should be obtained 
early in the treatment process to assess HbCO levels. 
15
 
CHAPTER 39 Anesthesia for Trauma & Emergency Surgery 
823 
 Miko I, Gould R, Wolf S, Afi fi  S: Acute spinal cord injury. 
Int Anesthesiol Clinic 2009;47:37. 
 Perkins JG, Cap AP, Weiss BM, et al: Massive transfusion 
and nonsurgical hemostatic agents. Crit Care Med 
2008;36:S325. 
 Pull ter Gunne AF, Skolasky RL, Cohen DB: Fracture 
characteristics predict patient mortality aft er 
blunt force cervical trauma. Eur J Emerg Med 
2010;17:107. 
 Sihler KC, Napolitano LM: Complications of massive 
transfusion. Chest 2011;137:209. 
 Snyder CW, Weinberg JA, McGwin G, Jr., et al: Th e 
relationship of blood product ratio to mortality: 
Survival benefi t or survival bias? J Trauma 
2009;66:358. 
 Stuke LE, Pons PT, Guy JS, et al: Prehospital spine 
immobilization for penetrating trauma—review 
and recommendations from the prehospital 
trauma life support executive committee. J Trauma 
2011;71:763. 
 Holcomb JB: Damage control resuscitation. J Trauma 
2007;62:S36. 
 Ipaktchi K, Arbabi S: Advances in burn critical care. Crit 
Care Med 2006;34:S239. 
 Kashuk JL, Moore EE, Sawyer M, et al: Postinjury 
coagulopathy management: Goal-directed 
resuscitation via POC thrombelastography. Ann Surg 
2010;251:604. 
 Kortbeek JB, Al Turki SA, Ali J, et al: Advanced trauma 
life support, 8th edition, the evidence for change. J 
Trauma 2008;64:1638. 
 Li LM, Timofeev I, Czosnyka M, et al: Th e surgical 
approach to the management of increased intracranial 
pressure aft er traumatic brain injury. Anesth Analg 
2010;111:736. 
 MacLeod JB, Lynn M, McKenney MG, et al: Early 
coagulopathy predicts mortality in trauma. J Trauma 
2003;55:39. 
 Magnotti LJ, Zarzaur BL, Fischer PE, et al: Improved 
survival aft er hemostatic resuscitation: does the 
emperor have no clothes? J Trauma 2011;70:97. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 825
40
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Maternal & Fetal 
Physiology & Anesthesia 
 Michael A. Frölich, MD, MS 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 
progressively decreases during pregnancy—
at term, by as much as 40%—for all general 
anesthetic agents; MAC returns to normal by 
the third day after delivery. 
 Pregnant patients display enhanced 
sensitivity to local anesthetics during 
regional anesthesia and analgesia, and neural 
blockade occurs at reduced concentrations 
of local anesthetics; dose requirements may 
be reduced as much as 30%. 
 Obstruction of the inferior vena cava by 
the enlarging uterus distends the epidural 
venous plexus and increases the risk of 
intravascular injection during epidural 
anesthesia. 
 Approximately 5% of women at term 
develop the supine hypotension syndrome, 
which is characterized by hypotension 
associated with pallor, sweating, or nausea 
and vomiting. The incidence of maternal 
hypotension syndrome may be higher in 
women receiving neuraxial analgesia. 
 The reduction in gastric motility and 
gastroesophageal sphincter tone place the 
parturient at high risk for regurgitation and 
pulmonary aspiration. 
 Ephedrine, which has considerable 
β-adrenergic activity, has traditionally been 
1
2
3
4
5
6
considered the vasopressor of choice for 
hypotension during pregnancy. However, 
clinical studies suggest that α-adrenergic 
agonists such as phenylephrine and 
metaraminol are just as eﬀ ective in treating 
hypotension in pregnant patients and are 
associated with less fetal acidosis than 
ephedrine. 
 Volatile inhalational anesthetics 
decrease blood pressure and, potentially, 
uteroplacental blood ﬂ ow. In concentrations 
of less than 1 MAC, however, their eﬀ ects 
are generally minor, consisting of dose-
dependent uterine relaxation and minor 
reductions in uterine blood ﬂ ow. 
 The greatest strain on the parturient’s heart 
occurs immediately after delivery, when 
intense uterine contraction and involution 
suddenly relieve inferior vena caval 
obstruction and increase cardiac output 
as much as 80% above late third trimester 
values. 
 Current techniques employing very dilute 
combinations of a local anesthetic (eg, 
bupivacaine, 0.125% or less) and an opioid 
(eg, fentanyl, 5 mcg/mL or less) for epidural 
or combined spinal–epidural (CSE) analgesia 
do not appear to prolong the ﬁ rst stage 
of labor or increase the likelihood of an 
operative delivery. 
7
8
9
826 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Central Nervous System Eﬀ ects 
 Th e minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 
progressively decreases during pregnancy—
at term, by as much as 40%—for all general anes-
thetic agents; MAC returns to normal by the third 
day aft er delivery. Changes in maternal hormonal 
and endogenous opioid levels have been impli-
cated. Progesterone, which is sedating when given 
in pharmacological doses, increases up to 20 times 
normal at term and is at least partly responsible 
for this observation. A surge in β-endorphin 
levels during labor and delivery also likely plays 
a major role. 
 Pregnant patients also display enhanced sen-
sitivity to local anesthetics during regional 
anesthesia and analgesia, and neural blockade 
occurs at reduced concentrations of local anesthet-
ics. Th e term minimum local analgesic concentra-
tion (MLAC) is used in obstetric anesthesia to 
compare the relative potencies of local anesthetics 
and the eff ects of additives; MLAC is defi ned as the 
local analgesic concentration leading to satisfac-
tory analgesia in 50% of patients (EC 50 ). Local 
anesthetic dose requirements during epidural anes-
thesia may be reduced as much as 30%, a phenom-
enon that appears to be hormonally mediated but 
may also be related to engorgement of the epidural 
venous plexus.  Obstruction of the inferior 
vena cava by the enlarging uterus distends 
the epidural venous plexus and increases epidural 
blood volume. Th e latter has three major eff ects: 
(1) decreased spinal cerebrospinal fl uid volume, 
(2) decreased potential volume of the epidural 
space, and (3) increased epidural (space) pressure. 
Th e fi rst two eff ects enhance the cephalad spread of 
local anesthetic solutions during spinal and epi-
dural anesthesia, respectively, whereas the last may 
complicate identifi cation of the epidural space (see 
Chapter 45). Bearing down during labor further 
accentuates all these eff ects. Positive (rather than 
the usual negative) epidural pressures have been 
recorded in parturients. Engorgement of the epi-
dural veins also increases the likelihood of placing 
an epidural needle or catheter in a vein, resulting in 
an unintentional intravascular injection. It is 
unclear whether pregnancy lowers the seizure 
threshold for local anesthetics. 
1
2
3
 Th is chapter reviews the normal physiological 
changes associated with pregnancy, labor, and de-
livery. It concludes with a description of the physi-
ological transition from fetal to neonatal life. 
 PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES 
DURING PREGNANCY 
 Pregnancy aff ects most organ systems ( Table 40–1 ). 
Many of these physiological changes appear to be 
adaptive and useful to the mother in tolerating the 
stresses of pregnancy, labor, and delivery. Other 
changes lack obvious benefi ts but nonetheless require 
special consideration in caring for the parturient. 
 TABLE 401 Average maximum physiological 
changes associated with pregnancy. 1 
Parameter
Change
 Neurological 
MAC
−40%
 Respiratory 
Oxygen consumption
Airway resistance
FRC
Minute ventilation
Tidal volume
Respiratory rate
Pa O 2 
Pa CO 2 
HCO 3 
+20 to 50%
−35%
−20%
+50%
+40%
+15%
+10%
−15%
−15%
 Cardiovascular 
Blood volume
Plasma volume
Cardiac output
Stroke volume
Heart rate
Systolic blood pressure
Diastolic blood pressure
Peripheral resistance
Pulmonary resistance
+35%
+55%
+40%
+30%
+20%
−5%
−15%
−15%
−30%
 Hematologic 
Hemoglobin
Platelets
Clotting factors 2 
−20%
−10%
+30 to 250%
 Renal 
GFR
+50%
1 MAC, minimum alveolar concentration; FRC, functional residual 
 capacity; GFR, glomerular ﬁ ltration rate.
2 Varies with each factor.
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
827 
 Respiratory Eﬀ ects 
 Oxygen consumption and minute ventilation pro-
gressively increase during pregnancy. Tidal volume 
and, to a lesser extent, respiratory rate and inspi-
ratory reserve volume also increase. By term, both 
oxygen consumption and minute ventilation have 
increased up to 50%. Pa co 2 decreases to 28–32 mm 
Hg; signifi cant respiratory alkalosis is prevented 
by a compensatory decrease in plasma bicarbonate 
concentration. Hyperventilation may also increase 
Pa o 2 slightly. Elevated levels of 2,3-diphosphoglyc-
erate off set the eff ect of hyperventilation on hemo-
globin’s affi  nity for oxygen (see Chapter 23). Th e P 50 
for hemoglobin increases from 27 to 30 mm Hg; the 
combination of the latter with an increase in cardiac 
output (see section on Cardiovascular Eff ects below) 
enhances oxygen delivery to tissues. 
 Th e maternal respiratory pattern changes as 
the uterus enlarges. In the third trimester, elevation 
of the diaphragm is compensated by an increase in 
the anteroposterior diameter of the chest; diaphrag-
matic motion, however, is not restricted. Th oracic 
breathing is favored over abdominal breathing. Both 
vital capacity and closing capacity are minimally 
aff ected, but functional residual capacity (FRC) 
decreases up to 20% at term; FRC returns to normal 
within 48 h of delivery. Th is decrease is principally 
due to a reduction in expiratory reserve volume as 
a result of larger than normal tidal volumes. Flow–
volume loops are unaff ected, and airway resistance 
decreases. Physiological dead space decreases but 
intrapulmonary shunting increases toward term. A 
chest fi lm may show prominent vascular markings 
due to increased pulmonary blood volume and an 
elevated diaphragm. Pulmonary vasodilation pre-
vents pulmonary pressures from rising. 
 Th e combination of decreased FRC and 
increased oxygen consumption promotes rapid 
oxygen desaturation during periods of apnea. 
Preoxygenation (denitrogenation) prior to induc-
tion of general anesthesia is therefore mandatory 
to avoid hypoxemia in pregnant patients. Closing 
volume exceeds FRC in some pregnant women 
when they are supine at term. Under these condi-
tions, atelectasis and hypoxemia readily occur. Th e 
decrease in FRC coupled with the increase in minute 
ventilation accelerates the uptake of all inhalational 
anesthetics. Th e reduction in dead space narrows 
the arterial end-tidal CO 2 gradient. 
 Capillary engorgement of the respiratory mucosa 
during pregnancy predisposes the upper airways to 
trauma, bleeding, and obstruction. Gentle laryngos-
copy and smaller endotracheal tubes (6–6.5 mm) 
should be employed during general anesthesia. 
 Cardiovascular Eﬀ ects 
 Cardiac output and blood volume increase to meet 
accelerated maternal and fetal metabolic demands. 
An increase (55%) in plasma volume in excess of an 
increase in red cell mass (45%) produces dilutional 
anemia and reduces blood viscosity. Hemoglobin 
concentration, however, usually remains greater 
than 11 g/dL. Moreover, in terms of tissue oxygen 
delivery, the reduction in hemoglobin concentration 
is off set by the increase in cardiac output and the 
rightward shift  of the hemoglobin dissociation curve 
(see the section on Respiratory Eff ects). A decrease 
in systemic vascular resistance by the second trimes-
ter decreases both diastolic and, to a lesser degree, 
systolic blood pressure. Th e response to adrenergic 
agents and vasoconstrictors is blunted. 
 At term, blood volume has increased by 
1000–1500 mL in most women, allowing them to 
easily tolerate the blood loss associated with deliv-
ery; total blood volume reaches 90 mL/kg. Average 
blood loss during vaginal delivery is 400–500 mL, 
compared with 800–1000 mL for a cesarean sec-
tion. Blood volume does not return to normal until 
1–2 weeks aft er delivery. 
 Th e increase in cardiac output (40% at term) 
is due to increases in both heart rate (20%) and 
stroke volume (30%). Cardiac chambers enlarge 
and myocardial hypertrophy is oft en noted on echo-
cardiography. Pulmonary artery, central venous, 
and pulmonary artery wedge pressures remain 
unchanged. Most of these eff ects are observed in 
the fi rst and, to a lesser extent, the second trimes-
ter. In the third trimester, cardiac output does not 
appreciably rise, except during labor. Th e greatest 
increases in cardiac output are seen during labor and 
immediately aft er delivery (see the section on Eff ect 
of Labor on Maternal Physiology). Cardiac output 
oft en does not return to normal until 2 weeks aft er 
delivery. 
828 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
respectively. A decreased renal tubular threshold 
for glucose and amino acids is common and oft en 
results in mild glycosuria (1–10 g/d) or proteinuria 
(<300 mg/d), or both. Plasma osmolality decreases 
by 8–10 mOsm/kg. 
 Gastroesophageal refl ux and esophagitis are 
common during pregnancy. Gastric motility is 
reduced, and upward and anterior displacement of 
the stomach by the uterus promotes incompetence 
of the gastroesophageal sphincter.  Th ese fac-
tors place the parturient at high risk for regur-
gitation and pulmonary aspiration. However, neither 
gastric acidity nor gastric volume changes signifi -
cantly during pregnancy. Opioids and anticholiner-
gics reduce lower esophageal sphincter pressure, 
may facilitate gastroesophageal refl ux, and delay 
gastric emptying. 
 Hepatic Eﬀ ects 
 Overall hepatic function and blood fl ow are 
unchanged; minor elevations in serum trans-
aminases and lactic dehydrogenase levels may be 
observed in the third trimester. Mild elevations in 
serum alkaline phosphatase are due to its secretion 
by the placenta. A mild decrease in serum albu-
min is due to an expanded plasma volume, and as a 
result, colloid oncotic pressure is reduced. A 25–30% 
decrease in serum pseudocholinesterase activity is 
also present at term but rarely produces signifi cant 
prolongation of succinylcholine’s action. Th e break-
down of ester-type local anesthetics is not apprecia-
bly altered. Pseudocholinesterase activity may not 
return to normal until up to 6 weeks postpartum. 
High progesterone levels appear to inhibit the release 
of cholecystokinin, resulting in incomplete emptying 
of the gallbladder. Th e latter, together with altered 
bile acid composition, can predispose to the forma-
tion of cholesterol gallstones during pregnancy. 
 Hematological Eﬀ ects 
 Pregnancy is associated with a hypercoagulable 
state that may be benefi cial in limiting blood loss at 
delivery. Fibrinogen and concentrations of factors 
VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII all increase; only factor XI 
levels may decrease. Accelerated fi brinolysis can be 
observed late in the third trimester. In addition to the 
dilutional anemia (see the section on Cardiovascular 
5
 Decreases in cardiac output can occur in the 
supine position aft er week 20 of pregnancy. Such 
decreases have been shown to be secondary to 
impeded venous return to the heart as the enlarging 
uterus 
compresses 
the 
inferior 
vena 
cava. 
 Approximately 5% of women at term develop 
the supine hypotension syndrome (aortocaval 
compression), which is characterized by hypoten-
sion associated with pallor, sweating, or nausea and 
vomiting. Th e cause of this syndrome appears to be 
complete or near-complete occlusion of the inferior 
vena cava by the gravid uterus. When combined 
with the hypotensive eff ects of regional or general 
anesthesia, aortocaval compression can readily pro-
duce fetal asphyxia. Turning the patient on her side 
typically restores venous return from the lower body 
and corrects the hypotension in such instances. Th is 
maneuver is most readily accomplished by placing a 
wedge (>15°) under the right hip. Th e gravid uterus 
also compresses the aorta in most parturients when 
they are supine. Th is latter eff ect decreases blood 
fl ow to the lower extremities and, more importantly, 
to the uteroplacental circulation. Uterine contrac-
tion reduces caval compression but exacerbates aor-
tic compression. 
 Chronic partial caval obstruction in the third 
trimester predisposes to venous stasis, phlebitis, and 
edema in the lower extremities. Moreover, compres-
sion of the inferior vena cava below the diaphragm 
distends and increases blood fl ow through the para-
vertebral venous plexus (including the epidural 
veins), and to a minor degree, the abdominal wall. 
 Lastly, elevation of the diaphragm shift s the 
heart’s position in the chest, resulting in the appear-
ance of an enlarged heart on a plain chest fi lm and 
in left  axis deviation and T wave changes on the elec-
trocardiogram. Physical examination oft en reveals 
a systolic ejection fl ow murmur (grade I or II) and 
exaggerated splitting of the fi rst heart sound (S 1 ); a 
third heart sound (S 3 ) may be audible. A few patients 
develop small, asymptomatic pericardial eff usion. 
 Renal & Gastrointestinal Eﬀ ects 
 Renal plasma fl ow and the glomerular fi ltra-
tion rate increase during pregnancy, and as a 
result serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen 
may decrease to 0.5–0.6 mg/dL and 8–9 mg/dL, 
4
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
829
both adequate uterine blood fl ow and normal pla-
cental function. 
 Uterine Blood Flow 
 At term, uterine blood fl ow represents about 10% of 
the cardiac output, or 600–700 mL/min (compared 
with 50 mL/min in the nonpregnant uterus). Eighty 
percent of uterine blood fl ow normally supplies the 
placenta; the remainder goes to the myometrium. 
Pregnancy maximally dilates the uterine vascula-
ture, so that autoregulation is absent, but the uterine 
vasculature remains sensitive to α-adrenergic ago-
nists. Uterine blood fl ow is not usually signifi cantly 
aff ected by respiratory gas tensions, but extreme 
hypocapnia (Pa co 2 <20 mm Hg) can reduce uterine 
blood fl ow and causes fetal hypoxemia and acidosis. 
 Blood fl ow is directly proportionate to the dif-
ference between uterine arterial and venous pres-
sures but inversely proportionate to uterine vascular 
resistance. Although not under appreciable neural 
control, the uterine vasculature has α-adrenergic 
and possibly some β-adrenergic receptors. 
 Th ree major factors decrease uterine blood fl ow 
during pregnancy: (1) systemic hypotension, 
(2) uterine vasoconstriction, and (3) uterine contrac-
tions. Common causes of hypotension during preg-
nancy include aortocaval compression, hypovolemia, 
and sympathetic blockade following regional anes-
thesia. Stress-induced release of endogenous cate-
cholamines (sympathoadrenal activation) during 
labor causes uterine arterial vasoconstriction. Any 
drug with α-adrenergic activity (eg, phenylephrine) 
potentially is capable of decreasing uterine blood 
fl ow by vasoconstriction.  Ephedrine, which 
has considerable β-adrenergic activity, has tra-
ditionally been considered the vasopressor of choice 
for hypotension during pregnancy. However, clinical 
studies suggest that α-adrenergic agonists such as 
phenylephrine and metaraminol are just as eff ective 
in treating hypotension in pregnant patients and are 
associated with less fetal acidosis than ephedrine. 
 Paradoxically, hypertensive disorders are oft en 
associated with decreased uterine blood fl ow due to 
generalized vasoconstriction. Uterine contractions 
decrease uterine blood fl ow by elevating uterine 
venous pressure and compressing arterial ves-
sels as they traverse the myometrium. Hypertonic 
6
Eff ects), leukocytosis (up to 21,000/µL) and a 10% 
decrease in platelet count may be encountered dur-
ing the third trimester. Because of fetal utilization, 
iron and folate defi ciency anemias readily develop if 
supplements of these nutrients are not taken. 
 Metabolic Eﬀ ects 
 Complex metabolic and hormonal changes occur 
during pregnancy. Altered carbohydrate, fat, and 
protein metabolism favors fetal growth and devel-
opment. Th ese changes resemble starvation, because 
blood glucose and amino acid levels are low whereas 
free fatty acids, ketones, and triglyceride levels are 
high. Nonetheless, pregnancy is a diabetogenic 
state; insulin levels steadily rise during pregnancy. 
Secretion of human placental lactogen, also called 
human chorionic somatomammotropin, by the pla-
centa is probably responsible for the relative insulin 
resistance associated with pregnancy. Pancreatic beta 
cell hyperplasia occurs in response to an increased 
demand for insulin secretion. 
 Secretion of human chorionic gonadotropin and 
elevated levels of estrogens promote hypertrophy of 
the thyroid gland and increase thyroid- binding globu-
lin; although T 4 and T 3 levels are elevated, free T 4 , free 
T 3 , and thyrotropin (thyroid- stimulating hormone) 
remain normal. Serum calcium levels decrease, but 
ionized calcium concentration remains normal. 
 Musculoskeletal Eﬀ ects 
 Elevated levels of relaxin throughout pregnancy help 
prepare for delivery by soft ening the cervix, inhib-
iting uterine contractions, and relaxing the pubic 
symphysis and pelvic joints. Ligamentous laxity of 
the spine increases the risk of back injury. Th e lat-
ter may contribute to the relatively high incidence of 
back pain during pregnancy. 
 UTEROPLACENTAL 
CIRCULATION 
 A normal uteroplacental circulation ( Figure 40–1 ) 
is critical in the development and maintenance of 
a healthy fetus. Uteroplacental insuffi  ciency is an 
important cause of intrauterine fetal growth retarda-
tion, and when severe, can result in fetal demise. Th e 
integrity of this circulation is, in turn, dependent on 
830 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
spaces (intervillous spaces). As a result of this arrange-
ment, the fetal capillaries within villi readily exchange 
substances with the maternal blood that bathes them. 
Maternal blood in the intervillous spaces is derived 
from spiral branches of the uterine artery and drains 
into the uterine veins. Fetal blood within villi is derived 
from the umbilical cord via two umbilical arteries and 
returns to the fetus via a single umbilical vein. 
 B. Placental Exchange 
 Placental exchange can occur by one of six mecha-
nisms: 
 1. Diff usion —Respiratory gases and small ions 
are transported by diff usion. Most drugs used in 
contractions during labor or during oxytocin infu-
sions can critically compromise uterine blood fl ow. 
 Placental Function 
 Th e fetus is dependent on the placenta for respira-
tory gas exchange, nutrition, and waste elimination. 
Th e placenta is formed by both maternal and fetal 
tissues and derives a blood supply from each. Th e 
resulting exchange membrane has a functional area 
of about 1.8 m 2 . 
 A. Physiological Anatomy 
 Th e placenta ( Figure 40–2 ) is composed of projec-
tions of fetal tissue (villi) that lie in maternal vascular 
 FIGURE 401  The uteroplacental 
circulation. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Shnider S, Levinson G:  Anesthesia for 
Obstetrics , 2nd ed. Williams & Wilkins, 1987.) 
Uterine
vein
Myometrial blood flow
Intervillous space
 
Uterine
blood
flow
Uterine
artery
Placental
membrane
Fetal placental flow
Fetal "shunt" flow
Umbilical
vein
Umbilical
artery
Umbilical
blood
flow
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
831 
Iron enters the fetal circulation in this way, facili-
tated by ferritin and transferrin. 
 6. Breaks —Breaks in the placental membrane may 
permit mixing of maternal and fetal blood. Th is 
probably underlies Rh sensitization (see Chapter 51). 
Rh sensitization occurs most commonly during 
 delivery. 
 Respiratory Gas Exchange 
 At term, fetal oxygen consumption averages about 
7 mL/min per kilogram of fetal body weight. 
Fortunately, because of multiple adaptive mecha-
nisms, the normal fetus at term can survive 10 min 
or longer instead of the expected 2 min in a state 
of total oxygen deprivation. Partial or complete 
oxygen deprivation can result from umbilical cord 
anesthesia have molecular weights well under 1000 
and consequently can readily diff use across the 
placenta. 
 2. Osmotic and hydrostatic pressure (bulk fl ow) —
Water moves across by osmotic and hydrostatic 
pressures. Water enters the fetal circulation in quan-
tities greater than any other substance. 
 3. Facilitated diff usion —Glucose enters the fetal 
circulation down the concentration gradient (no 
energy is consumed) facilitated by a specifi c trans-
porter molecule. 
 4. Active transport —Amino acids, vitamin B 12 , fatty 
acids, and some ions (calcium and phosphate) uti-
lize this mechanism. 
 5. Vesicular transport —Large molecules, such as 
immunoglobulins, are transported by pinocytosis. 
 FIGURE 402  The placenta. 
Maternal blood pools
within intervillous space
Fetal venule
Fetal arteriole
Maternal
arteriole
Maternal
venule
Maternal
portion
of placenta
(decidua basalis)
Fetal
portion
of placenta
(chorion)
Myometrium
Umbilical vein
Umbilical arteries
Umbilical cord
832 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
techniques for labor and delivery generally have 
minimal fetal eff ects despite signifi cant placental 
transfer of anesthetic agents and adjuncts. 
 All inhalational agents and most intravenous 
agents freely cross the placenta . Inhalational agents 
generally produce little fetal depression when they 
are given in limited doses (<1 MAC) and delivery 
occurs within 10 min of induction. Ketamine, pro-
pofol, and benzodiazepines readily cross the pla-
centa and can be detected in the fetal circulation. 
Fortunately, when these agents (with the excep-
tion of benzodiazepines) are administered in usual 
induction doses, drug distribution, metabolism, 
and possibly placental uptake may limit fetal eff ects. 
Although most opiates readily cross the placenta, 
their eff ects on neonates at delivery vary consider-
ably. Newborns appear to be more sensitive to the 
respiratory depressant eff ect of morphine compared 
with other opioids. Although meperidine produces 
respiratory depression, peaking 1–3 h aft er admin-
istration, it produces less than morphine; butorpha-
nol and nalbuphine produce even less respiratory 
depression but still may have signifi cant neurobe-
havioral depressant eff ects. Although fentanyl read-
ily crosses the placenta, it appears to have minimal 
neonatal eff ects unless larger intravenous doses 
(>1 mcg/kg) are given immediately before delivery. 
Epidural or intrathecal fentanyl, sufentanil, and, to a 
lesser extent, morphine, generally produce minimal 
neonatal eff ects. Alfentanil causes neonatal depres-
sion similar to meperidine. Remifentanil also readily 
crosses the placenta and has the potential to produce 
respiratory depression in newborns. Fetal blood con-
centrations of remifentanil are generally about half 
those of the mother just prior to delivery. Th e UA/
UV ratio is about 30%, suggesting fairly rapid metab-
olism of remifentanil in the neonate. Th e highly ion-
ized nature of muscle relaxants impedes placental 
transfer, resulting in minimal eff ects on the fetus. 
 Local anesthetics are weakly basic drugs that 
are principally bound to α 1 -acid glycoprotein. 
Placental transfer depends on three factors: (1) p K a 
(see Chapter 16), (2) maternal and fetal pH, and 
(3) degree of protein binding. Except for chloropro-
caine, fetal acidosis increases fetal-to-maternal drug 
ratios because binding of hydrogen ions to the non-
ionized form causes trapping of the local anesthetic 
compression, umbilical cord prolapse, placental 
abruption, severe maternal hypoxemia, or hypoten-
sion. Compensatory fetal mechanisms include redis-
tribution of blood fl ow primarily to the brain, heart, 
placenta, and adrenal gland; decreased oxygen con-
sumption; and anaerobic metabolism. 
 Transfer of oxygen across the placenta is depen-
dent on the ratio of maternal uterine blood fl ow to 
fetal umbilical blood fl ow. Th e reserve for oxygen 
transfer is small even during normal pregnancy. 
Normal fetal blood from the placenta has a Pa o 2 of 
only 30–35 mm Hg. To aid oxygen transfer, the fetal 
hemoglobin oxygen dissociation curve is shift ed to 
the left  such that fetal hemoglobin has greater affi  nity 
for oxygen than does maternal hemoglobin (whose 
curve is already shift ed to the right; see the section 
on Respiratory Eff ects). In addition, fetal hemoglo-
bin concentration is usually 15 g/dL (compared with 
approximately 12 g/dL in the mother). 
 Carbon dioxide readily diff uses across the pla-
centa. Maternal hyperventilation (see the section on 
Respiratory Eff ects) increases the gradient for the 
transfer of carbon dioxide from the fetus into the 
maternal circulation. Fetal hemoglobin has less affi  n-
ity for carbon dioxide than do adult forms of hemo-
globin. Carbon monoxide readily diff uses across the 
placenta, and fetal hemoglobin has greater affi  nity 
for carbon monoxide than do adult forms. 
 Placental Transfer 
of Anesthetic Agents 
 Transfer of a drug across the placenta is refl ected 
by the ratio of its fetal umbilical vein to maternal 
venous concentrations (UV/MV), whereas its uptake 
by fetal tissues can be correlated with the ratio of its 
fetal umbilical artery to umbilical vein concentra-
tions (UA/UV). Fetal eff ects of drugs administered 
to parturients depend on multiple factors, including 
route of administration (oral, intramuscular, intra-
venous, epidural, or intrathecal), dose, timing of 
administration (both relative to delivery as well as 
contractions), and maturity of the fetal organs (brain 
and liver). Th us, a drug given hours before delivery 
or as a single intravenous bolus during a uterine 
contraction just prior to delivery (when uterine 
blood fl ow is maximally reduced) is unlikely to pro-
duce high fetal levels. Fortunately, current anesthetic 
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
833
paracervical blocks (in which the injection site is 
in close proximity to the uterine arteries), and local 
absorption or injection into these vessels cannot be 
ruled out). Spinal and epidural anesthesia typically 
do not decrease uterine blood fl ow except when arte-
rial hypotension occurs. Moreover, uterine blood fl ow 
during labor may actually improve in preeclamp-
tic patients following epidural anesthesia; a reduc-
tion in circulating endogenous catecholamines likely 
decreases uterine vasoconstriction. Th e addition of 
dilute concentrations of epinephrine to local anes-
thetic solutions does not appreciably alter uterine 
blood fl ow. Intravascular uptake of the epinephrine 
from the epidural space may result in only minor sys-
temic β-adrenergic eff ects. 
 PHYSIOLOGY 
OF NORMAL LABOR 
 On average, labor commences 40 ± 2 weeks follow-
ing the last menstrual period. Th e factors involved 
in the initiation of labor likely involve distention of 
the uterus, enhanced myometrial sensitivity to oxy-
tocin, and altered prostaglandin synthesis by fetal 
membranes and decidual tissues. Although circu-
lating oxytocin levels oft en do not increase at the 
beginning of labor, the number of myometrial oxy-
tocin receptors rapidly increases. Several prodromal 
events usually precede true labor approximately 
2–4 weeks prior to delivery: the fetal presenting part 
settles into the pelvis (lightening); patients develop 
uterine (Braxton Hicks) contractions that are char-
acteristically irregular in frequency, duration, and 
intensity; and the cervix soft ens and thins out (cervi-
cal eff acement). Approximately 1 week to 1 h before 
true labor, the cervical mucous plug (which is oft en 
bloody) breaks free (bloody show). 
 True labor begins when the sporadic Braxton 
Hicks contractions increase in strength (25–60 mm 
Hg), coordination, and frequency (15–20 min apart). 
Amniotic membranes may rupture spontaneously 
prior or subsequent to the onset of true labor. 
Following progressive cervical dilation, the con-
tractions propel fi rst the fetus and then the placenta 
through the pelvis and perineum. By convention, 
labor is divided into three stages. Th e fi rst stage is 
defi ned by the onset of true labor and ends with 
in the fetal circulation. Highly protein-bound agents 
diff use slowly across the placenta; thus, greater pro-
tein binding of bupivacaine and ropivacaine, com-
pared with that of lidocaine, likely accounts for their 
lower fetal blood levels. Chloroprocaine has the least 
placental transfer because it is rapidly broken down 
by plasma cholinesterase in the maternal circulation. 
 Most commonly used anesthetic adjuncts also 
readily cross the placenta. Th us, maternally admin-
istered ephedrine, β-adrenergic blockers (such as 
labetalol and esmolol), vasodilators, phenothiazines, 
antihistamines (H 1 and H 2 ), and metoclopramide are 
transferred to the fetus. Atropine and scopolamine, 
but not glycopyrrolate, cross the placenta; the latter’s 
quaternary ammonium (ionized) structure results in 
only limited transfer. 
 Eﬀ ect of Anesthetic Agents 
on Uteroplacental Blood Flow 
 Intravenous anesthetic agents have variable eff ects 
on uteroplacental blood fl ow. Propofol and barbitu-
rates are typically associated with small reductions 
in uterine blood fl ow due to mild to moderate, dose-
dependent decreases in maternal blood pressure. A 
small induction dose, however, can produce greater 
reductions in blood fl ow as a result of sympathoad-
renal activation (due to light anesthesia). Ketamine 
in doses of less than 1.5 mg/kg does not appreciably 
alter uteroplacental blood fl ow; its hypertensive 
eff ect typically counteracts any vasoconstriction. 
Uterine hypertonus may occur with ketamine at 
doses of more than 2 mg/kg. Etomidate likely has 
minimal eff ects, but its actions on uteroplacental cir-
culation have not been well-described. 
 Volatile inhalational anesthetics decrease 
blood pressure and, potentially, uteroplacental 
blood fl ow. In concentrations of less than 1 MAC, 
however, their eff ects are generally minor, consist-
ing of dose-dependent uterine relaxation and minor 
reductions in uterine blood fl ow. Nitrous oxide has 
minimal eff ects on uterine blood fl ow when adminis-
tered with a volatile agent. In animal studies, nitrous 
oxide alone can vasoconstrict the uterine arteries. 
 High blood levels of local anesthetics— 
particularly lidocaine—cause uterine arterial vasocon-
striction. Such levels are seen only with unintentional 
intravascular injections and occasionally following 
7
834 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
activity refers to the frequency and magnitude of 
uterine contractions. Th e latter may be measured 
directly, with a catheter inserted through the cer-
vix, or indirectly, with a tocodynamometer applied 
externally around the abdomen. Cervical dilation 
and fetal descent are assessed by pelvic examination. 
Fetal station refers to the level of descent (in centi-
meters) of the presenting part relative to the ischial 
spines (eg, –1 or +1). 
 Eﬀ ect of Labor on Maternal Physiology 
 During intense painful contractions, maternal min-
ute ventilation may increase up to 300%. Oxygen 
consumption also increases by an additional 60% 
above third-trimester values. With excessive hyper-
ventilation, Pa co 2 may decrease below 20 mm Hg. 
Marked hypocapnia can cause periods of hypoven-
tilation and transient maternal and fetal hypoxemia 
between contractions. Excessive maternal hyper-
ventilation also reduces uterine blood fl ow and pro-
motes fetal acidosis. 
 Each contraction places an additional burden 
on the heart by displacing 300–500 mL of blood 
from the uterus into the central circulation 
complete cervical dilation. Th e second stage begins 
with full cervical dilation, is characterized by fetal 
descent, and ends with complete delivery of the 
fetus. Finally, the third stage extends from the birth 
of the baby to the delivery of the placenta. 
 Based on the rate of cervical dilation, the fi rst 
stage is further divided into a slow latent phase fol-
lowed by a faster active phase ( Figure 40–3 ). Th e 
latent phase is characterized by progressive cervical 
eff acement and minor dilation (2–4 cm). Th e subse-
quent active phase is characterized by more frequent 
contractions (3–5 min apart) and progressive cervi-
cal dilation up to 10 cm. Th e fi rst stage usually lasts 
8–12 h in nulliparous patients and about 5–8 h in 
multiparous patients. 
 Contractions during the second stage occur 
1.5–2 min apart and last 1–1.5 min. Although con-
traction intensity does not appreciably change, the 
parturient, by bearing down, can greatly augment 
intrauterine pressure and facilitate expulsion of the 
fetus. Th e second stage usually lasts 15–120 min and 
the third stage typically 15–30 min. 
 Th e course of labor is monitored by uterine 
activity, cervical dilation, and fetal descent. Uterine 
 FIGURE 403  The course of normal labor. (Reproduced, with permission, from DeCherney AH, Pernoll ML [editors]:  Current Obstetric & 
Gynecologic Diagnosis & Treatment , 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2001.) 
First stage
Hours of labor
Latent phase
4
8
6
2
Delivery
Accel-
eration
phase
Phase of maximum slope
Deceleration phase
Second stage
Descent of presenting part
Active phase
Cervical dilation (cm)
0
10
12
14
16
0
2
4
6
8
10
+2
+1
+3
+4
L t
t
h
Accel-
eration
phase
Phase of maximum slope
A ti
h
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
835
or combined spinal–epidural (CSE) analgesia do not 
prolong labor or increase the likelihood of operative 
delivery. 
 When greater concentrations of local anesthetic 
(eg, bupivacaine, 0.25%) are used for continuous 
epidural analgesia, the second stage of labor may 
be prolonged by approximately 15–30 min. Intense 
regional analgesia/anesthesia can remove the urge 
to bear down during the second stage (Ferguson 
refl ex), and motor weakness can impair expulsive 
eff orts, oft en prolonging the second stage of delivery. 
Use of dilute local anesthetic–opioid mixtures can 
preserve motor function and allow eff ective push-
ing. Intravenous fl uid loading (crystalloid boluses) is 
oft en used to prevent or reduce the severity of hypo-
tension following an epidural injection. So-called 
fl uid loading does not reduce the incidence of 
hypotension and has been shown to reduce endog-
enous oxytocin secretion from the pituitary and 
transiently decrease uterine activity. Epinephrine-
containing local anesthetic solutions could theoreti-
cally prolong the fi rst stage of labor if absorption of 
epinephrine from the epidural space results in sig-
nifi cant systemic β-adrenergic eff ects. Prolongation 
of labor is generally not clinically observed with very 
dilute (eg, 1:400,000) epinephrine-containing local 
anesthetics. 
 D. Vasopressors 
 Uterine muscle has both α and β receptors. α 1 -
Receptor stimulation causes uterine contraction, 
whereas β 2 -receptor stimulation produces relax-
ation. Large doses of α-adrenergic agents, such as 
phenylephrine, in addition to causing uterine arte-
rial constriction, can produce tetanic uterine con-
tractions. Small doses of phenylephrine (40 mcg) 
may increase uterine blood fl ow in normal parturi-
ents by raising arterial blood pressure. In contrast, 
ephedrine has little eff ect on uterine contractions. 
 E. Oxytocin 
 Oxytocin (Pitocin) is usually administered intrave-
nously to induce or augment uterine contractions 
or to maintain uterine tone postpartum. It has a 
half-life of 3–5 min. Induction doses for labor are 
0.5–8 mU/min. Complications include fetal dis-
tress due to hyperstimulation, uterine tetany, 
and, less commonly, maternal water retention 
(analogous to an autotransfusion). Cardiac output 
rises 45% over third-trimester values.  Th e 
greatest strain on the heart, however, occurs 
immediately aft er delivery, when intense uterine 
contraction and involution suddenly relieve inferior 
vena caval obstruction and increase cardiac output 
as much as 80% above late third trimester values. 
 Eﬀ ect of Anesthetic Agents 
on Uterine Activity & Labor 
 A. Inhalational Agents 
 Sevofl urane, desfl urane, isofl urane, and halothane 
depress uterine activity equally at equipotent doses; 
all cause dose-dependent uterine relaxation. Low 
doses (<0.75 MAC) of these agents, however, do not 
interfere with the eff ect of oxytocin on the uterus. 
Higher doses can result in uterine atony and increase 
blood loss at delivery. Nitrous oxide has minimal, if 
any, eff ects. 
 B. Parenteral Agents 
 Opioids minimally decrease the progression of labor; 
ketamine, in doses of less than 2 mg/kg, appears to 
have little eff ect. 
 C. Regional Anesthesia 
 Th e administration of epidural analgesia is usually 
based upon the patient’s choice, and it is oft en uti-
lized for patients with maternal or fetal factors that 
increase the likelihood of prolonged labor or cesar-
ean delivery ( Table 40–2 ).  Current evidence 
indicates that dilute combinations of a local 
anesthetic (eg, bupivacaine, 0.125% or less) and an 
opioid (eg, fentanyl, 5 mcg/mL or less) for epidural 
8
9
 TABLE 402 Factors that prolong labor, 
increase the likelihood of cesarean section, 
and often cause patients to request an 
epidural. 
Primigravida
Prolonged labor
High parenteral analgesic requirements
Use of oxytocin
Large baby
Small pelvis
Fetal malpresentation
836 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
hypotension, heart block, muscle weakness, and 
sedation. Magnesium in these doses and concentra-
tions intensifi es neuromuscular blockade from non-
depolarizing agents. 
 H. β 2 Agonists 
 Th e β 2 -adrenergic agonists ritodrine and terbutaline 
inhibit uterine contractions and are used to treat 
premature labor. 
 FETAL PHYSIOLOGY 
 Th e placenta, which receives nearly half the fetal 
cardiac output, is responsible for respiratory gas 
exchange. As a result, the lungs receive little blood 
fl ow and the pulmonary and systemic circula-
tions are parallel instead of in series, as in the adult 
( Figures 40–4 and  40–5 ). Th is arrangement is made 
possible by two cardiac shunts—the foramen ovale 
and the ductus arteriosus: 
1. 
 Well-oxygenated blood from the placenta 
(approximately 80% oxygen saturation) mixes 
with venous blood returning from the lower 
body (25% oxygen saturation) and fl ows via 
the inferior vena cava into the right atrium. 
2. 
 Right atrial anatomy preferentially directs 
blood fl ow from the inferior vena cava 
(67% oxygen saturation) through the foramen 
ovale into the left  atrium. 
3. 
 Left  atrial blood is then pumped by the left  
ventricle to the upper body (mainly the brain 
and the heart). 
4. 
 Poorly oxygenated blood from the upper body 
returns via the superior vena cava to the right 
atrium. 
5. 
 Right atrial anatomy preferentially directs fl ow 
from the superior vena cava into the right 
ventricle. 
6. 
 Right ventricular blood is pumped into the 
pulmonary artery. 
7. 
 Because of high pulmonary vascular 
resistance, 95% of the blood ejected from the 
right ventricle (60% oxygen saturation) is 
shunted across the ductus arteriosus, into the 
descending aorta, and back to the placenta and 
lower body. 
(antidiuretic eff ect). Rapid intravenous infusion 
can cause transient systemic hypotension due 
to relaxation of vascular smooth muscle; refl ex 
tachycardia may also be noted. 
 Uterine atony is the most common cause of 
severe postpartum hemorrhage. Immediate admin-
istration of oxytocin aft er delivery is a standard 
measure to prevent this complication. Despite this 
practice, uterine atony complicates 4–6% of pregnan-
cies. Th e concentration of volatile anesthetics should 
be reduced to 0.5 MAC in obstetric patients undergo-
ing general anesthesia for cesarean delivery to avoid 
the uterine-relaxing eff ects of these drugs. Second-
line oxytocics are methylergonovine (Methergine) 
and carboprost tromethamine (Hemabate). 
 F. Ergot Alkaloids 
 Methylergonovine (Methergine) causes intense and 
prolonged uterine contractions. It is therefore given 
only aft er delivery (postpartum) to treat uterine 
atony. Moreover, because it also constricts vascular 
smooth muscle and can cause severe hypertension 
if given as an intravenous bolus, it is usually admin-
istered only as a single 0.2 mg dose intramuscularly 
or in dilute form as an intravenous infusion over 
10 minutes. 
 G. Prostaglandins 
 Carboprost tromethamine (Hemabate, prostaglan-
din F 2α ) is a synthetic analogue of prostaglandin F 2 
that stimulates uterine contractions. It is oft en used 
to treat refractory postpartum hemorrhage. An ini-
tial dose of 0.25 mg intramuscularly may be repeated 
every 15–90 min to a maximum of 2 mg. Common 
side eff ects include nausea, vomiting, broncho-
constriction, and diarrhea. It is contraindicated in 
patients with bronchial asthma. Prostaglandin E 1 
(Cytotec, rectal suppository) or E 2 (Dinoprostone, 
vaginal suppository) is sometimes administered and 
has no bronchoconstricting eff ect. 
 H. Magnesium 
 Magnesium is used in obstetrics both to stop pre-
mature labor (tocolysis) and to prevent eclamptic 
seizures. It is usually administered as a 4 g intra-
venous loading dose (over 20 min) followed by a 
2 g/h infusion. Th erapeutic serum levels are consid-
ered to be 6–8 mg/dL. Serious side eff ects include 
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
837 
Th e latter may be important in allowing relatively 
rapid hepatic degradation of drugs (or toxins) that 
are absorbed from the maternal circulation. 
 In contrast to the fetal circulation, which is estab-
lished very early during intrauterine life, maturation 
of the lungs lags behind. Extrauterine survival is not 
possible until aft er 24–25 weeks of gestation, when 
pulmonary capillaries are formed and come to lie in 
close approximation to an immature alveolar epithe-
lium. At 30 weeks, the cuboidal alveolar epithelium 
 Th e parallel circulation results in unequal ven-
tricular fl ows; the right ventricle ejects two thirds of 
the combined ventricular outputs, whereas the left  
ventricle ejects only one third. 
 Up to 50% of the well-oxygenated blood in the 
umbilical vein can pass directly to the heart via the 
ductus venosus, bypassing the liver. Th e remain-
der of the blood fl ow from the placenta mixes with 
blood from the portal vein (via the  portal sinus ) and 
passes through the liver before reaching the heart. 
Superior
vena cava
Left atrium
Foramen ovale
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Ductus venosus
Umbilical vein
From placenta
Umbilical
arteries
To placenta
Portal
vein
Aorta
Left
ventricle
Pulmonary
artery
Ductus
arteriosus
Inferior
vena cava
 FIGURE 404  The fetal circulation before and after 
birth. (Reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF:  Review of 
Medical Physiology , 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2012.) 
838 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
FETAL CIRCULATION
Upper half
of body
NEWBORN CIRCULATION PRIOR
TO DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS CLOSURE
Upper half
of body
IVC 
LA
LV
RA
RV
LA
LV
SVC
IVC
Aorta
Aorta
DA
PA
DA
PA
Lungs
Lower half
of body
RA
RV
Lungs
Lower half
of body
Placenta
PV
UV
PV
UV
UA
UA
Liver
HV
DV
IVC 
SVC 
LA
LV
RA
RV
Aorta
DA
PA
Lungs
Lower half
of body
PV
UV
UA
Liver
HV
DV
Liver
HV
DV
NEWBORN CIRCULATION AFTER
CLOSURE OF DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
Upper half
of body 
LA
LV
R A
RV
DA
DV
PA
UA
UV
PV
HV
IVC
SVC
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Ductus arteriosus
Ductus venosus
Pulmonary artery
Umbilical artery
Umbilical vein
Portal vein
Hepatic vein
Inferior vena cava
Superior vena cava
Arrows indicate direction
of blood flow
Oxygenated
Mixed
Deoxygenated
 FIGURE 405  A schematic comparison of fetal and 
neonatal circulation. (Reproduced, with permission, from Danforth 
DN, Scott JR:  Obstetrics and Gynecology , 5th ed. Lippincott, 1986.) 
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
839 
and sustain respirations, whereas the outward recoil 
of the chest at delivery aids in fi lling the lungs with air. 
 Lung expansion increases both alveolar and 
arterial oxygen tensions and decreases pulmonary 
vascular resistance. Th e increase in oxygen tension 
is a potent stimulus for pulmonary arterial vasodi-
lation. Th e resultant increase in pulmonary blood 
fl ow and augmented fl ow to the left  heart elevates 
left  atrial pressure and functionally closes the fora-
men ovale. Th e increase in arterial oxygen tension 
also causes the ductus arteriosus to contract and 
functionally close. Other chemical mediators that 
may play a role in ductal closure include acetylcho-
line, bradykinin, and prostaglandins. Th e overall 
result is elimination of right-to-left  shunting and 
establishment of the adult circulation ( Figure 40–5 ). 
Anatomic closure of the ductus arteriosus does not 
usually occur until about 2–3 weeks, whereas closure 
of the foramen ovale takes months if it occurs at all. 
 Hypoxia or acidosis during the fi rst few days 
of life can prevent or reverse these physiological 
changes, resulting in persistence of (or return to) the 
fetal circulation, or persistent pulmonary hyper-
tension of the newborn. A vicious circle is estab-
lished where the right-to-left  shunting promotes 
hypoxemia and acidosis, which in turn promote 
more shunting ( Figure 40–6 ). Right-to-left  shunting 
may occur across the foramen ovale, the ductus arte-
riosus, or both. Unless this circle is broken, neonatal 
demise can occur rapidly. 
fl attens out and begins to produce pulmonary sur-
factant. Th is substance provides alveolar stability 
and is necessary to maintain normal lung expan-
sion aft er birth (see Chapter 23). Suffi  cient pulmo-
nary surfactant is usually present aft er 34 weeks of 
gestation. Administration of glucocorticoids to the 
mother may accelerate fetal surfactant production. 
 PHYSIOLOGICAL TRANSITION 
OF THE FETUS AT BIRTH 
 Th e most profound adaptive changes at birth involve 
the circulatory and respiratory systems. Failure 
to make this transition successfully results in fetal 
death or permanent neurological damage. 
 At term, the fetal lungs are developed but contain 
about 90 mL of a plasma ultrafi ltrate. During expul-
sion of the fetus at delivery, this fl uid is normally 
squeezed from the lungs by the forces of the pelvic 
muscles and the vagina acting on the baby (the vagi-
nal squeeze). Any remaining fl uid is reabsorbed by 
the pulmonary capillaries and lymphatics. Small (pre-
term) neonates and neonates delivered via cesarean 
section do not benefi t from the vaginal squeeze and 
thus typically have greater diffi  culty in maintaining 
respirations (transient tachypnea of the newborn). 
Respiratory eff orts are normally initiated within 30 s 
aft er birth and become sustained within 90 s. Mild 
hypoxia and acidosis as well as sensory stimulation—
cord clamping, pain, touch, and noise—help initiate 
 FIGURE 406  Pathophysiology of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (persistent fetal circulation). 
(Modiﬁ ed from Gregory GA:  Pediatric Anesthesia , 2nd ed. Churchill Livingstone, 1989.) 
Left ventricular
failure 
Increased pulmonary
vascular resistance
Right ventricular
failure 
Right-to-left shunting
across foramen ovale
Right-to-left shunting
across ductus arteriosus
Hypoxemia
acidosis
840 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Postpartum tubal ligation or fulguration may 
be (1) performed immediately following delivery of 
the baby and repair of the uterus during a cesarean 
section, (2) delayed 8–48 h following delivery to 
allow an elective fasting period, or (3) deferred until 
after the postpartum period (generally 6 weeks). 
Many obstetricians are reluctant to perform ster-
ilizations immediately postpartum because the 
patient may change her mind later, particularly 
if something untoward happens to the baby. 
Furthermore, they want to ensure that the patient 
is stable, particularly after a complicated delivery. 
On the other hand, sterilization is technically much 
easier to perform in the immediate postpartum 
period because of the enlargement of the uterus 
and tubes. Postpartum sterilizations following 
natural vaginal delivery are generally performed 
within 48 h of delivery, because bacterial coloniza-
tion of the reproductive tract thereafter is thought 
to increase the risk of postoperative infection . 
 What factors determine selection of an anesthetic 
technique for postpartum sterilization? 
 When continuous epidural anesthesia is admin-
istered for labor and vaginal delivery, the epidural 
catheter may be left in place up to 48 h for subse-
quent tubal ligation. The delay allows a period of 
elective fasting. A T4–5 sensory level with regional 
anesthesia is usually necessary to ensure a pain-
free anesthetic experience. Lower sensory levels (as 
low as T10) may be adequate but sometimes fail to 
prevent pain during surgical traction on viscera . 
 When the patient has not had anesthesia for 
delivery, postpartum sterilization may be per-
formed under either regional or general anesthesia. 
Because of the increased risk of pulmonary aspira-
tion, regional anesthesia usually is preferred for 
bilateral tubal ligation via a minilaparotomy. Many 
clinicians prefer spinal over epidural anesthesia in 
this setting because of the risk of unintentional 
intravascular or intrathecal injections with the lat-
ter (see Chapter 45). Moreover, the risk of a precipi-
tous decrease in blood pressure following spinal 
anesthesia may be signiﬁ cantly diminished fol-
lowing delivery (particularly when preceded by an 
intravenous ﬂ uid bolus). In addition, the incidence 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Postpartum Tubal Ligation 
 A 36-year-old woman is scheduled for bilateral 
tubal ligation 12 h after delivery of a healthy baby . 
 Is this patient still at increased risk for 
pulmonary aspiration? 
 Controversy exists over when the increased 
risk for pulmonary aspiration diminishes follow-
ing pregnancy. Certainly, many factors contrib-
uting to delayed gastric emptying are alleviated 
shortly after delivery: mechanical distortion of 
the stomach is relieved, labor pains cease, and the 
circulating progesterone level rapidly declines. 
In addition, a period of 8–12 h of elective fasting 
is possible. Some studies suggest that the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration as judged by gastric volume 
and gastric ﬂ uid pH (see the section on Renal and 
Gastrointestinal Eﬀ ects) normalizes within 24 h. 
Gastric volume and acidity usually do not diﬀ er in 
pregnant compared with nonpregnant women, 
although 30–60% of pregnant patients have a gas-
tric volume greater than 25 mL or a gastric ﬂ uid pH 
less than 2.5. Therefore, most clinicians still con-
sider the postpartum patient to be at increased risk 
for pulmonary aspiration and take appropriate pre-
cautions (see Chapters 17 and 41). It is not known 
when the risk returns to the level associated with 
elective surgical patients. Although some physi-
ological changes associated with pregnancy may 
require up to 6 weeks for resolution, the increased 
risk of pulmonary aspiration probably returns to 
“normal” well before that time . 
 Other than aspiration risk, what factors determine 
the “optimal” time for postpartum sterilization? 
 The decision about when to perform postpar-
tum tubal ligation (or laparoscopic fulguration) 
is complex and varies according to patient and 
obstetrician preferences as well as local practices. 
Factors inﬂ uencing the decision include whether 
the patient had a vaginal or cesarean delivery and 
whether an anesthetic was administered for labor 
(epidural anesthesia) or delivery (epidural or gen-
eral anesthesia) . 
 
CHAPTER 40 Maternal & Fetal Physiology & Anesthesia  
841 
citrate), or metoclopramide (see Chapters 17 and 
41). In addition, induction of anesthesia should 
employ a rapid-sequence technique with cricoid 
pressure prior to endotracheal intubation, and 
the patient should be extubated only when she 
is awake. Decreased plasma cholinesterase levels 
persist after delivery (see the section on Hepatic 
Eﬀ ects), modestly prolonging the eﬀ ect of suc-
cinylcholine. The duration of vecuronium but 
not atracurium (or cisatracurium) has also been 
reported to be prolonged in postpartum women. 
High concentrations of volatile agents should be 
avoided because of the at least theoretical risk of 
increasing uterine blood loss or inducing postpar-
tum hemorrhage secondary to uterine relaxation. 
Intravenous opioids may be used to supplement 
inhalational agents. Intravenous drugs adminis-
tered intraoperatively to mothers  who are breast-
feeding appear to have minimal if any eﬀ ects on 
their neonates. Nonetheless, it may be prudent to 
avoid breast-feeding 12–24 h following general 
anesthesia . Mothers are advised by some anesthe-
tists to “pump and dump” breast milk for 24 hours 
before resuming breast feeding. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Chestnut DH, Polley LS, Tsen LC, et al:  Chestnut’s 
Obstetric Anesthesia: Principals and Practice , 4th ed. 
Mosby, 2009. 
 Suresh M:  Shnider and Levinson’s Anesthesia for 
Obstetrics , 5th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 
2012. 
of postdural puncture headache is as low as 1% 
when a 25-gauge or smaller pencil-point needle 
is used. Dosage requirements for regional anes-
thesia generally return to normal within 24–36 h 
after delivery. Bupivacaine, 8–12 mg, or lidocaine, 
60–75 mg, may be used for spinal anesthesia. For 
epidural anesthesia, 15–30 mL of lidocaine 1.5–2% 
or chloroprocaine 3% is most commonly used . 
 In contrast, when laparoscopic tubal fulgura-
tion is planned, general endotracheal anesthe-
sia is usually preferred. Insuﬄ  ation of gas during 
laparoscopy impairs pulmonary gas exchange and 
predisposes the patient to nausea, vomiting, and 
possibly pulmonary aspiration. Endotracheal intu-
bation generally ensures adequate ventilation and 
protects the airway . 
 What considerations are important for 
postpartum patients undergoing general 
anesthesia? 
 Preoperative concerns include a decreased 
blood hemoglobin concentration and the persis-
tent increased risk of pulmonary aspiration. Anemia 
is nearly always present as a result of the physio-
logical eﬀ ects of pregnancy combined with blood 
loss during and following delivery. Hemoglobin 
concentrations are usually greater than 9 g/dL, but 
levels as low as 7 g/dL are generally considered 
safe. Fortunately, sterilization procedures are rarely 
associated with signiﬁ cant blood loss . 
 The risk of pulmonary aspiration is diminished 
by a minimum of 8 h of fasting, premedication with 
an H 2 blocker (ranitidine), a clear antacid (sodium 
This page intentionally left blank 
 843
843
41
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Obstetric Anesthesia 
 Michael A. Frölich, MD, MS 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The most common morbidities encountered 
in obstetrics are severe hemorrhage and 
severe preeclampsia. 
 Regardless of the time of last oral intake, all 
obstetric patients are considered to have a 
full stomach and to be at risk for pulmonary 
aspiration. 
 Nearly all parenteral opioid analgesics and 
sedatives readily cross the placenta and 
can aﬀ ect the fetus. Regional anesthetic 
techniques are preferred for management 
of labor pain. 
 Using a local anesthetic–opioid mixture 
for lumbar epidural analgesia during labor 
signiﬁ cantly reduces drug requirements, 
compared with using either agent alone. 
 Pain relief during labor requires neural 
blockade at the T10–L1 sensory level in 
the ﬁ rst stage of labor and at T10–S4 in 
the second stage. 
 Continuous lumbar epidural analgesia is the 
most versatile and most commonly employed 
technique, because it can be used for pain 
relief for the ﬁ rst stage of labor as well as 
analgesia/anesthesia for subsequent vaginal 
delivery or cesarean section, if necessary. 
 When dilute mixtures of a local anesthetic 
and an opioid are used, epidural analgesia 
has little if any eﬀ ect on the progress of labor. 
 Even when aspiration does not yield 
blood or cerebrospinal ﬂ uid, unintentional 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
intravascular or intrathecal placement of an 
epidural needle or catheter is possible. 
 Hypotension is a common side eﬀ ect of 
regional anesthetic techniques and must 
be treated aggressively with phenylephrine 
or ephedrine, supplemental oxygen, left 
uterine displacement, and intravenous ﬂ uid 
boluses to prevent fetal compromise. 
 Techniques using combined spinal–epidural 
analgesia and anesthesia may particularly 
beneﬁ t patients with severe pain early in 
labor and those who receive analgesia/
anesthesia just prior to delivery. 
 Spinal or epidural anesthesia is preferred 
to general anesthesia for cesarean section 
because regional anesthesia is associated 
with lower maternal mortality. 
 Continuous epidural anesthesia allows 
better control over the sensory level than 
“single-shot” techniques. Conversely, spinal 
anesthesia has a more rapid, predictable 
onset; may produce a more dense 
(complete) block; and lacks the potential for 
serious systemic drug toxicity because of the 
smaller dose of local anesthetic employed. 
 Risk of systemic local anesthetic toxicity 
during epidural analgesia and anesthesia is 
minimized by slowly administering dilute 
solutions for labor pain and by fractionating 
the total dose administered for cesarean 
section into 5-mL increments. 
9
10
11
12
13
—Continued next page
844 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
uterine inversion, and use of tocolytic 
agents prior to delivery. 
 Intrauterine asphyxia during labor is the 
most common cause of neonatal depression. 
Fetal monitoring throughout labor is helpful 
in identifying which babies may be at risk, 
detecting fetal distress, and evaluating the 
eﬀ ect of acute interventions. 
16
 Maternal hemorrhage is one of the most 
common severe morbidities complicating 
obstetric anesthesia. Causes include 
placenta previa, abruptio placentae, and 
uterine rupture. 
 Common causes of postpartum 
hemorrhage include uterine atony, a 
retained placenta, obstetric lacerations, 
14
15
 Th is chapter focuses on the practice of obstetric an-
esthesia. Techniques for analgesia and anesthesia 
during labor, vaginal delivery, and cesarean section 
are presented. Th e chapter ends with a review of 
neonatal resuscitation. 
 ANESTHETIC RISK IN 
OBSTETRIC PATIENTS 
 Although the majority of women of childbearing age 
are healthy and would be considered to be at mini-
mal operative risk, pregnancy, certain maternal– 
fetal factors, and preexisting medical conditions 
signifi cantly increase surgical and obstetric risks. 
 Maternal Mortality 
 Maternal mortality is usually presented as the 
number of women who die while pregnant (or 
within 42 days of pregnancy termination) aft er 
excluding accidents and unrelated causes. Th is 
number is oft en indexed to the total number of live 
births. Th e maternal mortality index has decreased 
nearly 100-fold since 1900. Likely due to better 
reporting, it rose slightly in the United States to 21 
deaths per 100,000 live births in 2010. Th e world 
average is 400 deaths per 100,000 live births. Of all 
maternal deaths worldwide, 99% occur in Africa, 
Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean. 
 In the United States, overall mortality risk is 
greater for women older than 35 years of age, black 
women, and women who do not receive prenatal 
care. Th e leading causes of death associated with 
a live birth in 2010 were cardiovascular diseases 
(13.5%), cardiomyopathy (12.6%), hemorrhage 
(11.9%), noncardiovascular diseases (11.8%), hyper-
tensive disorders of pregnancy (11.1%), infection/
sepsis (11.1%), thrombotic pulmonary embolism 
(5.6%), amniotic fl uid embolism (5.6%), cerebro-
vascular accidents (5.3%) and anesthesia compli-
cations (0.6%) Of all maternal deaths, only 34% of 
patients died within 24 h of delivery, whereas 55% 
died between 1 and 42 days, and another 11% died 
between 43 days and 1 year. Direct causes of mater-
nal deaths are more clearly detailed from Canadian 
data, which show that, in addition to pulmonary 
embolism and preeclampsia/pregnancy-induced 
hypertension (PIH), amniotic fl uid embolism and 
intracranial hemorrhage emerge as important addi-
tional causes of death. 
 Severe obstetric morbidity may be a more sensi-
tive measure of outcome than maternal mortality. 
Data from the United Kingdom suggest that inci-
dence of severe obstetric morbidity is 12 per 1000 
deliveries, 100 times more common than mortality. 
Risk factors include age greater than 34 years, non-
white ethnic group, multiple pregnancy, history of 
hypertension, previous postpartum hemorrhage, 
and emergency cesarean delivery.  Table 41–1 lists 
the estimated incidence of the most common causes 
of severe morbidity; thromboembolic disease was 
deliberately excluded because of the diffi  culty in 
making the diagnosis in nonfatal cases.  By 
far the most common morbidities encoun-
tered in obstetrics are severe hemorrhage and severe 
preeclampsia. 
1
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia
845
Although newborn deaths and brain damage 
also decreased over this period, they remained a 
leading cause of obstetric anesthesia malpractice 
claims. Maternal nerve injury was more common 
in claims reported aft er 1990 compared with ear-
lier years. 
 General Approach 
to the Obstetric Patient 
 All patients entering the obstetric suite potentially 
require anesthesia services, whether planned or 
emergent. Patients requiring anesthetic care for 
labor or cesarean section should undergo a 
focused preanesthetic evaluation as early as pos-
sible. Th is should consist of a maternal health his-
tory, anesthesia and anesthesia-related obstetric 
history, blood pressure measurement, airway 
assessment, and back examination for regional 
anesthesia. 
 Regardless of the time of last oral intake, all 
patients are considered to have a full stomach 
and to be at risk for pulmonary aspiration. Because 
the duration of labor is oft en prolonged, guidelines 
usually allow small amounts of oral clear liquid for 
uncomplicated labor. Th e minimum fasting period 
for elective cesarean section remains controver-
sial, but is recommended to be 6 h for light meals 
and 8 h for heavy meals. Prophylactic administra-
tion of a clear antacid (15–30 mL of 0.3 M sodium 
citrate orally) every 30 min prior to a cesarean 
section can help maintain gastric pH greater than 
2.5 and may decrease the likelihood of severe aspi-
ration pneumonitis. An H 2 -blocking drug (raniti-
dine, 100–150 mg orally or 50 mg intravenously) 
or metoclopramide, 10 mg orally or intravenously, 
should also be considered in high-risk patients 
and in those expected to receive general anesthe-
sia. H 2 blockers reduce both gastric volume and pH 
but have no eff ect on the gastric contents already 
present. Metoclopramide accelerates gastric emp-
tying, decreases gastric volume, and increases 
lower esophageal sphincter tone. Th e supine posi-
tion should be avoided unless a left  uterine dis-
placement device (>15° wedge) is placed under the 
right hip. 
2
 Anesthetic Mortality 
 Anesthesia accidents and mishaps account for 
approximately 2–3% of maternal deaths. Data col-
lected between 1985 and 1990 suggested a maternal 
mortality of 32 deaths per 1,000,000 live births due 
to general anesthesia and 1.9 deaths per 1,000,000 
live births due to regional anesthesia. More recent 
data between 1998 and 2005 suggest a lower over-
all maternal mortality from anesthesia (about 
1.2 % of live births), possibly due to greater use of 
regional anesthesia for labor and cesarean delivery. 
Most deaths occur during or aft er cesarean section. 
Moreover, the risk of an adverse outcome appears to 
be much greater with emergent than with elective 
cesarean sections. 
 Obstetric Anesthesia Closed Claims 
 Obstetric anesthesia care accounts for approx-
imately 12% of the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) Closed Claims database 
claims. A comparison of obstetric anesthesia 
claims from 1990 to 2003 or with pre-1990 claims 
shows a decrease in maternal deaths, as well as a 
decrease in respiratory-damaging events (aspi-
ration, diffi  cult intubation, esophageal intuba-
tion, and inadequate oxygenation/ventilation). 
 TABLE 411  Incidence of severe obstetric 
morbidity. 1,3 
Morbidity
Incidence per 1000
Severe hemorrhage
6.7
Severe preeclampsia
3.9
HELLP syndrome 2 
0.5
Severe sepsis
0.4
Eclampsia
0.2
Uterine rupture
0.2
 1 Note thromboembolic disease was excluded.
 2 HELLP syndrome consists of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, 
and low platelet count.
 3 Data from Waterstone M, Bewley S, Wolfe C: Incidence and 
predictors of severe obstetric morbidity: Case-control study. BMJ 
2001;322:1089.
846 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
the birthing process are central to such techniques. 
Pain during labor tends to be accentuated by fear of 
the unknown or previous unpleasant experiences. 
Techniques include those of Bradley, Dick-Read, 
Lamaze, and LeBoyer. Th e Lamaze technique, one 
of the most popular, coaches the parturient to take 
a deep breath at the beginning of each contraction 
followed by rapid, shallow breathing for the duration 
of the contraction. Th e parturient also concentrates 
on an object in the room and attempts to focus her 
thoughts away from the pain. Less common non-
pharmacological techniques include hypnosis, trans-
cutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, biofeedback, 
and acupuncture. Th e success of all these techniques 
varies considerably from patient to patient, and 
many patients require additional forms of analgesia. 
 PARENTERAL AGENTS 
 Nearly all parenteral opioid analgesics and 
sedatives readily cross the placenta and can 
aff ect the fetus. Concern over fetal depression limits 
the use of these agents to the early stages of labor or 
to situations in which regional anesthetic techniques 
are not available or appropriate. Central nervous sys-
tem depression in the neonate may be manifested by 
a prolonged time to sustain respirations, respiratory 
acidosis, or an abnormal neurobehavioral exami-
nation. Moreover, loss of beat-to-beat variability in 
the fetal heart rate (seen with most central nervous 
system depressants) and decreased fetal movements 
(due to sedation of the fetus) complicate the evalua-
tion of fetal well-being during labor. Long-term fetal 
heart rate variability is aff ected more than short-
term variability. Th e degree and signifi cance of these 
eff ects depend on the specifi c agent, the dose, the 
time elapsed between its administration and deliv-
ery, and fetal maturity. Premature neonates exhibit 
the greatest sensitivity. In addition to maternal respi-
ratory depression, opioids can also induce maternal 
nausea and vomiting and delay gastric emptying. 
Some clinicians have advocated use of opioids via 
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) devices early in 
labor because this technique appears to reduce total 
opioid requirements. 
 Meperidine, a commonly used opioid, can 
be given in doses of 10–25 mg intravenously or 
3
 Anesthesia for 
Labor & Vaginal Delivery 
 PAIN PATHWAYS 
DURING LABOR 
 Th e pain of labor arises from contraction of the 
myometrium against the resistance of the cervix 
and perineum, progressive dilation of the cervix and 
lower uterine segment, and stretching and compres-
sion of pelvic and perineal structures. 
 Pain during the fi rst stage of labor is primar-
ily visceral pain resulting from uterine contractions 
and cervical dilation. It is usually initially confi ned 
to the T11–T12 dermatomes during the latent phase, 
but eventually involves the T10–L1 dermatomes as 
labor enters the active phase. Th e visceral aff erent 
fi bers responsible for labor pain travel with sympa-
thetic nerve fi bers fi rst to the uterine and cervical 
plexuses, then through the hypogastric and aortic 
plexuses, before entering the spinal cord with the 
T10–L1 nerve roots. Th e pain is initially perceived in 
the lower abdomen but may increasingly be referred 
to the lumbosacral area, gluteal region, and thighs 
as labor progresses. Pain intensity also increases 
with progressive cervical dilation and with increas-
ing intensity and frequency of uterine contractions. 
Nulliparous women and those with a history of dys-
menorrhea appear to experience greater pain during 
the fi rst stage of labor. 
 Th e onset of perineal pain at the end of the fi rst 
stage signals the beginning of fetal descent and the 
second stage of labor. Stretching and compression of 
pelvic and perineal structures intensifi es the pain. 
Sensory innervation of the perineum is provided by 
the pudendal nerve (S2–4) so pain during the sec-
ond stage of labor involves the T10–S4 dermatomes. 
 PSYCHOLOGICAL & 
NONPHARMACOLOGICAL 
TECHNIQUES 
 Psychological and nonpharmacological techniques 
are based on the premise that the pain of labor 
can be suppressed by reorganizing one’s thoughts. 
Patient education and positive conditioning about 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
847 
1 mg/kg. Large boluses of ketamine (>1 mg/kg) can 
be associated with hypertonic uterine contractions. 
Low-dose ketamine is most useful just prior to deliv-
ery or as an adjuvant to regional anesthesia. Some cli-
nicians avoid use of ketamine because it may produce 
unpleasant psychotomimetic eff ects (see Chapter 9). 
 In the past, reduced concentrations of volatile 
anesthetic agents (eg, methoxyfl urane) in oxygen 
were sometimes used for relief of milder labor pain. 
Inhalation of nitrous oxide–oxygen remains in com-
mon use for relief of mild labor pain in many coun-
tries. As previously noted, nitrous oxide has minimal 
eff ects on uterine blood fl ow or uterine contractions. 
 PUDENDAL NERVE BLOCK 
 Pudendal nerve blocks are oft en combined with 
perineal infi ltration of local anesthetic to provide 
perineal anesthesia during the second stage of labor 
when other forms of anesthesia are not employed or 
prove to be inadequate. Paracervical plexus blocks 
are no longer used because of their association with 
a relatively high rate of fetal bradycardia; the close 
proximity of the injection site to the uterine artery 
may result in uterine arterial vasoconstriction, 
uteroplacental insuffi  ciency, and increased levels of 
the local anesthetic in the fetal blood. 
 During a pudendal nerve block, a special needle 
(Koback) or guide (Iowa trumpet) is used to place 
the needle transvaginally underneath the ischial 
spine on each side (see Chapter 48); the needle is 
advanced 1–1.5 cm through the sacrospinous liga-
ment, and 10 mL of 1% lidocaine or 2% chloropro-
caine is injected following aspiration. Th e needle 
guide is used to limit the depth of injection and 
protect the fetus and vagina from the needle. Other 
potential complications include intravascular injec-
tion, retroperitoneal hematoma, and retropsoas or 
subgluteal abscess. 
 REGIONAL ANESTHETIC 
TECHNIQUES 
 Epidural or intrathecal techniques, alone or in com-
bination, are currently the most popular methods of 
pain relief during labor and delivery. Th ey can pro-
vide excellent analgesia while allowing the mother 
25–50 mg intramuscularly, usually up to a total of 
100 mg. Maximal maternal and fetal respiratory 
depression is seen in 10–20 min following intrave-
nous administration and in 1–3 h following intra-
muscular administration. Consequently, meperidine 
is usually administered early in labor when delivery 
is not expected for at least 4 h. Intravenous fentanyl, 
25–100 mcg/h, has also been used for labor. Fentanyl 
in 25–100 mcg doses has a 3- to 10-min analgesic 
onset that initially lasts about 60 min, and lasts longer 
following multiple doses. However, maternal respira-
tory depression outlasts the analgesia. Lower doses of 
fentanyl may be associated with little or no neonatal 
respiratory depression and are reported to have no 
eff ect on Apgar scores. Morphine is not used because 
in equianalgesic doses it appears to cause greater 
respiratory depression in the fetus than meperidine 
and fentanyl. Agents with mixed agonist– antagonist 
activity (butorphanol, 1–2 mg, and nalbuphine, 
10–20 mg intravenously or intramuscularly) are 
eff ective and are associated with little or no cumu-
lative respiratory depression, but excessive sedation 
with repeat doses can be problematic. 
 Promethazine (25–50 mg intramuscularly) and 
hydroxyzine (50–100 mg intramuscularly) can be 
useful alone or in combination with meperidine. 
Both drugs reduce anxiety, opioid requirements, and 
the incidence of nausea, but do not add appreciably 
to neonatal depression. A signifi cant disadvantage 
of hydroxyzine is pain at the injection site following 
intramuscular administration. Nonsteroidal antiin-
fl ammatory agents, such as ketorolac, are not recom-
mended because they suppress uterine contractions 
and promote closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus. 
 Small doses (up to 2 mg) of midazolam (Versed) 
may be administered in combination with a small 
dose of fentanyl (up to 100 mcg) in healthy partu-
rients at term to facilitate neuraxial blockade. At 
this dose, maternal amnesia has not been observed. 
Chronic administration of the longer-acting benzo-
diazepine diazepam (Valium) has been associated 
with fetal depression. 
 Low-dose intravenous ketamine is a powerful 
analgesic. In doses of 10–15 mg intravenously, good 
analgesia can be obtained in 2–5 min without loss of 
consciousness. Unfortunately, fetal depression with 
low Apgar scores is associated with doses greater than 
848 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
less complete analgesia, lack of perineal relaxation, 
and side eff ects such as pruritus, nausea, vomiting, 
sedation, and respiratory depression. Side eff ects 
may be ameliorated with low doses of naloxone 
(0.1–0.2 mg/h intravenously). 
 Intrathecal Opioids 
 Intrathecal morphine in doses of 0.1–0.5 mg may 
produce satisfactory and prolonged (4–6 h) anal-
gesia during the fi rst stage of labor. Unfortunately, 
the onset of analgesia is slow (45–60 min), and these 
doses may not be suffi  cient in many patients. Higher 
doses are associated with a relatively high incidence 
of side eff ects. Morphine is therefore rarely used 
alone. Th e combination of morphine, 0.1–0.25 mg, 
and fentanyl, 12.5 mcg (or sufentanil, 5 mcg), may 
result in a more rapid onset of analgesia (5 min). 
Intermittent boluses of 10–15 mg of meperidine, 
12.5–25 mcg of fentanyl, or 3–10 mcg of sufentanil 
via an intrathecal catheter can also provide satisfac-
tory analgesia for labor. Early reports of fetal bra-
dycardia following intrathecal opioid injections (eg, 
sufentanil) have not been confi rmed by subsequent 
studies. Hypotension following administration of 
intrathecal opioids for labor is likely related to the 
resultant analgesia and decreased circulating cat-
echolamine levels. 
 Epidural Opioids 
 Relatively large doses (≥7.5 mg) of epidural mor-
phine are required for satisfactory labor analgesia, 
but doses larger than 5 mg are not recommended 
because of the increased risk of delayed respiratory 
depression and because the resultant analgesia is 
eff ective only in the early fi rst stage of labor. Onset 
may take 30–60 min but analgesia lasts up to 12–24 h 
(as does the risk of delayed respiratory depression). 
Epidural meperidine, 50–100 mg, provides good, 
but relatively brief, analgesia (1–3 h). Epidural fen-
tanyl, 50–150 mcg, or sufentanil, 10–20 mcg, usu-
ally produces analgesia within 5–10 min with few 
side eff ects, but it has a short duration (1–2 h). 
Although “single-shot” epidural opioids do not 
appear to cause signifi cant neonatal depression, 
caution should be exercised following repeated 
administrations. Combinations of a lower dose of 
morphine, 2.5 mg, with fentanyl, 25–50 mcg (or 
to be awake and cooperative during labor. Although 
spinal opioids or local anesthetics alone can provide 
satisfactory analgesia, techniques that combine the 
two have proved to be the most satisfactory in most 
parturients.  Moreover, the synergy between 
opioids and local anesthetics decreases dose 
requirements and provides excellent analgesia with 
few maternal side eff ects and little or no neonatal 
depression. 
 1. Spinal Opioids Alone 
 Opioids may be given intrathecally as a single injec-
tion or intermittently via an epidural or intrathe-
cal catheter ( Table 41–2 ). Relatively large doses are 
required for analgesia during labor when epidural or 
intrathecal opioids are used alone. For example, the 
ED 50 during labor is 124 mcg for epidural fentanyl 
and 21 mcg for epidural sufentanil. Th e higher doses 
may be associated with a high risk of side eff ects, 
most importantly respiratory depression. For that 
reason combinations of local anesthetics and opioids 
are most commonly used (see below). Pure opioid 
techniques are most useful for high-risk patients 
who may not tolerate the functional sympathec-
tomy associated with spinal or epidural anesthesia 
(see Chapter 45). Th is group includes patients with 
hypovolemia or signifi cant cardiovascular disease 
such as moderate to severe aortic stenosis, tetralogy 
of Fallot, Eisenmenger’s syndrome, or pulmonary 
hypertension. With the exception of meperidine, 
which has local anesthetic properties, spinal opi-
oids alone do not produce motor blockade or sym-
pathectomy. Th us, they do not impair the ability 
of the parturient to “push.” Disadvantages include 
4
 TABLE 412  Spinal opioid dosages for labor 
and delivery. 
Agent
Intrathecal
Epidural
Morphine
0.1–0.5 mg
5 mg
Meperidine
10–15 mg
50–100 mg
Fentanyl
10–25 mcg
50–150 mcg
Sufentanil
3–10 mcg
10–20 mcg
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia
849
may not be justifi ed, because dehiscence of a lower 
segment scar frequently does not cause pain even 
without epidural anesthesia; moreover, changes in 
uterine tone and contraction pattern may be more 
reliable signs. 
 Before performing any regional block, appro-
priate equipment and supplies for resuscitation 
should be checked and made immediately available. 
Minimum supplies include oxygen, suction, a mask 
with a positive-pressure device for ventilation, a 
functioning laryngoscope and blades, endotracheal 
tubes (6 or 6.5 mm), oral and nasal airways, intrave-
nous fl uids, ephedrine, atropine, propofol, and suc-
cinylcholine. Th e ability to frequently monitor blood 
pressure and heart rate is mandatory. A pulse oxim-
eter and capnograph should be readily available. 
 Lumbar Epidural Analgesia 
 Epidural analgesia for labor may be administered in 
early labor aft er the patient has been evaluated by 
her obstetrician.  When dilute mixtures of a 
local anesthetic and an opioid are used, epi-
dural analgesia has little if any eff ect on the progress 
of labor. Concerns that regional analgesia will 
increase the likelihood of oxytocin augmentation, 
operative (eg, forceps) delivery, or cesarean section, 
are unjustifi ed. It is oft en advantageous to place an 
epidural catheter early, when the patient is less 
uncomfortable and can be positioned more easily. 
Moreover, should an urgent or emergent cesarean 
section become necessary, the presence of a well-
functioning epidural catheter makes it possible to 
avoid general anesthesia. 
 A. Technique 
 Parturients may be positioned on their sides or in 
the sitting position for the procedure. Th e sitting 
position oft en makes it easier to identify the midline 
and spine in obese patients. When epidural anesthe-
sia is being given for vaginal delivery (second stage), 
the sitting position helps ensure good sacral spread. 
 Because the lumbar epidural space pressure 
may be positive in some parturients, correct iden-
tifi cation of the epidural space may be diffi  cult. 
Unintentional dural puncture will occur even in 
experienced hands; the incidence of “wet taps” in 
obstetric patients is 0.25–9%, depending on clinician 
7
sufentanil, 7.5–10 mcg), may result in a more rapid 
onset and prolongation of analgesia (4–5 h) with 
fewer side eff ects. 
 2. Local Anesthetic/Local 
Anesthetic–Opioid Mixtures 
 Epidural and spinal (intrathecal) analgesia more 
commonly utilizes local anesthetics either alone or 
with opioids for labor and delivery.  Analgesia 
during the fi rst stage of labor requires neural 
blockade at the T10–L1 sensory level, whereas pain 
relief during the second stage of labor requires neu-
ral blockade at T10–S4.  Continuous lumbar 
epidural analgesia is the most versatile and 
most commonly-employed technique, because it 
can be used for pain relief for the fi rst stage of labor 
as well as analgesia/anesthesia for subsequent vagi-
nal delivery or cesarean section, if necessary. “Single-
shot” epidural, spinal, or combined spinal epidural 
analgesia may be appropriate when pain relief is ini-
tiated just prior to vaginal delivery (the second 
stage). Obstetric caudal injections have largely been 
abandoned because of less versatility; although 
eff ective for perineal analgesia/anesthesia they 
require large volumes of local anesthetic to anesthe-
tize upper lumbar and lower thoracic dermatomes. 
Th ey have also been associated with early paralysis 
of the pelvic muscles that may interfere with normal 
rotation of the fetal head, and with a small risk of 
accidental puncture of the fetus. 
 Absolute contraindications to regional anesthe-
sia include patient refusal, infection over the injection 
site, coagulopathy, marked hypovolemia, and true 
allergies to local anesthetics. Th e patient’s inability 
to cooperate may prevent successful regional anes-
thesia. Neuraxial anesthesia and full anticoagulation 
is a dangerous combination. Regional anesthesia 
should generally not be performed within 6–8 h of 
a subcutaneous minidose of unfractionated heparin 
or within 12–24 h of administration of low-molecu-
lar-weight heparin (LMWH). Th rombocytopenia or 
concomitant administration of an antiplatelet agent 
increases the risk of spinal hematoma. A vaginal 
birth aft er cesarean (VBAC) delivery is not consid-
ered a contraindication to regional anesthesia dur-
ing labor. Concern that the anesthesia may mask 
pain associated with uterine rupture during VBAC 
5
6
850 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
when advancing the needle and by intermittently 
applying pressure to the air-fi lled loss-of resistance 
syringe. Th e later technique allows for precise con-
trol of needle advancement and may allow a better 
distinction of various tissue densities. If air is used 
for detecting loss of resistance, the amount injected 
should be limited; injection of larger volumes of air 
(>2–3 mL) in the epidural space has been associated 
with patchy or unilateral analgesia and headache. 
Th e average depth of the lumbar epidural space in 
obstetric patients is reported to be 5 cm from the 
skin. Placement of the epidural catheter at the L3–4 
or L4–5 interspace is generally optimal for achiev-
ing a T10–S5 neural blockade. Ultrasound guidance 
has recently been off ered as tool in assisting with 
the placement of an epidural catheter. Th is technique 
experience. Many practitioners add a compress-
ible air bubble to the saline syringe and bounce the 
plunger to ensure that it moves freely and does not 
stick to the syringe wall ( Figure 41–1A and C ). Most 
clinicians advocate the midline approach, whereas 
a minority favors the paramedian approach. For 
the placement of a lumbar epidural catheter in the 
obstetric patient, most anesthesiologists advance the 
epidural needle with the left  hand, which is braced 
against the patient’s back, while applying continuous 
pressure to a glass syringe fi lled with sterile saline 
( Figure 41–1A and C ). Alternatively, some make 
use of the “wings” of the Weiss epidural needle by 
advancing it with both hands few millimeters at a 
time ( Figure 41–1B ). A change of tissue resistance 
is then tested continuously using tactile feedback 
 FIGURE 411  A: One-handed needle advancement; 
continuous pressure technique. The operator applies 
continuous pressure to the plunger of a loss-of-resistance 
syringe ﬁ lled with saline and an air bubble while 
advancing the needle with the left hand braced against 
the patient’s back.  B: Bimanual needle advancement; 
intermittent pressure technique. The operator advances 
the loss-of-resistance syringe with both hands 2–3 mm 
at a time while appreciating the resistance encountered 
by the needle.  C: In between bimanual advancements of 
the needle, the operator tests the tissue resistance of the 
needle tip by bouncing the plunger of the air-ﬁ lled loss-of-
resistance syringe. Many practitioners add a compressible 
air bubble to a saline-ﬁ lled syringe and bounce the 
plunger to ensure that the plunger is moving freely 
and not sticking to the syringe barrel wall. 
A
B
C
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
851 
both local anesthetic and opioid can be used. More 
importantly, the incidence of adverse side eff ects, 
such as hypotension and drug toxicity, is likely 
reduced. Although local anesthetics can be used 
alone, there is rarely a reason to do so. Moreover, 
when an opioid is omitted, the higher concentration 
of local anesthetic required (eg, bupivacaine, 0.25%, 
and ropivacaine, 0.2%) for adequate analgesia can 
impair the parturient’s ability to push eff ectively as 
labor progresses. Bupivacaine or ropivacaine in con-
centrations of 0.0625–0.125% with either fentanyl, 
2–3 mcg/mL, or sufentanil, 0.3–0.5 mcg/mL, is most 
oft en used. In general, the lower the concentration 
of the local anesthetic the greater the concentration 
of opioid that is required. Very dilute local anes-
thetic mixtures (0.0625%) generally do not produce 
motor blockade and may allow some patients to 
ambulate (“walking” or “mobile” epidural). Th e long 
duration of action of bupivacaine makes it a popu-
lar agent for labor. Ropivacaine may be preferable 
because of its reduced potential for cardiotoxicity 
(see Chapter 16). At equi-analgesic doses, ropiva-
caine and bupivacaine appear to produce the same 
degree of motor block. 
 Th e eff ect of epinephrine-containing solutions 
on the course of labor is somewhat controversial. 
Many clinicians use epinephrine-containing solu-
tions only for intravascular test doses because of 
concern that the solutions may slow the progres-
sion of labor or adversely aff ect the fetus; others use 
only very dilute concentrations of epinephrine such 
as 1:800,000 or 1:400,000. Studies comparing these 
various agents have failed to fi nd any diff erences in 
neonatal Apgar scores, acid–base status, or neurobe-
havioral evaluations. 
 D. Epidural Activation 
for the First Stage of Labor 
 Initial epidural injections may be done either before 
or aft er the catheter is placed. Administration 
through the needle can facilitate catheter place-
ment, whereas administration through the catheter 
ensures proper function of the catheter. Th e follow-
ing sequence is suggested for epidural activation: 
1. 
 Test for unintentional subarachnoid or 
intravascular placement of the needle or 
catheter with a 3-mL test dose of a local 
allows the practitioner to judge the depth of the epi-
dural space and estimate the best angle of needle 
insertion. Th e potential benefi t of this technique is 
most obvious in obese patients with poor anatomic 
landmarks. However, the technique is highly user-
dependent, and few practitioners have adopted it. 
 If unintentional dural puncture occurs, the 
anesthetist has two choices: (1) place the epidural 
catheter in the subarachnoid space for continu-
ous spinal (intrathecal) analgesia and anesthesia 
(see below), or (2) remove the needle and attempt 
placement at a higher spinal level. Th e intrathecally-
placed epidural catheter may be used as continuous 
spinal anesthetic, possibly reducing the incidence of 
post–dural puncture headache. If used in this fash-
ion, an infusion of 0.0625–0.125% bupivacaine with 
fentanyl, 2–3 mcg/mL starting at 1–3 mL/h, is a rea-
sonable choice. 
 B. Choice of Epidural Catheter 
 Many clinicians advocate use of a multiholed cath-
eter instead of a single-holed catheter for obstetric 
anesthesia. Use of a multiholed catheter may be 
associated with fewer unilateral blocks and greatly 
reduces the incidence of false-negative aspiration 
when assessing for intravascular or intrathecal cath-
eter placement. Advancing a multiholed catheter 
4–6 cm into the epidural space appears to be optimal 
for obtaining adequate sensory levels. A single-hole 
catheter need only be advanced 3–5 cm into the epi-
dural space. Shorter insertion depths (<5 cm), how-
ever, may favor dislodgment of the catheter out of the 
epidural space in obese patients following fl exion/
extension movements of the spine. Spiral wire-
reinforced catheters are very resistant to kinking. A 
spiral or spring tip, particularly when used without 
a stylet, is associated with fewer, less intense pares-
thesias and may also be associated with a lower inci-
dence of accidental intravascular insertion. 
 C. Choice of Local Anesthetic Solutions 
 Th e addition of opioids to local anesthetic solutions 
for epidural anesthesia has dramatically changed 
the practice of obstetric anesthesia. Th e synergy 
between epidural opioids and local anesthetic solu-
tions refl ects separate sites of action, namely, opiate 
receptors and neuronal axons, respectively. When 
the two are combined, very low concentrations of 
852 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
vessel during a continuous infusion technique 
may be heralded by loss of eff ective analgesia; 
a high index of suspicion is required because 
overt signs of systemic toxicity may be absent. 
Erosion of the catheter through the dura results 
in a slowly progressive motor blockade of the 
lower extremities and a rising sensory level. 
 E. Epidural Administration 
During the Second Stage of Labor 
 Administration for the second stage of labor extends 
the block to include the S2–4 dermatomes. Whether 
a catheter is already in place or epidural anesthesia 
is just being initiated, the following steps should be 
undertaken: 
1. 
 If the patient does not already have a catheter 
in place, identify the epidural space while the 
patient is in a sitting position. A patient who 
already has an epidural catheter in place should 
be placed in a semiupright or sitting position 
prior to injection. 
2. 
 Give a 3-mL test dose of local anesthetic 
(eg, lidocaine 1.5%) with 1:200,000 
epinephrine. Again, the injection should be 
completed between contractions. 
3. 
 If aft er 5 min signs of an intravascular or 
intrathecal injection are absent, give 10–15 mL 
of additional local anesthetic–opioid mixture at 
a rate not faster than 5 mL every 1–2 min. 
4. 
 Administer oxygen by face mask, lay the 
patient supine with left  uterine displacement, 
and monitor blood pressure every 1–2 min for 
the fi rst 15 min, then every 5 min thereaft er. 
 F. Prevention of Unintentional 
Intravascular and Intrathecal Injections 
 Safe administration of epidural anesthesia is criti-
cally dependent on avoiding unintentional intrathe-
cal or intravascular injection.  Unintentional 
intravascular or intrathecal placement of an 
epidural needle or catheter is possible even when 
aspiration fails to yield blood or cerebrospinal fl uid 
(CSF). Th e incidence of unintentional intravascular 
or intrathecal placement of an epidural catheter is 
5–15% and 0.5–2.5%, respectively. Even a properly 
placed catheter can subsequently erode into an 
8
anesthetic with 1:200,000 epinephrine 
(controversial; see the section on Prevention 
of Unintentional Intravascular and 
Intrathecal Injections). Many clinicians test 
with lidocaine 1.5% because of less toxicity 
following unintentional intravascular 
injection and a more rapid onset of spinal 
anesthesia than with bupivacaine and 
ropivacaine. Th e test dose should be injected 
between contractions to help reduce false 
positive signs of an intravascular injection 
(ie, tachycardia due to a painful contraction). 
2. 
 If aft er 5 min signs of intravascular or 
intrathecal injection are absent, with the 
patient supine and left  uterine displacement, 
administer 10 mL of the local anesthetic–
opioid mixture in 5-mL increments, waiting 
1–2 min between doses, to achieve a T10–L1 
sensory level. Th e initial bolus is usually 
composed of 0.1–0.2% ropivacaine or 
0.0625–0.125% bupivacaine combined with 
either 50–100 mcg of fentanyl or 10–20 mcg of 
sufentanil. 
3. 
 Monitor with frequent blood pressure 
measurements for 20–30 min or until the 
patient is stable. Pulse oximetry should also 
be used. Oxygen is administered via face mask 
if there are any signifi cant decreases in blood 
pressure or oxygen saturation readings. 
4. 
 Repeat steps 2 and 3 when pain recurs until the 
fi rst stage of labor is completed. Alternatively, 
a continuous epidural infusion technique may 
be employed using bupivacaine or ropivacaine 
in concentrations of 0.0625–0.125% with 
either fentanyl, 1–5 mcg/mL, or sufentanil, 
0.2–0.5 mcg/mL at a rate of 10 mL/h, which 
subsequently is adjusted to the patient’s 
analgesic requirements (range: 5–15 mL/h). A 
third choice would be to use patient-controlled 
epidural analgesia (PCEA). Some studies 
suggest that total drug requirements may be less 
and patient satisfaction is greater with PCEA 
compared with other epidural techniques. 
PCEA settings are typically a 5-mL bolus 
dose with a 5–10 min lockout and 0–12 mL/h 
basal rate; a 1-h limit of 15–25 mL may used. 
Migration of the epidural catheter into a blood 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia
853
Use of the head-down (Trendelenburg) position is 
controversial because of its potentially detrimental 
eff ects on pulmonary gas exchange. 
 2. Unintentional intravascular injection —Early 
recognition of intravascular injection, facilitated by 
the use of small, repeated doses of local anesthetic 
instead of a large bolus, may prevent more serious 
local anesthetic toxicity, such as seizures or cardio-
vascular collapse. Intravascular injections of toxic 
doses of lidocaine or chloroprocaine usually pres-
ent as seizures. Propofol, 20–50 mg, will terminate 
seizure activity. Maintenance of a patent airway and 
adequate oxygenation are critical; however, imme-
diate endotracheal intubation with succinylcholine 
and cricoid pressure is rarely necessary. Intravascular 
injections of bupivacaine can cause rapid and pro-
found cardiovascular collapse as well as seizure activ-
ity. Cardiac resuscitation may be exceedingly diffi  cult 
and is aggravated by acidosis and hypoxia. An imme-
diate infusion of 20% Intralipid has shown effi  cacy 
in reversing bupivacaine-induced cardiac toxicity. 
Amiodarone is the agent of choice for treating local 
anesthetic–induced ventricular arrhythmias. 
 3. Unintentional intrathecal injection —Even when 
dural puncture is recognized immediately aft er 
injection of local anesthetic, attempted aspiration 
of the local anesthetic will usually be unsuccessful. 
Th e patient should be placed supine with left  uter-
ine displacement. Head elevation accentuates the 
adverse cerebral eff ects of hypotension and should be 
avoided. Hypotension should be treated with phen-
ylephrine and intravenous fl uids. A high spinal level 
can also result in diaphragmatic paralysis, which 
necessitates intubation and ventilation with 100% 
oxygen. Delayed onset of a very high and oft en patchy 
or unilateral block may be due to unrecognized sub-
dural injection (see Chapter 45), which is managed 
similarly. 
 4. Postdural puncture headache (PDPH) —
Headache frequently follows unintentional dural 
puncture in parturients. A self-limited headache 
may occur without dural puncture; in such instances, 
injection of signifi cant amounts of air into the epi-
dural space during a loss-of-resistance technique 
may be responsible. PDPH is due to decreased intra-
cranial pressure with compensatory cerebral vaso-
dilation (see Chapter 45). Bed rest, hydration, oral 
analgesics, and caff eine sodium benzoate (500 mg 
epidural vein or an intrathecal position. Th is possi-
bility should be considered each time local anes-
thetic is injected through an epidural catheter. 
 Test doses of lidocaine, 45–60 mg, bupivacaine, 
7.5–10 mg, ropivacaine, 6–8 mg, or chloroprocaine, 
100 mg, can be given to exclude unintentional intra-
thecal placement. Signs of sensory and motor block-
ade usually become apparent within 2–3 min and 
3–5 min, respectively, if the injection is intrathecal. 
 In patients not receiving β-adrenergic antago-
nists, the intravascular injection of a local anesthetic 
solution with 15–20 mcg of epinephrine consistently 
increases the heart rate by 20–30 beats/min within 
30–60 s if the catheter (or epidural needle) is intra-
vascular. Th is technique is not always reliable in 
parturients because they oft en have marked spon-
taneous baseline variations in heart rate with con-
tractions. In fact, bradycardia has been reported in a 
parturient following intravenous injection of 15 mcg 
of epinephrine. Moreover, in animal studies, 15 mcg 
of epinephrine intravenously reduces uterine blood 
fl ow. Alternative methods of detecting unintentional 
intravascular catheter placement include eliciting 
tinnitus or perioral numbness following a 100-mg 
test dose of lidocaine or eliciting a chronotropic 
eff ect following injection of 5 mcg of isoproterenol. 
Th e use of dilute local anesthetic solutions and slow 
injection rates of no more than 5 mL at a time may 
also enhance detection of unintentional intravascular 
injections before catastrophic complications develop. 
 G. Management of Complications 
 1. Hypotension —Generally defi ned as a 
greater than 20% decrease in the patient’s 
baseline blood pressure, or a systolic blood pressure 
less than 100 mm Hg, hypotension is a common side 
eff ect of neuraxial anesthesia. It is primarily due to 
decreased sympathetic tone and is greatly accentu-
ated by aortocaval compression and an upright or 
semiupright position. Treatment should be aggres-
sive in obstetric patients and consists of intravenous 
boluses of ephedrine (5–15 mg) or phenylephrine 
(25–50 mcg), supplemental oxygen, left  uterine dis-
placement, and an intravenous fl uid bolus. Although 
the routine use of a crystalloid fl uid bolus prior to 
dosing an epidural catheter is not eff ective in the 
prevention of hypotension, ensuring proper intrave-
nous hydration of the pregnant patient is important. 
9
854 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Th e spinal and epidural needles may be placed 
at separate interspaces, but most clinicians use a 
needle-through-needle technique at the same inter-
space. Use of saline for identifi cation of the epidural 
space may potentially cause confusion of saline for 
CSF. With the needle-through-needle technique, the 
epidural needle is placed in the epidural space and 
a long spinal needle is then introduced through it 
and advanced farther into the subarachnoid space. 
A distinct pop is felt as the needle penetrates the 
dura. Th e needle-beside-needle technique typically 
employs a specially designed epidural needle that has 
a channel for the spinal needle. Aft er the intrathecal 
injection and withdrawal of the spinal needle, the 
epidural catheter is threaded into position and the 
epidural needle is withdrawn. Th e risk of advancing 
the epidural catheter through the dural hole created 
by the spinal needle appears to be negligible when 
a 25-gauge or smaller needle is used. Th e epidural 
catheter, however, should be aspirated carefully and 
local anesthetic should always be given slowly and 
in small increments to avoid unintentional intrathe-
cal injections. Moreover, epidural drugs should be 
titrated carefully because the dural hole may facili-
tate entry of epidural drugs into CSF and enhance 
their eff ects. 
 Spinal Anesthesia 
 Spinal anesthesia given just prior to delivery—also 
known as saddle block—provides profound anesthe-
sia for operative vaginal delivery. Use of a 22-gauge 
or smaller, pencil-point spinal needle (Whitacre, 
Sprotte, or Gertie Marx) decreases the likelihood 
of PDPH. Hyperbaric tetracaine (3–4 mg), bupiva-
caine (2.5–5 mg), or lidocaine (20–40 mg) usually 
provides excellent perineal anesthesia. Addition of 
fentanyl (12.5–25 mcg) or sufentanil (5–7.5 mcg) 
signifi cantly potentiates the block. A T10 sensory 
level can be obtained with slightly larger amounts of 
local anesthetic. Th ree minutes aft er injection, the 
patient is placed in the lithotomy position with left  
uterine displacement. 
 GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
 Because of the increased risk of aspiration, general 
anesthesia for vaginal delivery is avoided except for 
a true emergency. If an epidural catheter is already in 
added to 1000 mL intravenous fl uids  administered 
at 200 mL/h) may be eff ective in patients with mild 
headaches and as temporary treatment. Patients with 
moderate to severe headaches usually require an 
epidural blood patch (10–20 mL) (see Chapter 45). 
Prophylactic epidural blood patches are not rec-
ommended; 25–50% of patients may not require a 
blood patch following dural puncture. Delaying a 
blood patch for 24 h increases its effi  cacy. Intracra-
nial subdural hematoma has been reported as a rare 
complication 1–6 weeks following unintentional 
dural puncture in obstetric patients. 
 5. Maternal fever —Maternal fever is oft en inter-
preted as chorioamnionitis and may trigger an 
invasive evaluation for neonatal sepsis. Th ere is no 
evidence that epidural anesthesia aff ects maternal 
temperature or that neonatal sepsis is increased with 
epidural analgesia. An elevation in maternal tem-
perature is associated with a high body mass index 
and with nulliparity in women and prolonged labor. 
 Combined Spinal & 
Epidural (CSE) Analgesia 
 Techniques using CSE analgesia and anes-
thesia may particularly benefi t patients with 
severe pain early in labor and those who receive anal-
gesia/anesthesia just prior to delivery. Intrathecal 
opioid and local anesthetic are injected aft er which 
an epidural catheter is left  in place. Th e intrathecal 
drugs provide nearly immediate pain control and 
have minimal eff ects on the early progress of labor, 
whereas the epidural catheter provides a route for 
subsequent analgesia for labor and delivery or anes-
thesia for cesarean section. Addition of small doses 
of local anesthetic agents to intrathecal opioid injec-
tion greatly potentiates their analgesia and can sig-
nifi cantly reduce opioid requirements. Th us, many 
clinicians will inject 2.5 mg of preservative-free 
bupivacaine or 3–4 mg of ropivacaine with intrathe-
cal opioids for analgesia in the fi rst stage of labor. 
Intrathecal doses for CSE are fentanyl, 5–10 mcg, 
or sufentanil, 5 mcg. Some studies suggest that CSE 
techniques may be associated with greater patient 
satisfaction and lower incidence of PDPH than epi-
dural analgesia alone. A 24- to 27-gauge pencil-point 
spinal needle (Whitacre, Sprotte, or Gertie Marx) is 
used to minimize the incidence of PDPH. 
10
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia
855
drugs, (2) a decreased risk of maternal pulmonary 
aspiration, (3) an awake mother at the birth of her 
child, and (4) the option of using spinal opioids for 
postoperative pain relief.  Continuous epi-
dural anesthesia allows better continuing 
 control over the sensory level than “single-shot” 
techniques. Conversely, spinal anesthesia has a 
more rapid, predictable onset; may produce a more 
dense (complete) block; and lacks the potential for 
serious systemic drug toxicity because of the smaller 
dose of local anesthetic employed. Regardless of the 
regional technique chosen, one must be prepared to 
administer a general anesthetic at any time during 
the procedure. Moreover, administration of a non-
particulate antacid within 30 min of surgery should 
be considered. 
 General anesthesia off ers (1) a very rapid and 
reliable onset, (2) control over the airway and venti-
lation, (3) greater comfort for parturients who have 
morbid fears of needles or surgery, and (4) potentially 
less hypotension than regional anesthesia. General 
anesthesia also facilitates management in the event of 
severe hemorrhagic complications such as placenta 
12
place and time permits, rapid-onset regional anes-
thesia can be obtained with alkalinized lidocaine 2% 
or chloroprocaine 3%.  Table 41–3 lists indications 
for general anesthesia during vaginal delivery. Th ese 
indications are rare, and most share the need for 
uterine relaxation. 
 Anesthesia for 
Cesarean Section 
 Common indications for cesarean section are 
listed in  Table 41–4 . Th e choice of anesthesia for 
cesarean section is determined by multiple factors, 
including the indication for operative delivery, its 
urgency, patient and obstetrician preferences, and 
the skills of the anesthetist. In a given country, 
cesarean section rates may vary as much as two-
fold between institutions. In some countries, 
cesarean delivery is seen as preferable to labor and 
rates are much greater than those in the United 
States (which generally vary between 15% and 35% 
from hospital to hospital). In the United States 
most elective cesarean sections are performed 
under spinal anesthesia.  Regional anesthesia 
has become the preferred technique because 
general anesthesia has been associated with a 
greater risk of maternal morbidity and mortality. 
Deaths associated with general anesthesia are gen-
erally related to airway problems, such as inability 
to intubate, inability to ventilate, or aspiration 
pneumonitis, whereas deaths associated with 
regional anesthesia are generally related to exces-
sive dermatomal spread of blockade or to local 
anesthetic toxicity. 
 Other advantages of regional anesthesia include 
(1) less neonatal exposure to potentially depressant 
11
 TABLE 413  Possible indications for general 
anesthesia during vaginal delivery. 
Fetal distress during the second stage
Tetanic uterine contractions
Breech extraction
Version and extraction
Manual removal of a retained placenta
Replacement of an inverted uterus
 TABLE 414  Major indications for cesarean 
section. 
 Labor unsafe for mother and fetus 
Increased risk of uterine rupture
Previous classic cesarean section
Previous extensive myomectomy or uterine 
reconstruction
Increased risk of maternal hemorrhage
Central or partial placenta previa
Abruptio placentae
Previous vaginal reconstruction
 Dystocia 
Abnormal fetopelvic relations
Fetopelvic disproportion
Abnormal fetal presentation
Transverse or oblique lie
Breech presentation
Dysfunctional uterine activity
 Immediate or emergent delivery necessary 
Fetal distress
Umbilical cord prolapse with fetal bradycardia
Maternal hemorrhage
Genital herpes with ruptured membranes
Impending maternal death
856 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
obstetrician will not likely complete the surgery in 
45 minutes. Use of a 22-gauge or smaller, pencil-
point spinal needle (Whitacre, Sprotte, or Gertie 
Marx) decreases the incidence of PDPH. Adding 
10–25 mcg of fentanyl or 5–10 mcg of sufentanil 
to the local anesthetic solution enhances the inten-
sity of the block and prolongs its duration without 
adversely aff ecting neonatal outcome. Addition 
of preservative-free morphine (0.1–0.3 mg) can 
prolong postoperative analgesia up to 24 h, but 
requires monitoring for delayed postoperative 
respiratory depression. Regardless of the anesthetic 
agents used, considerable variability in the maxi-
mal dermatomal extent of anesthesia should be 
expected (see Chapter 45). In obese patients, a stan-
dard 3.5-in. (9-cm) spinal needle may not be long 
enough to reach the subarachnoid space. In these 
cases, longer spinal needles of 4.75 in. (12 cm) to 
6 in. (15.2 cm) may be required. To prevent these 
longer needles from bending, some anesthesiolo-
gists prefer larger diameter needles, such as the 
22-gauge Sprotte needle. Alternatively, a 2.5-in. 
(6.3-cm) 20-gauge Quincke type spinal needle 
can be used as a long introducer and guide for a 
25-gauge pencil-point spinal needle. 
 Continuous spinal anesthesia is also a reason-
able option, especially for obese patients, follow-
ing unintentional dural puncture sustained while 
attempting to place an epidural catheter for cesar-
ean section. Aft er the catheter is advanced 2–2.5 cm 
into the lumbar subarachnoid space and secured, 
it can be used to inject anesthetic agents; more-
over, it allows later supplementation of anesthesia if 
necessary. 
 Epidural Anesthesia 
 Epidural anesthesia for cesarean section is typically 
performed using a catheter, which allows supplemen-
tation of anesthesia if necessary and provides an 
excellent route for postoperative opioid admin-
istration.  Aft er negative aspiration and a nega-
tive test dose, a total of 15–25 mL of local anesthetic 
is injected slowly in 5-mL increments in order to 
minimize the risk of systemic local anesthetic toxic-
ity. Lidocaine 2% (typically with 1:200,000 epineph-
rine) or chloroprocaine 3% are most commonly used 
in the United States. Th e addition of fentanyl, 
13
accreta. Its principal disadvantages are the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration, the potential inability to intu-
bate or ventilate the patient, and drug-induced fetal 
depression. Present anesthetic techniques, however, 
limit the dose of intravenous agents such that fetal 
depression is usually not clinically signifi cant with 
general anesthesia when delivery occurs within 
10 min of induction of anesthesia. Regardless of the 
type of anesthesia, neonates delivered more than 
3 min aft er uterine incision have lower Apgar scores 
and pH values. 
 REGIONAL ANESTHESIA 
 Cesarean section requires that dermatomes up to and 
including T4 be anesthetized. Because of the associ-
ated sympathetic blockade, patients should receive 
an appropriate intravenous bolus of crystalloid such 
as lactated Ringer’s (typically 1000–1500 mL) or col-
loid (typically 250–500 mL) solution at the time of 
neural blockade. Such boluses will not consistently 
prevent hypotension but can virtually eliminate 
preexisting hypovolemia. Aft er the local anesthetic 
injection, phenylephrine may be titrated to maintain 
blood pressure within 20% of baseline. An approxi-
mate 10% decrease in blood pressure is expected. 
Administration of ephedrine (5–10 mg) may be 
necessary in the hypotensive patient with reduced 
heart rate. Some studies suggest that phenyleph-
rine produces less neonatal acidosis compared with 
ephedrine. 
 Aft er spinal anesthetic injection, the patient is 
placed supine with left  uterine displacement; supple-
mental oxygen (40–50%) is given; and blood pres-
sure is measured every 1–2 min until it stabilizes. 
Hypotension following epidural anesthesia typically 
has a slower onset. Slight Trendelenburg positioning 
facilitates achieving a T4 sensory level and may also 
help prevent severe hypotension. Extreme degrees 
of Trendelenburg may interfere with pulmonary gas 
exchange. 
 Spinal Anesthesia 
 Th e patient is usually placed in the lateral decubi-
tus or sitting position, and a hyperbaric solution of 
lidocaine (50–60 mg) or bupivacaine (10–15 mg) 
is injected. Bupivacaine should be chosen if the 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
857 
needle may facilitate movement of epidural drugs 
into CSF and enhance their eff ects. 
 GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
 Pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents and failed 
endotracheal intubation are the major causes of 
maternal morbidity and mortality associated with 
general anesthesia. All patients should receive pro-
phylaxis against aspiration pneumonia with 30 mL 
of 0.3 M sodium citrate 30–45 min prior to induc-
tion. Patients with additional risk factors pre-
disposing them to aspiration should also receive 
intravenous ranitidine, 50 mg, or metoclopramide, 
10 mg, or both, 1–2 h prior to induction; such fac-
tors include morbid obesity, symptoms of gastro-
esophageal refl ux, a potentially diffi  cult airway, or 
emergent surgical delivery without an elective fast-
ing period. Premedication with oral omeprazole, 
40 mg, at night and in the morning also appears to 
be highly eff ective in high-risk patients undergoing 
elective cesarean section. Although anticholinergics 
theoretically may reduce lower esophageal sphinc-
ter tone, premedication with glycopyrrolate (0.1 mg) 
helps reduce airway secretions and should be con-
sidered in patients with a potentially diffi  cult airway. 
 Anticipation of a diffi  cult endotracheal intuba-
tion may help reduce the incidence of failed intuba-
tions. Examination of the neck, mandible, dentition, 
and oropharynx oft en helps predict which patients 
may have problems. Useful predictors of a diffi  -
cult intubation include Mallampati classifi cation, 
short neck, receding mandible, prominent maxil-
lary incisors, and history of diffi  cult intubation (see 
Chapter 19). Th e higher incidence of failed intuba-
tions in pregnant patients compared with nonpreg-
nant surgical patients may be due to airway edema, 
a full dentition, or large breasts that can obstruct the 
handle of the laryngoscope in patients with short 
necks. Proper positioning of the head and neck may 
facilitate endotracheal intubation in obese patients: 
elevation of the shoulders, fl exion of the cervical 
spine, and extension of the atlantooccipital joint 
( Figure 41–2 ). A variety of laryngoscope blades, a 
short laryngoscope handle, at least one extra stiletted 
endotracheal tube (6 mm), Magill forceps (for nasal 
intubation), a laryngeal mask airway (LMA), an intu-
bating LMA (Fastrach), a fi beroptic bronchoscope, 
50–100 mcg, or sufentanil, 10–20 mcg, greatly 
enhances the intensity of the analgesia and prolongs 
its duration without adversely aff ecting neonatal out-
come. Some practitioners also add sodium bicarbon-
ate (7.5% or 8.4% solution) to local anesthetic 
solutions (1 mEq/10 mL of lidocaine) to increase the 
concentration of the nonionized free base and pro-
duce a faster onset and more rapid spread of epidural 
anesthesia. If pain develops as the sensory level 
recedes, additional local anesthetic is administered in 
5-mL increments to maintain a T4 sensory level. 
“Patchy” anesthesia prior to delivery of the baby can 
be treated with 10–20 mg of intravenous ketamine in 
combination with 1–2 mg of midazolam or 30% 
nitrous oxide. Aft er delivery, intravenous opioid sup-
plementation may also be used, provided excessive 
sedation and loss of consciousness are avoided. Pain 
that remains intolerable in spite of a seemingly ade-
quate sensory level and that proves unresponsive to 
these measures necessitates general anesthesia with 
endotracheal intubation. Nausea can be treated intra-
venously with a 5-HT3-receptor antagonist such as 
ondansetron, 4 mg. 
 Epidural morphine (5 mg) at the end of surgery 
provides good to excellent pain relief postopera-
tively for 6–24 h. An increased incidence (3.5–30%) 
of recurrent herpes simplex labialis infection has 
been reported 2–5 days following epidural mor-
phine administration in some studies. Postoperative 
analgesia can also be provided by continuous epi-
dural infusions of fentanyl, 25–75 mcg/h, or sufent-
anil, 5–10 mcg/h, at a volume rate of approximately 
10 mL/h. Epidural butorphanol, 2 mg, can also pro-
vide eff ective postoperative pain relief, but marked 
somnolence is oft en a side eff ect. 
 CSE Anesthesia 
 Th e technique for CSE is described in the earlier 
section on Combined Spinal & Epidural Analgesia 
for labor and vaginal delivery. For cesarean section, 
it combines the benefi t of rapid, reliable, intense 
blockade of spinal anesthesia with the fl exibility of 
an epidural catheter. Th e catheter also allows supple-
mentation of anesthesia and can be used for post-
operative analgesia. As mentioned previously, drugs 
given epidurally should be administered and titrated 
carefully because the dural hole created by the spinal 
858 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
or local (infi ltration) anesthesia, may be tried. In the 
presence of fetal distress, if spontaneous or positive-
pressure ventilation (by mask or LMA) with cricoid 
pressure is possible, delivery of the fetus may be 
attempted. In such instances, a potent volatile agent 
with oxygen is employed for anesthesia, but once 
the fetus is delivered, nitrous oxide may be added to 
reduce the concentration of the volatile agent; sevo-
fl urane may be the best volatile agent because it may 
be least likely to depress ventilation. Th e inability to 
ventilate the patient at any time may require imme-
diate cricothyrotomy or tracheostomy. 
 Suggested Technique 
for Cesarean Section 
1. 
 Th e patient is placed supine with a wedge under 
the right hip for left  uterine displacement. 
2. 
 Denitrogenation is accomplished with 100% 
oxygen for 3–5 min while monitors are applied. 
3. 
 Th e patient is prepared and draped for surgery. 
4. 
 When the surgeons are ready, a rapid-sequence 
induction with cricoid pressure is performed 
using propofol, 2 mg/kg, or ketamine, 
1–2 mg/kg, and succinylcholine, 1.5 mg/
kg. Ketamine is used instead of propofol in 
hypovolemic patients. Other agents, including 
methohexital and etomidate, off er little benefi t 
in obstetric patients. 
5. 
 With few exceptions, surgery is begun only 
aft er proper placement of the endotracheal 
tube is confi rmed. Excessive hyperventilation 
(Pa co 2 < 25 mm Hg) should be avoided 
because it can reduce uterine blood fl ow and 
has been associated with fetal acidosis. 
6. 
 Fift y percent nitrous oxide in oxygen with up 
to 0.75 MAC of a low concentration of volatile 
agent (eg, 1% sevofl urane, 0.75% isofl urane, 
or 3% desfl urane) is used for maintenance of 
anesthesia. Th e low dose of volatile agent helps 
ensure amnesia but is generally not enough to 
cause excessive uterine relaxation or prevent 
uterine contraction following oxytocin. A 
muscle relaxant of intermediate duration 
(atracurium, cisatracurium, or rocuronium) is 
used for relaxation, but may exhibit prolonged 
neuromuscular blockade in patients who are 
receiving magnesium sulfate. 
a video-assisted laryngoscope (GlideScope or Stortz 
CMAC), the capability for transtracheal jet ventila-
tion, and possibly an esophageal– tracheal Combitube 
should be readily available (see Chapter 19). 
 When potential diffi  culty in securing the air-
way is suspected, alternatives to the standard rapid-
sequence induction with conventional laryngoscopy, 
such as regional anesthesia or awake fi beroptic tech-
niques, should be considered. We have found that 
video-assisted laryngoscopy has greatly reduced the 
incidence of diffi  cult or failed tracheal intubation 
at our institutions. Moreover, a clear plan should 
be formulated for a failed endotracheal intubation 
following induction of anesthesia ( Figure 41–3 ). In 
the absence of fetal distress, the patient should be 
awakened, and an awake intubation, with regional 
A
B
 FIGURE 412  Optimal positioning for obese patients 
with a short neck.  A: The normal supine position often 
prevents extension of the head and makes endotracheal 
intubation diﬃ  cult.  B: Elevation of the shoulder allows 
some neck ﬂ exion with more optimal extension of the 
head at the atlantooccipital joint, facilitating intubation. 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
859 
8. 
 If the uterus does not contract readily, 
an opioid should be given, and the 
halogenated agent should be discontinued. 
Methylergonovine (Methergine), 0.2 mg 
intramuscularly or in 100-mL normal saline 
as slow intravenous infusion, may also be 
7. 
 Aft er the neonate and placenta are delivered, 
20–80 units of oxytocin are added to the fi rst 
liter of intravenous fl uid, and another 20 units 
to the next. Additional intravenous agents, 
such as propofol, opioid, or benzodiazepine, 
can be given to ensure amnesia. 
Failed intubation
Assess ventilation and oxygenation
Adequate
Assess fetus
Fetal distress
Wake patient
Awake intubation, OR
Regional anesthesia
LMA with cricoid pressure
(if not in place)
Consider intubation
through LMA
Assess ventilation
and oxygenation
No fetal distress
Halothane or sevoflurane
in 100% oxygen
Spontaneous ventilation
(if possible)
Consider alternate nonsurgical airway:
(1) LMA with cricoid pressure
(if not in place), OR
(2) Combitube, OR
(3) Transtracheal jet ventilation
Deliver baby
Surgical airway:
(1) Cricothyrotomy, OR
(2) Tracheotomy
Inadequate
Adequate
Deliver baby
Inadequate
Call for help
Ventilate with 100% oxygen using:
(1) Face mask and cricoid pressure, OR
(2) Laryngeal mask airway (LMA)
and cricoid pressure
 FIGURE 413  An algorithm for a diﬃ  cult intubation in obstetric patients. 
860 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
based on monitoring of fetal heart rate. Because 
worrisome fetal heart rate patterns have a rela-
tively high incidence of false-positive results, care-
ful interpretation of other parameters, such as fetal 
scalp pH or fetal pulse oximetry, may also be nec-
essary. Moreover, continuation of fetal monitoring 
in the operating room may help avoid unnecessary 
induction of general anesthesia for fetal distress 
when additional time for use of regional anesthesia 
is possible. In selected instances where immedi-
ate delivery is not absolutely mandatory, epidural 
anesthesia (with 3% chloroprocaine or alkalin-
ized 2% lidocaine) or spinal anesthesia may be 
appropriate. 
 Anesthesia for the 
Complicated Pregnancy 
 UMBILICAL CORD PROLAPSE 
 Prolapse of the umbilical cord complicates 0.2–0.6% 
of deliveries. Umbilical cord compression follow-
ing prolapse can rapidly lead to fetal asphyxia. 
Predisposing factors include excessive cord length, 
malpresentation, low birth weight, grand parity 
(more than fi ve pregnancies), multiple gestations, 
and artifi cial rupture of membranes. Th e diagnosis 
is suspected aft er sudden fetal bradycardia or pro-
found decelerations and is confi rmed by physical 
examination. Treatment includes immediate steep 
Trendelenburg or knee–chest position and manual 
pushing of the presenting fetal part back up into the 
pelvis until immediate cesarean section under gen-
eral anesthesia can be performed. If the fetus is not 
viable, vaginal delivery is allowed to continue. 
given but can increase arterial blood pressure. 
15-Methylprostaglandin F 2α (Hemabate), 
0.25 mg intramuscularly, may also be used. 
 9.  An attempt to aspirate gastric contents may 
be made via an oral gastric tube to decrease 
the likelihood of pulmonary aspiration on 
emergence. 
10.  At the end of surgery, muscle relaxants are 
completely reversed, the gastric tube (if placed) 
is removed, and the patient is extubated while 
awake to reduce the risk of aspiration. 
 ANESTHESIA FOR EMERGENCY 
CESAREAN SECTION 
 Indications for emergency cesarean section include 
massive bleeding (placenta previa or accreta, abrup-
tio placentae, or uterine rupture), umbilical cord 
prolapse, and severe fetal distress. A distinction 
must be made between a true emergency requir-
ing immediate delivery (previously referred to as 
“crash”) and one in which some delay is possible. 
Close communication with the obstetrician is neces-
sary to determine whether fetus, mother, or both are 
in immediate jeopardy. 
 Th e choice of anesthetic technique is deter-
mined by consideration for maternal safety (airway 
evaluation), technical issues, and the anesthesi-
ologist’s personal expertise. Criteria leading to the 
diagnosis of nonreassuring fetal status should be 
reviewed as the fetal evaluation may be based on 
criteria with poor predictive accuracy and the fetal 
status may change. Th is information is required to 
choose the anesthetic technique that will produce 
the best outcome for both mother and fetus. Rapid 
institution of regional anesthesia is an option in 
selected cases but is problematic in severely hypo-
volemic or hypotensive patients. If general anes-
thesia is chosen, adequate denitrogenation may be 
achieved rapidly with four maximal breaths of 100% 
oxygen while monitors are being applied. Ketamine, 
1 mg/kg, may be substituted for propofol in hypo-
tensive or hypovolemic patients. 
 Table 41–5 lists commonly accepted signs 
of fetal distress, an imprecise and poorly defi ned 
term. In most instances the diagnosis is primarily 
 TABLE 415  Signs of fetal distress. 
Nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern
Repetitive late decelerations
Loss of fetal beat-to-beat variability associated with late 
or deep decelerations
Sustained fetal heart rate <80 beats/min
Fetal scalp pH <7.20
Meconium-stained amniotic fluid
Intrauterine growth restriction
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
861 
may administer a tocolytic agent at the same time. 
External version can be facilitated, and its success 
rate improved, by providing epidural analgesia with 
2% lidocaine and fentanyl. Although an external 
version is successful in 75% of patients, it can cause 
placental abruption and umbilical cord compression 
necessitating immediate cesarean section. 
 Because the shoulders or head can become 
trapped aft er vaginal delivery of the body, some 
obstetricians employ cesarean section for all breech 
presentations. Manual or forceps-assisted partial 
breech extraction is usually necessary during these 
vaginal deliveries. Th e need for breech extraction 
does not appear to be increased when epidural anes-
thesia is used for labor—if labor is well established 
prior to epidural activation. Moreover, epidural 
anesthesia may decrease the likelihood of a trapped 
head, because the former relaxes the perineum. 
Nonetheless, the fetal head can become trapped 
in the uterus even during cesarean section under 
regional anesthesia; rapid induction of general endo-
tracheal anesthesia and administration of a volatile 
agent may be attempted in such instances to relax 
the uterus. Alternatively, nitroglycerin, 50–100 mcg 
intravenously, can be administered. 
 Abnormal Vertex Presentations 
 When the fetal occiput fails to spontaneously rotate 
anteriorly, a persistent occiput posterior presenta-
tion results in a more prolonged and painful labor. 
Manual, vacuum, or forceps rotation is usually 
necessary but increases the likelihood of maternal 
and fetal injuries. Regional anesthesia can be used 
to provide perineal analgesia and pelvic relaxation, 
allowing manual or forceps rotation followed by for-
ceps delivery. 
 A  face presentation occurs when the fetal head 
is hyperextended and generally requires cesarean 
section. A  compound presentation occurs when 
an extremity enters the pelvis along with either the 
head or the buttocks. Vaginal delivery is usually still 
possible because the extremity oft en withdraws as 
the labor progresses. 
 Shoulder dystocia , or impaction of a shoulder 
against the pubic symphysis, complicates 0.2–2% 
of deliveries and is one of the major causes of birth 
injuries. Th e most important risk factor is fetal 
 DYSTOCIA & ABNORMAL 
FETAL PRESENTATIONS 
& POSITIONS 
 Primary Dysfunctional Labor 
 A prolonged latent phase by defi nition exceeds 20 h 
in a nulliparous parturient and 14 h in a multiparous 
patient. Th e cervix usually remains at 4 cm or less but 
is completely eff aced. Th e etiology is likely ineff ective 
contractions without a dominant myometrial pace-
maker.  Arrest of dilation is present when the cervix 
undergoes no further change aft er 2 h in the active 
phase of labor. A protracted active phase refers to 
slower than normal cervical dilation, defi ned as less 
than 1.2 cm/h in a nulliparous patient and less than 
1.5 cm/h in a multiparous parturient. A  prolonged 
deceleration phase occurs when cervical dilation 
slows markedly aft er 8 cm. Th e cervix becomes very 
edematous and appears to lose eff acement. A pro-
longed second stage ( disorder of descent ) is defi ned 
as a descent of less than 1 cm/h and 2 cm/h in nul-
liparous and multiparous parturients, respectively. 
Failure of the head to descend 1 cm in station aft er 
adequate pushing is referred to as  arrest of descent . 
 Oxytocin is usually the treatment of choice for 
uterine contractile abnormalities. Th e drug is given 
intravenously at 1–6 mU/min and increased in incre-
ments of 1–6 mU/min every 15–40 min, depending 
on the protocol. Use of amniotomy is controversial. 
Treatment is usually expectant management, as long 
as the fetus and mother are tolerating the prolonged 
labor. When a trial of oxytocin is unsuccessful or 
when malpresentation or cephalopelvic dispropor-
tion is also present, operative vaginal delivery or 
cesarean section is indicated. 
 Breech Presentation 
 Breech presentations complicate 3–4% of deliveries 
and signifi cantly increase both maternal and fetal 
morbidity and mortality rates. Breech presentations 
increase neonatal mortality and the incidence of 
cord prolapse more than 10-fold. External cephalic 
version may be attempted aft er 34 weeks of gestation 
and prior to the onset of labor; however, the fetus 
may spontaneously return to the breech presenta-
tion before the onset of labor. Some obstetricians 
862 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
patient is usually treated with bed rest and obser-
vation. Aft er 37 weeks of gestation, delivery is usu-
ally accomplished via cesarean section. Patients with 
low-lying placenta may rarely be allowed to deliver 
vaginally if the bleeding is mild. 
 Active bleeding or an unstable patient requires 
immediate cesarean section under general anesthe-
sia. Th e patient should have two large-bore intrave-
nous catheters in place; intravascular volume defi cits 
must be replaced, and blood must be available for 
transfusion. Th e bleeding can continue aft er delivery 
because the placental implantation site in the lower 
uterine segment oft en does not contract well (as 
does the rest of the uterus). 
 A history of a previous placenta previa or 
cesarean section increases the risk of abnormal 
placentation. 
 Abruptio Placentae 
 Premature separation of a normal placenta com-
plicates approximately 1–2% of pregnancies. Most 
abruptions are mild (grade I), but up to 25% are 
severe (grade III). Risk factors include hypertension, 
trauma, a short umbilical cord, multiparity, pro-
longed premature rupture of membranes, alcohol 
abuse, cocaine use, and an abnormal uterus. Patients 
usually experience painful vaginal bleeding with 
uterine contraction and tenderness. An abdominal 
ultrasound can help in the diagnosis. Th e choice 
between regional and general anesthesia must factor 
in the urgency for delivery, maternal hemodynamic 
stability, and any coagulopathy. Th e bleeding may 
remain concealed inside the uterus and cause under-
estimation of blood loss. Severe abruptio placen-
tae can cause coagulopathy, particularly following 
fetal demise. Fibrinogen levels are mildly reduced 
(150–250 mg/dL) with moderate abruptions but 
are typically less than 150 mg/dL with fetal demise. 
Th e coagulopathy is thought to be due to activation 
of circulating plasminogen (fi brinolysis) and the 
release of tissue thromboplastins that  precipitate 
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). 
Platelet count and factors V and VIII are low, and 
fi brin split products are elevated. Severe abruption 
is a life-threatening emergency that necessitates an 
emergency cesarean section. Massive blood transfu-
sion, including replacement of coagulation factors 
and platelets, may be anticipated. 
macrosomia. Shoulder dystocias are oft en diffi  cult 
to predict. Several obstetric maneuvers can be used 
to relieve it, but a prolonged delay in the delivery 
could result in fetal asphyxia. Induction of general 
anesthesia may be necessary if an epidural catheter 
is not already in place. 
 MULTIPLE GESTATIONS 
 Multiple gestations account for approximately 1 in 
150 births and are commonly associated with two 
complications: breech presentation and prematurity. 
Anesthesia may be necessary for version, extraction, 
or cesarean section. Th e second baby (and any subse-
quent ones) is oft en more depressed and asphyxiated 
than the fi rst. Regional anesthesia provides eff ective 
pain relief during labor, minimizes the need for cen-
tral nervous system depressants, and may shorten 
the interval between the birth of the fi rst and second 
baby. Some studies suggest that the acid–base status 
of the second twin is better when epidural anesthe-
sia is used. Patients with multiple gestations, how-
ever, are more prone to develop hypotension from 
aortocaval compression, particularly aft er regional 
anesthesia. 
 ANTEPARTUM HEMORRHAGE 
 Maternal hemorrhage is one of the most com-
mon severe morbidities complicating obstetric 
anesthesia. Causes include uterine atony, placenta 
previa, abruptio placentae, and uterine rupture. 
 Placenta Previa 
 A  placenta previa is present if the placenta implants 
in advance of the fetal presenting part. Th e incidence 
of placenta previa is 0.5% of pregnancies. Placenta 
previa oft en occurs in patients who have had a previ-
ous cesarean section or uterine myomectomy; other 
risk factors include multiparity, advanced maternal 
age, and a large placenta. An anterior-lying placenta 
previa increases the risk of excessive bleeding for 
cesarean section. 
 Placenta previa usually presents as painless 
vaginal bleeding. Although the bleeding oft en stops 
spontaneously, severe hemorrhage can occur at any 
time. When the gestation is less than 37 weeks in 
duration and the bleeding is mild to moderate, the 
14
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
863 
 Chorioamnionitis represents infection of the 
chorionic and amnionic membranes, and may 
involve the placenta, uterus, umbilical cord, and 
fetus. It complicates up to 1–2% of pregnancies and 
is usually but not always associated with ruptured 
membranes. Th e contents of the amniotic cavity are 
normally sterile but become vulnerable to ascending 
bacterial infection from the vagina when the cervix 
dilates or the membranes rupture. Intraamniotic 
infections are less commonly caused by hematog-
enous spread of bacteria or retrograde seeding 
through the fallopian tubes. Th e principal maternal 
complications of chorioamnionitis are premature 
or dysfunctional labor, oft en leading to cesarean 
section, 
intraabdominal 
infection, 
septicemia, 
and postpartum hemorrhage. Fetal complications 
include acidosis, hypoxia, and septicemia. 
 Clinical signs of chorioamnionitis include fever 
(>38°C), maternal and fetal tachycardia, uterine 
tenderness, and foul-smelling or purulent amniotic 
fl uid. Blood leukocyte count is useful only if mark-
edly elevated because it normally increases during 
labor (normal average 15,000/µL). C-reactive pro-
tein levels are usually elevated (>2 mg/dL). Gram 
stain of amniotic fl uid obtained by amniocentesis is 
helpful in ruling out infection. 
 Th e use of regional anesthesia in patients with 
chorioamnionitis is controversial because of the the-
oretical risk of promoting the development of men-
ingitis or an epidural abscess. Available evidence 
suggests that this risk is very low and that concerns 
may be unjustifi ed. Moreover, antepartum antibiotic 
therapy appears to reduce maternal and fetal mor-
bidity. Nonetheless, concerns over hemodynamic 
stability following sympathectomy are justifi ed, 
particularly in patients with chills, high fever, tachy-
pnea, changes in mental status, or borderline hypo-
tension. In the absence of overt signs of septicemia, 
thrombocytopenia, or coagulopathy, most clinicians 
off er regional anesthesia to those patients with cho-
rioamnionitis who have received antibiotic therapy. 
 PRETERM LABOR 
 Preterm labor by defi nition occurs between 20 and 
37 weeks of gestation and is the most common com-
plication of the third trimester. Approximately 8% 
of live-born infants in the United States are deliv-
ered before term. Important contributory maternal 
 Uterine Rupture 
 Uterine rupture is relatively uncommon (1:1000–
3000 deliveries) but can occur during labor as a result 
of (1) dehiscence of a scar from a previous (usually 
classic) cesarean section (VBAC), extensive myo-
mectomy, or uterine reconstruction; (2) intrauter-
ine manipulations or use of forceps (iatrogenic); or 
(3) spontaneous rupture following prolonged labor 
in patients with hypertonic contractions (particularly 
with oxytocin infusions), fetopelvic disproportion, or 
a very large, thin, and weakened uterus. Uterine rup-
ture can present as frank hemorrhage, fetal distress, 
loss of uterine tone, or hypotension with occult bleed-
ing into the abdomen. Even when epidural anesthesia 
is employed for labor, uterine rupture is oft en her-
alded by the abrupt onset of continuous abdominal 
pain and hypotension. Treatment requires volume 
resuscitation and immediate laparotomy, typically 
under general anesthesia. Ligation of the internal iliac 
(hypogastric) arteries, with or without hysterectomy, 
may be necessary to control intraoperative bleeding. 
 PREMATURE RUPTURE 
OF MEMBRANES & 
CHORIOAMNIONITIS 
 Premature rupture of membranes (PROM) is pres-
ent when leakage of amniotic fl uid occurs before 
the onset of labor. Th e pH of amniotic fl uid causes 
Nitrazine paper to change color from blue to yellow. 
PROM complicates 10% of all pregnancies and up 
to 35% of premature deliveries. Predisposing fac-
tors include a short cervix, prior history of PROM 
or preterm delivery, infection, multiple gestations, 
polyhydramnios, and smoking. Spontaneous labor 
commences within 24 h of ruptured membranes in 
90% of patients. Management of PROM balances 
the risk of infection with the risk of fetal prematu-
rity. Delivery is usually indicated sometime aft er 
34 weeks of gestation. Patients with a gestation of 
less than 34 weeks can be managed expectantly with 
prophylactic antibiotics and tocolytics for 5–7 days 
to allow some additional maturation of fetal organs. 
Th e longer the interval between rupture and the 
onset of labor, the higher the incidence of chorioam-
nionitis. PROM also predisposes to placental abrup-
tion and postpartum endometritis. 
864 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
oxytocin antagonists (atosiban), and possibly nitric 
oxide. Fetal ductal constriction can occur aft er 
32 weeks of gestation with nonsteroidal antiinfl am-
matory drugs such as indomethacin, but it is usually 
transient and resolves aft er discontinuation of the 
drug; renal impairment in the fetus may also cause 
oligohydramnios. 
 When tocolytic therapy fails to arrest labor, 
anesthesia oft en becomes necessary. Th e goal dur-
ing vaginal delivery of a preterm fetus is a slow con-
trolled delivery with minimal pushing by the mother. 
An episiotomy and low forceps are oft en employed. 
Spinal or epidural anesthesia allows complete pel-
vic relaxation. Cesarean section is performed for 
fetal distress, breech presentation, intrauterine 
growth retardation, or failure of labor to progress. 
Residual eff ects from β-adrenergic agonists may 
complicate general anesthesia. Th e half-life of rito-
drine may be as long as 3 h. Ketamine and ephed-
rine (and halothane) should be used cautiously due 
to interaction with tocolytics. Hypokalemia is usu-
ally due to an intracellular uptake of potassium and 
rarely requires treatment; however, it may increase 
sensitivity to muscle relaxants. Magnesium therapy 
potentiates muscle relaxants and may predispose to 
hypotension (secondary to vasodilation). Residual 
eff ects from tocolytics interfere with uterine con-
traction following delivery. Lastly, preterm new-
borns are oft en depressed at delivery and frequently 
need resuscitation. Preparations for resuscitation 
should be completed prior to delivery. 
 HYPERTENSIVE DISORDERS 
 Hypertension during pregnancy can be classifi ed as 
pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH, oft en also 
referred to as preeclampsia), chronic hypertension 
that preceded pregnancy, or chronic hypertension 
with superimposed preeclampsia. Preeclampsia 
is usually defi ned as a systolic blood pressure 
greater than 140 mm Hg or diastolic pressure 
greater than 90 mm Hg aft er the 20th week of ges-
tation, accompanied by proteinuria (>300 mg/d) 
and resolving within 48 h aft er delivery. When sei-
zures occur, the syndrome is termed eclampsia. Th e 
HELLP syndrome describes preeclampsia associated 
with  h emolysis,  e levated  l iver enzymes, and a  l ow 
factors include extremes of age, inadequate prenatal 
care, unusual body habitus, increased physical activ-
ity, infections, prior preterm labor, multiple gesta-
tion, and other medical illnesses or complications 
during pregnancy. 
 Because of their small size and incomplete 
development, preterm infants—particularly those 
less than 30 weeks of gestational age or weighing 
less than 1500 g—experience a greater number of 
complications than term infants. Premature rupture 
of membranes complicates one third of premature 
deliveries; the combination of premature rupture of 
membranes and premature labor increases the like-
lihood of umbilical cord compression resulting in 
fetal hypoxemia and asphyxia. Preterm infants with 
a breech presentation are particularly prone to pro-
lapse of the umbilical cord during labor. Moreover, 
inadequate production of pulmonary surfactant fre-
quently leads to the idiopathic respiratory distress 
syndrome (hyaline membrane disease) aft er deliv-
ery. Surfactant levels are generally adequate only 
aft er week 35 of gestation. Lastly, a soft , poorly calci-
fi ed cranium predisposes these neonates to intracra-
nial hemorrhage during vaginal delivery. 
 When preterm labor occurs before 35 weeks of 
gestation, bed rest and tocolytic therapy are usually 
initiated. Treatment is successful in 75% of patients. 
Labor is inhibited until the lungs mature and suffi  -
cient pulmonary surfactant is produced, as judged 
by amniocentesis. Th e risk of respiratory distress 
syndrome is markedly reduced when the amniotic 
fl uid lecithin/sphingomyelin ratio is greater than 2. 
Glucocorticoid (betamethasone) may be given to 
induce production of pulmonary surfactant, which 
requires a minimum of 24–48 h. Th e most com-
monly used tocolytics are β 2 -adrenergic agonists 
(ritodrine or terbutaline) and magnesium (6 g intra-
venously over 30 min followed by 2–4 g/h). Ritodrine 
(given intravenously as 100–350 mcg/min) and ter-
butaline (given orally as 2.5–5 mg every 4–6 h) also 
have some β 1 -adrenergic receptor activity, which 
accounts for some of their side eff ects. Maternal 
side eff ects include tachycardia, arrhythmias, myo-
cardial ischemia, mild hypotension, hyperglycemia, 
hypokalemia, and, rarely, pulmonary edema. Other 
tocolytic agents include calcium channel blockers 
(nifedipine), prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors, 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
865 
and prevent convulsions. Th erapeutic magnesium 
levels are 4–6 mEq/L. 
 Invasive arterial and central venous monitor-
ing are indicated in patients with severe hyperten-
sion, pulmonary edema, or refractory oliguria; an 
intravenous vasodilator infusion may be necessary. 
Defi nitive treatment of preeclampsia is delivery of 
the fetus and placenta. 
 Anesthetic Management 
 Patients with mild preeclampsia generally require 
only extra caution during anesthesia; standard anes-
thetic practices may be used. Spinal and epidural 
anesthesia are associated with similar decreases in 
 p latelet count. In the United States, preeclampsia 
complicates approximately 7–10% of pregnancies; 
eclampsia is much less common, occurring in one 
of 10,000–15,000 pregnancies. Severe preeclamp-
sia causes or contributes to 20–40% of maternal 
deaths and 20% of perinatal deaths. Maternal deaths 
are usually due to stroke, pulmonary edema, and 
hepatic necrosis or rupture. 
 Pathophysiology & Manifestations 
 Th e pathophysiology of preeclampsia is probably 
related to a vascular dysfunction of the placenta 
that results in abnormal prostaglandin metabolism. 
Patients with preeclampsia have elevated production 
of thromboxane A 2 (TXA 2 ) and decreased produc-
tion of prostacyclin (PGI 2 ). TXA 2 is a potent vaso-
constrictor and promoter of platelet aggregation, 
whereas PGI 2 is a potent vasodilator and inhibitor 
of platelet aggregation. Endothelial dysfunction may 
reduce production of nitric oxide and increase pro-
duction of endothelin-1. Th e latter is also a potent 
vasoconstrictor and activator of platelets. Marked 
vascular reactivity and endothelial injury reduce 
placental perfusion and can lead to widespread sys-
temic manifestations. 
 Severe preeclampsia substantially increases 
both maternal and fetal morbidity and mortal-
ity, and is defi ned by a blood pressure greater than 
160/110 mm Hg, proteinuria in excess of 5 g/d, oli-
guria (<500 mL/d), elevated serum creatinine, intra-
uterine growth restriction, pulmonary edema, central 
nervous system manifestations (headache, visual dis-
turbances, seizures, or stroke), hepatic tenderness, or 
the HELLP syndrome ( Table 41-6 ). Hepatic rupture 
may also occur in patients with the HELLP syndrome. 
 Patients with severe preeclampsia or eclampsia 
have widely diff ering hemodynamic profi les. Most 
patients have low-normal cardiac fi lling pressures 
with high systemic vascular resistance, but cardiac 
output may be low, normal, or high. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of preeclampsia consists of bed rest, seda-
tion, repeated doses of antihypertensive drugs (usually 
labetalol, 5–10 mg, or hydralazine, 5 mg intrave-
nously), and magnesium sulfate (4 g intravenous 
loading, followed by 1–3 g/h) to treat hyperrefl exia 
 TABLE 416  Complications of preeclampsia. 
 Neurological 
Headache
Visual disturbances
Hyperexcitability
Seizures
Intracranial hemorrhage
Cerebral edema
 Pulmonary 
Upper airway edema
Pulmonary edema
 Cardiovascular 
Decreased intravascular volume
Increased arteriolar resistance
Hypertension
Heart failure
 Hepatic 
Impaired function
Elevated enzymes
Hematoma
Rupture
 Renal 
Proteinuria
Sodium retention
Decreased glomerular filtration
Renal failure
 Hematological 
Coagulopathy
Thrombocytopenia
Platelet dysfunction
Prolonged partial thromboplastin time
Microangiopathic hemolysis
866 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
blood pressure during general anesthesia. Intravenous 
labetalol (5–10 mg increments) can also be eff ective 
in controlling the hypertensive response to intuba-
tion and does not appear to alter placental blood fl ow. 
Because magnesium potentiates muscle relaxants, 
doses of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants should 
be reduced in patients receiving magnesium therapy 
and should be guided by a peripheral nerve stimu-
lator. Th e patient with suspected magnesium toxic-
ity, manifested by hyporefl exia, excessive sedation, 
blurred vision, respiratory compromise and cardiac 
depression, can be treated with intravenous admin-
istration of calcium gluconate (1 g over 10 minutes). 
 HEART DISEASE 
 Th e marked cardiovascular changes associated with 
pregnancy, labor, and delivery oft en cause preg-
nant patients with heart disease (2% of parturients) 
to decompensate during this period. Although 
most pregnant patients with cardiac disease have 
rheumatic heart disease, an increasing number of 
parturients are presenting with corrected or palli-
ated congenital lesions. Anesthetic management is 
directed toward employing techniques that mini-
mize the added stresses of labor and delivery. Specifi c 
management of the various lesions is discussed else-
where. Most patients can be divided into one of two 
groups. Patients in the fi rst group benefi t from the 
falls in systemic vascular resistance caused by neur-
axial analgesia techniques, but usually not from 
overzealous fl uid administration. Th ese patients 
include those with mitral insuffi  ciency, aortic insuf-
fi ciency, chronic heart failure, or congenital lesions 
with left -to-right shunting. Th e induced sympathec-
tomy from spinal or epidural techniques reduces 
both preload and aft erload, relieves pulmonary con-
gestion, and in some cases increases forward fl ow 
(cardiac output). 
 Patients in the second group do not benefi t 
from a decrease in systemic vascular resistance. 
Th ese patients include those with aortic stenosis, 
congenital lesions with right-to-left  or bidirectional 
shunting, or primary pulmonary hypertension. 
Reductions in venous return (preload) or aft erload 
are usually poorly tolerated. Th ese patients are bet-
ter managed with intraspinal opioids alone, systemic 
arterial blood pressure in these patients. Patients with 
severe disease, however, are critically ill and require 
stabilization prior to administration of any anesthetic. 
Hypertension should be controlled and hypovolemia 
corrected before administration of anesthesia. In the 
absence of coagulopathy, continuous epidural anes-
thesia is the fi rst choice for most patients with pre-
eclampsia during labor, vaginal delivery, and cesarean 
section. Moreover, continuous epidural anesthesia 
avoids the increased risk of a failed intubation due to 
severe edema of the upper airway. 
 A platelet count and coagulation profi le should 
be checked prior to the institution of regional anes-
thesia in patients with severe preeclampsia. It has 
been recommended that regional anesthesia be 
avoided if the platelet count is less than 100,000/µL, 
but a platelet count as low as 70,000/µL may be 
acceptable in selected cases, particularly when the 
count has been stable. Although some patients 
have a qualitative platelet defect, the usefulness 
of a bleeding time determination is questionable. 
Continuous epidural anesthesia has been shown 
to decrease catecholamine secretion and improve 
uteroplacental perfusion up to 75% in these patients, 
provided hypotension is avoided. Judicious fl uid 
boluses with epidural activation may be required 
to correct the disease-related hypovolemia. Goal-
directed hemodynamic and fl uid therapy utiliz-
ing arterial pulse wave contour analysis (Virgileo/
Flotrac, LiDCOrapid ) or echocardiography may be 
employed to guide fl uid replacement. Use of an epi-
nephrine-containing test dose for epidural anesthe-
sia is controversial because of questionable reliability 
(see earlier section Prevention of Unintentional 
Intravascular and Intrathecal Injection) and the risk 
of exacerbating hypertension. Hypotension should 
be treated with small doses of vasopressors because 
patients tend to be very sensitive to these agents. 
Recent evidence suggests that spinal anesthesia does 
not, as previously thought, result in a more severe 
reduction of maternal blood pressure. Th erefore, 
this technique is a reasonable anesthetic choice for 
cesarean section in a preeclamptic patient. 
 Intraarterial blood pressure monitoring is indi-
cated in patients with severe hypertension during 
both general and regional anesthesia. Intravenous 
vasodilator infusions may be necessary to control 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia
867
expeditious delivery appears to improve maternal 
and fetal outcome; immediate (cesarean) delivery 
should therefore be carried out. Once the patient 
is resuscitated, mechanical ventilation, fl uid resus-
citation, and inotropes are best provided under the 
guidance of invasive hemodynamic monitoring. 
Uterine atony is treated with oxytocin, methylergo-
novine, and prostaglandin F 2α , whereas signifi cant 
coagulopathies are treated with platelets and coagu-
lation factors based on laboratory fi ndings. 
 POSTPARTUM HEMORRHAGE 
 Postpartum hemorrhage is the leading cause of 
maternal mortality in developing countries. It is 
diagnosed when the postpartum blood loss exceeds 
500 mL. Up to 4% of parturients may experience 
postpartum hemorrhage, which is oft en associated 
with a prolonged third stage of labor, preeclampsia, 
multiple gestations, and forceps delivery. 
 Common causes include uterine atony, a 
retained placenta, obstetric lacerations, uterine inver-
sion, and use of tocolytic agents prior to delivery. 
Atony is oft en associated with uterine overdistention 
(multiple gestation and polyhydramnios). Less com-
monly, a clotting defect may be responsible. 
 Th e anesthesiologist may be consulted to assist 
in venous access or fl uid (and blood) resuscitation, as 
well as to provide anesthesia for careful examination 
of the vagina, cervix, and uterus. Perineal lacerations 
can usually be repaired with local anesthetic infi ltra-
tion or pudendal nerve blocks. Residual anesthesia 
from prior epidural or spinal anesthesia facilitates 
examination of the patient; however, supplementa-
tion with an opioid, nitrous oxide, or both may be 
required. Induction of spinal or epidural anesthe-
sia in the presence of hypovolemia is problematic. 
General anesthesia is usually required for manual 
extraction of a retained placenta, reversion of 
an inverted uterus, or repair of a major lacera-
tion. Uterine atony should be treated with oxytocin 
(20–30 units/L of intravenous fl uid), methylergono-
vine (0.2 mg intramuscularly or in 100 mL of nor-
mal saline administered over 10 min intravenously), 
and prostaglandin F 2α (0.25 mg intramuscularly). 
Emergency laparotomy and hysterectomy may be 
necessary in rare instances. Early ligation of the 
15
medications, pudendal nerve blocks, and, if neces-
sary, general anesthesia. 
 AMNIOTIC FLUID EMBOLISM 
 Amniotic fl uid embolism is a rare (1:20,000 deliver-
ies) but oft en lethal complication (86% mortality rate 
in some series) that can occur during labor, deliv-
ery, cesarean section, or postpartum. Mortality may 
exceed 50% in the fi rst hour. Entry of amniotic fl uid 
into the maternal circulation can occur through any 
break in the uteroplacental membranes. Such breaks 
may occur during normal delivery or cesarean sec-
tion or following placental abruption, placenta pre-
via, or uterine rupture. In addition to fetal debris, 
amniotic fl uid contains various prostaglandins and 
leukotrienes, which appear to play an important role 
in the genesis of this syndrome. Th e alternate term 
anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy has been sug-
gested to emphasize the role of chemical mediators 
in this syndrome. 
 Patients typically present with sudden tachy-
pnea, cyanosis, shock, and generalized bleeding. 
Th ree major pathophysiological manifestations 
are responsible: (1) acute pulmonary embolism, 
(2) disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 
and (3) uterine atony. Mental status changes, includ-
ing seizures, and pulmonary edema may develop; the 
latter has both cardiogenic and noncardiogenic com-
ponents. Acute left  ventricular dysfunction is com-
mon. Although the diagnosis can be fi rmly established 
only by demonstrating fetal elements in the maternal 
circulation (usually at autopsy or less commonly by 
aspirating amniotic fl uid from a central venous cath-
eter), amniotic fl uid embolism should always be sug-
gested by sudden respiratory distress and circulatory 
collapse. Th e presentation may initially mimic acute 
pulmonary thromboembolism, venous air embolism, 
overwhelming septicemia, or hepatic rupture or cere-
bral hemorrhage in a patient with toxemia. 
 Treatment consists of cardiopulmonary resus-
citation and supportive care. When cardiac arrest 
occurs prior to delivery of the fetus, the effi  cacy of 
closed-chest compressions may be marginal at best. 
Aortocaval compression impairs resuscitation in 
the supine position, whereas chest compressions 
are less eff ective in a lateral tilt position. Moreover, 
868 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
drugs (anticholinergics or β agonists), or, rarely, 
hyperthyroidism. A decreased baseline heart rate may 
be due to a postterm pregnancy, fetal heart block, or 
fetal asphyxia. 
 Baseline Variability 
 Th e healthy mature fetus normally displays a base-
line beat-to-beat (R wave to R wave) variability that 
can be classifi ed as minimal (<5 beats/min), mod-
erate (6–25 beats/min), or marked (>25 beats/min). 
Baseline variability, which is best assessed with scalp 
electrodes, has become an important sign of fetal 
well-being and represents a normally functioning 
autonomic system. Sustained decreased baseline 
variability is a prominent sign of fetal asphyxia. 
Central nervous system depressants (opioids, bar-
biturates, volatile anesthetics, benzodiazepines, or 
magnesium sulfate) and parasympatholytics (atro-
pine) also decrease baseline variability, as do pre-
maturity, fetal arrhythmias, and anencephaly. A 
sinusoidal pattern that resembles a smooth sine wave 
is associated with fetal depression (hypoxia, drugs, 
and anemia secondary to Rh isoimmunization). 
 Accelerations 
 Accelerations of FHR are defi ned as increases of 
15 beats/min or more lasting for more than 15 s. 
Periodic accelerations in FHR refl ect normal oxy-
genation and are usually related to fetal movements 
and to responses to uterine pressure. Such accel-
erations are generally considered reassuring. By 
32 weeks, fetuses display periodic increases in base-
line heart rate that are associated with fetal move-
ments. Normal fetuses have 15–40 accelerations/h. 
Th e mechanism is thought to involve increases in 
catecholamine secretion with decreases in vagal 
tone. Accelerations diminish with fetal sleep, some 
drugs (opioids, magnesium, and atropine), as well as 
fetal hypoxia. Accelerations to fetal scalp or vibro-
acoustic stimulation are considered a reassuring 
sign of fetal well-being.  Th e absence of both baseline 
variability and accelerations is nonreassuring and 
may be an important sign of fetal compromise . 
 Deceleration Patterns 
 A. Early (Type I) Decelerations 
 Early deceleration (usually 10–40 beats/min) 
( Figure 41–4A ) is thought to be a vagal response 
internal iliac (hypogastric) arteries may help avoid 
hysterectomy or reduce blood loss. 
 Fetal & Neonatal Resuscitation 
 FETAL RESUSCITATION 
 Resuscitation of the neonate starts during labor. Any 
compromise of the uteroplacental circulation readily 
produces fetal asphyxia.  Intrauterine asphyxia 
during labor is the most common cause of neo-
natal depression. Fetal monitoring throughout labor is 
helpful in identifying which babies may be at risk, 
detecting fetal distress, and evaluating the eff ect of 
acute interventions. Th ese include correcting mater-
nal hypotension with fl uids or vasopressors, supple-
mental oxygen, and decreasing uterine contraction 
(stopping oxytocin or administering tocolytics). Some 
studies suggest that the normal fetus can compensate 
for up to 45 min of relative hypoxia, a period termed 
fetal stress; the latter is associated with a marked redis-
tribution of blood fl ow primarily to the heart, brain, 
and adrenal glands. With time, however, progressive 
lactic acidosis and asphyxia produce increasing fetal 
distress that necessitates immediate delivery. 
 1. Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring 
 Monitoring of fetal heart rate (FHR) is presently the 
most useful technique in assessing fetal well-being, 
although alone it has a 35–50% false-positive rate 
of predicting fetal compromise. Because of this, the 
term fetal distress in the context of FHR monitoring 
has been largely replaced with nonreassuring FHR. 
Correct interpretation of heart rate patterns is cru-
cial. Th ree parameters are evaluated: baseline heart 
rate, baseline variability, and the relationship to uter-
ine contractions (deceleration patterns). Monitoring 
of heart rate is most accurate when fetal scalp elec-
trodes are used, but this may require rupture of the 
membranes and is not without complications (eg, 
amnionitis or fetal injury). 
 Baseline Heart Rate 
 Th e mature fetus normally has a baseline heart rate of 
110–160 beats/min. An increased baseline heart rate 
may be due to prematurity, mild fetal hypoxia, chorio-
amnionitis, maternal fever, maternally administered 
16
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
869 
 B. Late (Type II) Decelerations 
 Late decelerations ( Figure 41–4B ) are associated 
with fetal compromise and are characterized by a 
decrease in heart rate at or following the peak of 
uterine contractions. Late decelerations may be 
to compression of the fetal head or stretching of the 
neck during uterine contractions. Th e heart rate 
forms a smooth mirror image of the contraction. 
Early decelerations are generally not associated with 
fetal distress and occur during descent of the head. 
 FIGURE 414  Periodic changes in fetal heart 
rate related to uterine contraction.  A: Early (type I) 
decelerations.  B: Late (type II) decelerations.  C: Variable 
(type III) decelerations. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Danforth DN, Scott JR:  Obstetrics and Gynecology , 5th ed. 
Lippincott, 1986.) 
A HEAD COMPRESSION
B UTEROPLACENTAL INSUFFICIENCY
C UMBILICAL CORD COMPRESSION
Fetal heart rate
Fetal heart rate
Fetal heart rate
100
50
180
180
0
50
0
50
0
100
180
100
Early onset
Early onset
Early onset
Intrauterine
pressure
Intrauterine
pressure
Intrauterine
pressure
Uniform shape
Uniform shape
1 min
1 min
1 min
Late onset
Late onset
Variable shape
Variable onset 
Variable onset 
Compression
of vessels
Umbilical
cord
870 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
an adequate uteroplacental circulation. Aortocaval 
compression, maternal hypoxemia or hypoten-
sion, or excessive uterine activity (during oxytocin 
infusions) must be corrected. Changes in maternal 
position, supplemental oxygen, and intravenous 
ephedrine or fl uid, or adjustments in an oxytocin 
infusion oft en correct the problem. Failure to relieve 
fetal stress, as well as progressive fetal acidosis and 
asphyxia, necessitate immediate delivery. 
 NEONATAL RESUSCITATION 
 1. General Care of the Neonate 
 One healthcare provider whose sole responsibility is 
to care for the neonate and who is capable of provid-
ing resuscitation should attend every delivery. As the 
head is delivered, the nose, mouth, and pharynx are 
suctioned with a bulb syringe. Aft er the remainder 
of the body is delivered, the skin is dried with a ster-
ile towel. Once the umbilical cord stops pulsating or 
neonatal breathing is initiated, the cord is clamped 
and the neonate is placed in a radiant warmer with 
the bed tilted in a slight Trendelenburg position. 
 Neonatal evaluation and treatment are carried 
out simultaneously ( Figure 41–5 ). If the neonate is 
obviously depressed, the cord is clamped early and 
resuscitation is initiated immediately. Breathing 
normally begins within 30 s and is sustained within 
90 s. Respirations should be 30–60 breaths/min and 
the heart rate 120–160 beats/min. Respirations are 
assessed by auscultation of the chest, whereas heart 
rate is determined by palpation of the pulse at the 
base of the umbilical cord or auscultation of the pre-
cordium. It is critically important to keep the neo-
nate warm. 
 In addition to respirations and heart rate, 
color, tone, and refl ex irritability should be evalu-
ated. Th e Apgar score ( Table 41–7 ), recorded at 
1 min and again at 5 min aft er delivery, remains 
the most valuable assessment of the neonate. Th e 
1-min score correlates with survival, whereas the 
5-min score has limited relationship to neurologi-
cal outcome. 
 Neonates with Apgar scores of 8–10 are vig-
orous and may require only gentle stimulation 
(fl icking the foot, rubbing the back, and additional 
drying). A catheter should fi rst be gently passed 
subtle (as few as 5 beats/min). Th ey are thought 
to represent decreased arterial oxygen tension on 
atrial chemoreceptors. Late decelerations with nor-
mal variability may be observed following acute 
insults (maternal hypotension or hypoxemia) and 
are usually reversible with treatment. Late decelera-
tions with decreased variability are associated with 
prolonged asphyxia and may be an indication for 
fetal scalp sampling (see Other Monitoring section 
below). Complete abolition of variability in this set-
ting is an ominous sign signifying severe decompen-
sation and the need for immediate delivery. 
 C. Variable (Type III) Decelerations 
 Th e most common type of decelerations are variable 
( Figure 41–4C ). Th ese decelerations are variable in 
onset, duration, and magnitude (oft en >30 beats/
min). Th ey are typically abrupt in onset and are 
thought to be related to umbilical cord compression 
and acute intermittent decreases in umbilical blood 
fl ow. Variable decelerations are typically associated 
with fetal asphyxia when fetal heart rate declines to 
less than 60 beats/min, last more than 60 s, or occur 
in a pattern that persists for more than 30 min. 
 2. Other Monitoring 
 Other less commonly used monitors include fetal 
scalp pH measurements, scalp lactate concentration, 
fetal pulse oximetry, and fetal ST-segment analysis. 
Clinical experience is limited with all except fetal 
scalp pH measurements. Unfortunately the latter is 
associated with a small but signifi cant incidence of 
false negatives and false positives. Fetal blood can 
be obtained and analyzed via a small scalp puncture 
once the membranes are ruptured. A fetal scalp pH 
higher than 7.20 is usually associated with a vigor-
ous neonate, whereas a pH less than 7.20 is oft en, but 
not always, associated with a depressed neonate and 
necessitates prompt (typically operative) delivery. 
Because of wide overlap, fetal blood sampling can be 
interpreted correctly only in conjunction with heart 
rate monitoring. 
 3. Treatment of the Fetus 
 Treatment of intrauterine fetal asphyxia is aimed at 
preventing fetal demise or permanent neurological 
damage. All interventions are directed at restoring 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
871 
through each nostril to rule out choanal atresia, and 
then through the mouth to suction the stomach and 
rule out esophageal atresia. 
 2. Meconium-Stained Neonates 
 Th e presence or absence of meconium in the amni-
otic fl uid (approximately 10–12% of deliveries) 
changes the immediate management of the neonate 
at birth. Fetal distress, particularly aft er 42 weeks of 
gestation, is oft en associated with release of thick 
meconium into the fl uid. Fetal gasping during stress 
results in entry of a large amount of meconium-
tainted amniotic fl uid into the lungs. When the 
neonate initiates respiration at birth, the meconium 
moves from the trachea and large airways down 
 TABLE 417  Apgar score. 
Points
Sign
 0 
 1 
 2 
Heart rate 
(beats/min)
Absent
<100
>100
Respiratory 
effort
Absent
Slow, 
irregular
Good, crying
Muscle tone
Flaccid
Some flexion Active motion
Reflex 
irritability
No 
response
Grimace
Crying
Color
Blue or pale
Body pink, 
extremities 
blue
All pink
 FIGURE 415  An algorithm for resuscitation of the newly born infant. (Reproduced, with permission, from ECC Committee, 
Subcommittees and Task Forces of the American Heart Association: 2005 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation 2005 Dec 13;112(24 Suppl):IV1-203.) 
Approximate time
Birth
Yes
No
30 s
30 s
30 s
Apnea    or HR <I00
Breathing
HR >I00
and pink
HR >I00
and pink
Ventilating
*Endotracheal intubation may
be considered at several steps
Ongoing care
Supportive care
Routine care
• Provide warmth
• Clear airway
• Dry
• Clear of meconium?
• Breathing or crying?
• Good muscle tone?
• Color pink?
• Term gestation?
• Provide warmth
• Position, clear airway* (as necessary)
• Dry, stimulate, reposition
• Give O2 (as necessary)
• Evaluate respirations, 
heart rate, and color
• Provide positive pressure ventilation*
• Provide positive pressure ventilation*
• Administer chest compressions
• Administer epinephrine*
HR <60
HR <60
HR >60
872 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
is also a contributing factor in a signifi cant num-
ber of neonates. Factors associated with hypovole-
mia include early clamping of the umbilical cord, 
holding the neonate above the introitus prior to 
clamping, prematurity, maternal hemorrhage, pla-
cental transection during cesarean section, sepsis, 
and twin-to-twin transfusion. 
 Failure of the neonate to quickly respond to 
respiratory resuscitative eff orts mandates vascular 
access and blood gas analysis; pneumothorax (1% 
incidence) and congenital anomalies of the airway, 
including tracheoesophageal fi stula (1:3000–5000 
live births), and congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
(1:2000–4000) should also be considered. 
 Grouping by the 1-min Apgar score greatly 
facilitates resuscitation: (1) mildly asphyxiated neo-
nates (Apgar score of 5–7) usually need only stimu-
lation while 100% oxygen is blown across the face; 
(2) moderately asphyxiated neonates (Apgar score 
of 3–4) require temporary assisted positive-pressure 
ventilation with mask and bag; and (3) severely 
depressed neonates (Apgar score of 0–2) should be 
immediately intubated, and chest compressions may 
be required. 
 Guidelines for Ventilation 
 Indications for positive-pressure ventilation include 
(1) apnea, (2) gasping respirations, (3) persistent 
central cyanosis with 100% oxygen, and (4) a per-
sistent heart rate less than 100 beats/min. Excessive 
fl exion or extension of the neck can cause airway 
obstruction. A 1-in.-high towel under the shoulders 
may be helpful in maintaining proper head posi-
tion. Assisted ventilation by bag and mask should 
be at a rate of 30–60 breaths/min with 100% oxy-
gen. Initial breaths may require peak pressures of 
up to 40 cm H 2 O, but pressures should not exceed 
30 cm H 2 O thereaft er. Adequacy of ventilation 
should be checked by auscultation and chest excur-
sions. Gastric decompression with an 8F tube 
oft en facilitates ventilation. If aft er 30 s the heart 
rate is over 100 beats/min and spontaneous ven-
tilations become adequate, assisted ventilation is 
no longer necessary. If the heart rate remains less 
than 60 beats/min or 60–80 beats/min without an 
increase in response to resuscitation, the neonate 
is intubated and chest compressions are started. 
toward the periphery of the lung. Th ick or partic-
ulate meconium may obstruct small airways and 
cause severe respiratory distress in 15% of meco-
nium-stained neonates. Moreover, these infants can 
develop persistent fetal circulation. 
 Unless the neonate has absent or depressed 
respirations, thin watery meconium does not 
require suctioning beyond careful bulb suctioning 
of the oropharynx when the head emerges from the 
perineum (or from the uterus at cesarean section). 
When thick “pea soup” meconium is present in the 
amniotic fl uid, however, some clinicians intubate 
and suction the trachea immediately aft er delivery 
but before the fi rst breath is taken. If the baby is 
not vigorous, tracheal suctioning is recommended 
when meconium is present. Tracheal suctioning of 
the thick meconium is accomplished by a special 
suctioning device attached to the endotracheal tube 
as the tube is withdrawn. If meconium is aspirated 
from the trachea, the procedure should be repeated 
until no meconium is obtained—but no more than 
three times, aft er which it is usually of no further 
benefi t. Th e infant should then be given supplemen-
tal oxygen by face mask and observed closely. Th e 
stomach should also be suctioned to prevent pas-
sive regurgitation of any meconium. Newborns with 
meconium aspiration have an increased incidence of 
pneumothorax (10% compared with 1% for all vagi-
nal deliveries). 
 3. Care of the Depressed Neonate 
 Approximately 6% of newborns, most of whom 
weigh less than 1500 g, require some form of 
advanced life support. Resuscitation of the 
depressed neonate requires two or more persons—
one to manage the airway and ventilation and 
another to perform chest compressions, if neces-
sary. A third person greatly facilitates the placement 
of intravascular catheters and the administration of 
fl uids or drugs. Th e anesthesiologist caring for the 
mother can render only brief assistance and only 
when it does not jeopardize the mother; other per-
sonnel are, therefore, usually responsible for neona-
tal resuscitation. 
 Because the most common cause of neonatal 
depression is intrauterine asphyxia, the empha-
sis in resuscitation is on respiration. Hypovolemia 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
873 
in neonates weighing more than 2.5 kg and may 
be useful if endotracheal intubation is diffi  cult (eg, 
Pierre Robin syndrome). 
 Guidelines for Chest Compressions 
 Indications for chest compressions are a heart rate 
that is less than 60 beats/min or 60–80 beats/min 
and not rising aft er 30 s of adequate ventilation with 
100% oxygen. 
 Cardiac compressions should be provided 
at a rate of 120/min. Th e two thumb/encircling 
hands technique ( Figure 41–7 ) is generally pre-
ferred because it appears to generate higher 
peak systolic and coronary perfusion pressures. 
Alternatively, the two-fi nger technique can be used 
( Figure 41–8 ). Th e depth of compressions should 
be approximately one third of the anterior–poste-
rior diameter of the chest and enough to generate 
a palpable pulse. 
 Compressions should be interposed with venti-
lation in a 3:1 ratio, such that 90 compressions and 
30 ventilations are given per minute. Th e heart rate 
should be checked periodically. Chest compressions 
should be stopped when the spontaneous heart rate 
exceeds 80 beats/min. 
If the heart rate is 60–80 beats/min and increasing, 
assisted ventilation is continued and the neonate 
is observed. Failure of the heart rate to rise above 
80 beats/min is an indication for chest compres-
sions. Indications for endotracheal intubation 
include ineff ective or prolonged mask ventilation 
and the need to administer medications. 
 Intubation ( Figure 41–6 ) is performed with a 
Miller 00, 0, or 1 laryngoscope blade, using a 2.5-, 
3-, or 3.5-mm endotracheal tube (for neonates 
<1 kg, 1–2 kg, and >2 kg, respectively). Correct 
endotracheal tube size is indicated by a small leak 
with 20 cm H 2 O pressure. Right endobronchial 
intubation should be excluded by chest ausculta-
tion. Th e correct depth of the endotracheal tube 
(“tip to lip”) is usually 6 cm plus the weight in kilo-
grams. Oxygen saturation can usually be measured 
by a pulse oximeter probe applied to the palm. 
Capnography is also very useful in confi rming 
endotracheal intubation. Transcutaneous oxygen 
sensors are useful for measuring tissue oxygenation 
but require time for initial equilibration. Use of a 
laryngeal mask airway (LMA#1) has been reported 
Epiglottis
Trachea
 FIGURE 416  Intubation of the neonate. The head is 
placed in a neutral position, and the laryngoscope handle 
is held with the thumb and index ﬁ nger as the chin is 
supported with the remaining ﬁ ngers. Pressure applied 
over the hyoid bone with the little ﬁ nger will bring the 
larynx into view. A straight blade such as a Miller 0 or 1 
usually provides the best view. 
 FIGURE 417  Chest compressions in the neonate. 
The neonate is held with both hands as each thumb is 
placed just beneath a line connecting the nipples and 
the remaining ﬁ ngers encircle the chest. The sternum 
is compressed 1⁄3 to ¾ in. (1 cm) at a rate of 120/min. 
(Reproduced with permission from Rudolph CD, et al. Rudolph’s 
Pediatrics. 22nd ed. McGraw-Hill; 2011.) 
874 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
blood cross-matched with maternal blood. Less 
common causes of hypotension include hypocalce-
mia, hypermagnesemia, and hypoglycemia. 
 Drug Therapy 
 A. Epinephrine 
 Epinephrine, 0.01–0.03 mg/kg (0.1–0.3 mL/kg of a 
1:10,000 solution), should be given for asystole or a 
spontaneous heart rate of less than 60 beats/min in 
spite of adequate ventilation and chest compressions. 
It may be repeated every 3–5 min. Epinephrine may 
be given in 1 mL of saline via the endotracheal tube 
when venous access is not available. 
 B. Naloxone 
 Naloxone, 0.1 mg/kg intravenously or 0.2 mg/kg 
intramuscularly, is given to reverse the respiratory 
depressant eff ect of opioids given to the mother in 
the last 4 h of labor. Withdrawal symptoms may be 
precipitated in babies of mothers who chronically 
consume prescribed or illicit opioids. 
 C. Other Drugs 
 Other drugs may be indicated only in specifi c 
settings. Sodium bicarbonate (2 mEq/kg of a 
0.5 mEq/mL 4.2% solution) should usually be given 
only for a severe metabolic acidosis documented 
by blood gas measurements and when ventilation 
is adequate. It may also be administered during 
prolonged resuscitation (>5 min)—particularly if 
blood gas measurements are not readily available. 
Th e infusion rate should not exceed 1 mEq/kg/min 
to avoid hypertonicity and intracranial hemorrhage. 
As noted above, in order to prevent hypertonicity-
induced hepatic injury, the umbilical vein catheter 
tip should not be in the liver. Calcium  gluconate 
100 mg/kg (CaCl 2 , 30 mg/kg) should be given only 
to neonates with documented hypocalcemia or 
those with suspected magnesium intoxication (from 
maternal magnesium therapy); these neonates are 
usually hypotensive, hypotonic, and appear vasodi-
lated. Glucose (8 mg/kg/min of a 10% solution) is 
given only for documented hypoglycemia because 
hyperglycemia worsens hypoxic neurological defi -
cits. Blood glucose should be measured because up 
to 10% of neonates may have hypoglycemia (glucose 
<35 mg/dL), particularly those delivered by cesarean 
 Vascular Access 
 Cannulation of the umbilical vein with a 3.5F or 5F 
umbilical catheter is easiest and the preferred tech-
nique. Th e tip of the catheter should be just below 
skin level and allow free backfl ow of blood; further 
advancement may result in infusion of hypertonic 
solutions directly into the liver. A peripheral vein or 
even the endotracheal tube can be used as an alter-
nate route for drug administration. 
 Cannulation of one of the two umbilical arteries 
allows measurement of blood pressure and facilitates 
blood gas measurements but may be more diffi  cult. 
Specially designed umbilical artery catheters allow 
continuous Pa o 2 or oxygen saturation monitoring as 
well as blood pressure. Care must be taken not to 
introduce any air into either the artery or the vein. 
 Volume Resuscitation 
 Some neonates at term and nearly two thirds of 
premature infants requiring resuscitation are hypo-
volemic at birth. Diagnosis is based on physical 
examination (low blood pressure and pallor) and a 
poor response to resuscitation. Neonatal blood pres-
sure generally correlates with intravascular volume 
and should therefore routinely be measured. Normal 
blood pressure depends on birth weight and varies 
from 50/25 mm Hg for neonates weighing 1–2 kg to 
70/40 mm Hg for those weighing over 3 kg. A low 
blood pressure suggests hypovolemia. Volume expan-
sion may be accomplished with 10 mL/kg of lactated 
Ringer’s injection, normal saline, or type O-negative 
 FIGURE 418  The alternative technique for neonatal 
chest compressions: two ﬁ ngers are placed on the lower 
third of the sternum at right angles to the chest. The chest 
is compressed approximately 1 cm at a rate of 120/min. 
 
CHAPTER 41 Obstetric Anesthesia 
875 
limiting both insuﬄ  ation pressure and duration of 
the procedure limit the degree of acidosis. Long-
term detrimental eﬀ ects relate to possible terato-
genic eﬀ ects on the developing fetus. 
 When is the fetus most sensitive to teratogenic 
inﬂ uences? 
 Three stages of susceptibility are generally 
recognized. In the ﬁ rst 2 weeks of intrauterine life, 
teratogens have either a lethal eﬀ ect or no eﬀ ect 
on the embryo. The third to eighth weeks are the 
most critical period, when organogenesis takes 
place; drug exposure during this period can pro-
duce major developmental abnormalities. From the 
eighth week onward, organogenesis is complete, 
and organ growth takes place. Teratogen exposure 
during this last period usually results in only minor 
morphological abnormalities but can produce sig-
niﬁ cant physiological abnormalities and growth 
retardation. Although the teratogenic inﬂ uences 
of anesthetic agents have been extensively studied 
in animals, retrospective human studies have been 
inconclusive. Past concerns about possible terato-
genic eﬀ ects of nitrous oxide and benzodiazepines 
do not appear to be justiﬁ ed. Nonetheless, exposure 
to all anesthetic agents should be kept to a minimum 
in terms of the total number of agents, dosage, and 
duration of exposure. We tend to administer only 
those agents that are required—and in our practice, 
nitrous oxide is never required and benzodiazepines 
are only rarely needed—in a pregnant patient. 
 What would be the ideal anesthetic technique 
in this patient? 
 Toward the end of the second trimester (after 
20–24 weeks of gestation), most of the major 
physiological changes associated with pregnancy 
have taken place. Regional anesthesia, when fea-
sible, is preferable to general anesthesia in order 
to decrease the risks of pulmonary aspiration and 
failed intubation and to minimize drug exposure 
to the fetus. The patient should be maintained 
with left lateral uterine displacement when supine. 
Total drug exposure is least with spinal anesthesia. 
Moreover, spinal anesthesia may be preferable to 
epidural anesthesia because it is not associated 
section. Dopamine may be started at 5 mcg/kg/min 
to support arterial blood pressure. Lastly, surfactant 
may be given through the endotracheal tube to pre-
mature neonates with respiratory distress syndrome. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Appendicitis in a Pregnant Woman 
 A 31-year-old woman with a 24-week gestation 
presents for an appendectomy. 
 How does pregnancy complicate the 
management of this patient? 
 Nearly 1–2% of pregnant patients require sur-
gery during their pregnancy. The most common 
procedure during the ﬁ rst trimester is laparoscopy; 
appendectomy (1:1500 pregnancies) and chole-
cystectomy (1:2000–10,000 pregnancies) are the 
most commonly performed general surgical proce-
dures. Cervical cerclage may be necessary in some 
patients for cervical incompetence. The physiologi-
cal eﬀ ects of pregnancy can alter the manifestations 
of disease process and make diagnosis diﬃ  cult. 
Patients may therefore present with advanced or 
complicated disease. The physiological changes 
associated with pregnancy (see Chapter 40) further 
predispose the patient to increased morbidity and 
mortality. Moreover, both the operation and the 
anesthesia can adversely aﬀ ect the fetus. 
 What are the potentially detrimental eﬀ ects 
of surgery and anesthesia on the fetus? 
 The procedure can have both immediate 
and long-term undesirable eﬀ ects on the fetus. 
Maternal hypotension, hypovolemia, severe ane-
mia, hypoxemia, and marked increases in sympa-
thetic tone can seriously compromise the transfer 
of oxygen and other nutrients across the uteropla-
cental circulation and promote intrauterine fetal 
asphyxia. The stress of the operative procedure 
and the underlying process may also precipitate 
preterm labor, which often follows intraabdomi-
nal surgery near the uterus. Laparoscopy may be 
safely performed although CO 2 insuﬄ  ation has 
the potential to cause fetal respiratory acidosis. 
Mild to moderate maternal hyperventilation and 
876 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
Nonetheless, large doses and prolonged infusions 
of nitroprusside should be avoided because the 
immature liver of the fetus may have a limited abil-
ity to metabolize the cyanide breakdown product. 
Cardiopulmonary bypass has been employed in 
pregnant patients successfully without adverse 
fetal outcome. Elective use of circulatory arrest dur-
ing pregnancy is not recommended. 
 GUIDELINES 
 Kattwinkel J, Perlman JM, Aziz K, et al: Part 15: 
Neonatal resuscitation: 2010 American Heart 
Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. 
Circulation 2010;122:S909. Erratum in: Circulation 
2011;124:e406. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Ahmed A: New insights into the etiology of preeclampsia: 
Identifi cation of key elusive factors for the vascular 
complications. Th romb Res 2011;127:S72. 
 Frölich MA, Esame A, Zhang K, et al: What factors aff ect 
intrapartum maternal temperature? A prospective 
cohort study: Maternal intrapartum temperature. 
Anesthesiology 2012;117:302. 
 Loubert C, Hinova A, Fernando R: Update on modern 
neuraxial analgesia in labour: A review of the 
literature of the last 5 years. Anaesthesia 2011;66:191. 
 MacKAy AP, Berg CJ, Liu X, et al: Changes in pregnancy 
mortality ascertainment: United States, 1999–2005. 
Obstet Gynecol 2011;118:104. 
 Ngan Kee WD: Prevention of maternal hypotension aft er 
regional anaesthesia for caesarean section. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2010;23:304. 
 Santos AC, Birnbach DJ: Spinal anesthesia in the 
parturient with severe preeclampsia: Time for 
reconsideration. Anesth Analg 2003;97:621. 
 Simmons SW, Cyna AM, Dennis AT, Hughes D: Combined 
spinal-epidural versus epidural analgesia in labour. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;18:CD003401. 
 Toledo P: What’s new in obstetric anesthesia: Th e 2011 
Gerard W. Ostheimer lecture. Int J Obstet Anesth 
2012;21:68. 
 Wong CA, Scavone BM, Peaceman AM, et al: Th e risk of 
cesarean delivery with neuraxial analgesia given early 
versus late in labor. N Engl J Med 2005;352:655. 
with unintentional intravascular injection or the 
potential for accidental intrathecal injection of 
large epidural doses of local anesthetic. On the 
other hand, general anesthesia guarantees patient 
comfort and, when a volatile agent is used, may 
even suppress preterm labor (see Chapter 40). 
Nitrous oxide without concomitant administration 
of a halogenated anesthetic is reported to reduce 
uterine blood ﬂ ow. 
 Although regional anesthesia is preferable in 
most instances, the choice between regional and 
general anesthesia must be individualized accord-
ing to the patient, the anesthesiologist, and the 
type of surgery. Spinal anesthesia is usually satis-
factory for open appendectomies, whereas gen-
eral anesthesia is appropriate for laparoscopic 
procedures. 
 Are any special monitors indicated 
perioperatively? 
 In addition to standard monitors, fetal heart 
rate and uterine activity should be monitored with 
a Doppler and tocodynamometer immediately 
prior to surgery and during anesthesia recovery in 
a woman who is 24 weeks or more pregnant. When 
regular organized uterine activity is detected, early 
treatment with a β-adrenergic agonist such as rito-
drine usually aborts the preterm labor. Magnesium 
sulfate and oral or rectal indomethacin may also be 
used as tocolytics. 
 When should elective operations be performed 
during pregnancy? 
 All elective operations should be postponed 
until 6 weeks after delivery. Only emergency pro-
cedures that pose an immediate threat to the 
mother or fetus should be routinely performed. 
The timing of semielective procedures, such as 
those for cancer, valvular heart disease, or intracra-
nial aneurysms, must be individualized and must 
balance the threat to maternal health versus fetal 
well-being. Controlled (deliberate) hypotensive 
anesthesia has been utilized to reduce blood loss 
during extensive cancer operations; nitroprusside, 
nitroglycerin, and hydralazine have been used dur-
ing pregnancy without apparent fetal compromise. 
 877
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
42
 Pediatric Anesthesia 
877
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Neonates and infants have fewer and 
smaller alveoli, reducing lung compliance; 
in contrast, their cartilaginous rib cage 
makes their chest wall very compliant. The 
combination of these two characteristics 
promotes chest wall collapse during 
inspiration and relatively low residual lung 
volumes at expiration. The resulting decrease 
in functional residual capacity (FRC) limits 
oxygen reserves during periods of apnea (eg, 
intubation attempts) and readily predisposes 
them to atelectasis and hypoxemia . 
 Compared with older children and adults, 
neonates and infants have a proportionately 
larger head and tongue, narrower nasal 
passages, an anterior and cephalad larynx, 
a longer epiglottis, and a shorter trachea 
and neck. These anatomic features make 
neonates and infants obligate nasal breathers 
until about 5 months of age. The cricoid 
cartilage is the narrowest point of the airway 
in children younger than 5 years of age . 
 Cardiac stroke volume is relatively ﬁ xed by 
a noncompliant and immature left ventricle 
in neonates and infants. The cardiac output 
is therefore very sensitive to changes in 
heart rate . 
 Thin skin, low fat content, and a greater 
surface area relative to weight promote 
greater heat loss to the environment in 
neonates. Heat loss is compounded by 
cold operating rooms, wound exposure, 
intravenous ﬂ uid administration, dry 
1
2
3
4
anesthetic gases, and the direct eﬀ ect 
of anesthetic agents on temperature 
regulation. Hypothermia has been 
associated with delayed awakening from 
anesthesia, cardiac irritability, respiratory 
depression, increased pulmonary vascular 
resistance, and altered drug responses . 
 Neonates, infants, and young children have 
relatively greater alveolar ventilation and 
reduced FRC compared with older children 
and adults even after adjustment for weight. 
This greater minute ventilation-to-FRC ratio 
with relatively greater blood ﬂ ow to vessel-
rich organs contributes to a rapid increase 
in alveolar anesthetic concentration and 
speeds inhalation induction . 
 Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) for 
halogenated agents is greater in infants 
than in neonates and adults. Unlike other 
agents, sevoﬂ urane has the same MAC in 
neonates and infants. Sevoﬂ urane appears 
to have a greater therapeutic index than 
halothane and has become the preferred 
agent for inhaled induction in pediatric 
anesthesia . 
 Children are more susceptible than adults 
to cardiac arrhythmias, hyperkalemia, 
rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinemia, masseter 
spasm, and malignant hyperthermia 
associated with succinylcholine. When a 
child experiences cardiac arrest following 
administration of succinylcholine, immediate 
5
6
7
—Continued next page
878 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
intercostal muscles and weaker diaphragms (due to a 
paucity of type I fi bers) and less effi  cient ventilation, 
more horizontal and pliable ribs, and protuberant 
abdomens. Respiratory rate is increased in neonates 
and gradually falls to adult values by adolescence. 
Tidal volume and dead space per kilogram are nearly 
constant during development. Th e presence of fewer, 
smaller airways produces increased airway resis-
tance. Th e alveoli are fully mature by late childhood 
(about 8 years of age). Th e work of breathing is 
increased and respiratory muscles easily fatigue. 
 Neonates and infants have fewer and smaller 
alveoli, reducing lung compliance; in contrast, 
their cartilaginous rib cage makes their chest wall 
very compliant. Th e combination of these two char-
acteristics promotes chest wall collapse during inspi-
ration and relatively low residual lung volumes at 
expiration. Th e resulting decrease in functional 
residual capacity (FRC) limits oxygen reserves dur-
ing periods of apnea (eg, intubation attempts) and 
readily predisposes neonates and infants to atelecta-
sis and hypoxemia. Th is may be exaggerated by their 
1
 Pediatric anesthesia involves more than simply adjust-
ing drug doses and equipment for smaller patients. 
Neonates (0–1 months), infants (1–12 months), tod-
dlers (12–24 months), and young children (2–12 years 
of age) have diff ering anesthetic requirements. Safe 
anesthetic management depends on full appreciation 
of the physiological, anatomic, and pharmacological 
characteristics of each group ( Table 42–1 ). Indeed 
infants are at much greater risk of anesthetic morbid-
ity and mortality than older children; risk is generally 
inversely proportional to age. In addition, pediatric 
patients are prone to illnesses that require unique 
surgical and anesthetic strategies. 
 ANATOMIC & PHYSIOLOGICAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
 Respiratory System 
 Th e transition from fetal to neonatal physiology is 
reviewed in Chapter 40. Compared with older chil-
dren and adults, neonates and infants have weaker 
because these patients have limited 
margins of error. A programmable infusion 
pump or a buret with a microdrip chamber 
is useful for accurate measurements. Drugs 
can be ﬂ ushed through low dead-space 
tubing to minimize unnecessary ﬂ uid 
administration . 
 Laryngospasm can usually be avoided 
by extubating the patient either while 
awake or while deeply anesthetized; both 
techniques have advocates. Extubation 
during the interval between these 
extremes, however, is generally recognized 
as more hazardous . 
 Patients with scoliosis due to muscular 
dystrophy are predisposed to malignant 
hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, and 
untoward eﬀ ects of succinylcholine 
(hyperkalemia, myoglobinuria, and 
sustained muscular contractures) . 
12
13
treatment for hyperkalemia should be 
instituted . 
 Unlike adults, children may have profound 
bradycardia and sinus node arrest following 
the ﬁ rst dose of succinylcholine without 
atropine pretreatment . 
 A viral infection within 2–4 weeks before 
general anesthesia and endotracheal 
intubation appears to place the child 
at an increased risk for perioperative 
pulmonary complications, such as wheezing, 
laryngospasm, hypoxemia, and atelectasis . 
 Temperature must be closely monitored in 
pediatric patients because of their greater 
risk for malignant hyperthermia and the 
potential for both iatrogenic hypothermia 
and hyperthermia . 
 Meticulous attention to ﬂ uid intake and loss 
is required in younger pediatric patients 
8
9
10
11
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia
879
younger than 5 years of age; in adults, the narrow-
est point is the glottis . One millimeter of mucosal 
edema will have a proportionately greater eff ect on 
gas fl ow in children because of their smaller tra-
cheal diameters. 
 Cardiovascular System 
 Cardiac stroke volume is relatively fi xed by a 
noncompliant and immature left  ventricle in 
neonates and infants. Th e cardiac output is there-
fore very sensitive to changes in heart rate (see 
Chapter 20). Although basal heart rate is greater 
than in adults ( Table 42–2 ), activation of the para-
sympathetic nervous system, anesthetic overdose, 
or hypoxia can quickly trigger bradycardia and 
profound reductions in cardiac output. Sick infants 
undergoing emergency or prolonged surgical proce-
dures appear particularly prone to episodes of bra-
dycardia that can lead to hypotension, asystole, and 
intraoperative death. Th e sympathetic nervous sys-
tem and baroreceptor refl exes are not fully mature. 
Th e infant cardiovascular system displays a blunted 
response to exogenous catecholamines. Th e imma-
ture heart is more sensitive to depression by volatile 
anesthetics and to opioid-induced bradycardia. Th e 
vascular tree is less able to respond to hypovolemia 
with compensatory vasoconstriction. Intravascular 
volume depletion in neonates and infants may be 
signaled by hypotension without tachycardia. 
 Metabolism & Temperature 
Regulation 
 Pediatric patients have a larger surface area per kilo-
gram than adults (or a smaller body-mass index). 
Metabolism and its associated parameters (oxygen 
consumption, CO 2 production, cardiac output, and 
alveolar ventilation) correlate better with surface 
area than with weight. 
 Th in skin, low fat content, and a greater sur-
face area relative to weight promote greater 
heat loss to the environment in neonates. Th is 
problem is compounded by inadequately warmed 
operating rooms, prolonged wound exposure, 
administration of room temperature intravenous or 
irrigation fl uid, and dry anesthetic gases. Of course, 
there are also eff ects of anesthetic agents on temper-
ature regulation (see Chapter 52). Even mild degrees 
of hypothermia can cause perioperative problems, 
3
4
 TABLE 421 Characteristics of neonates 
and infants that diﬀ erentiate them from 
adult patients. 1 
Physiological
Heart-rate-dependent cardiac output
Increased heart rate
Reduced blood pressure
Increased respiratory rate 
Increased metabolic rate
Reduced lung compliance
Increased chest wall compliance
Reduced functional residual capacity
Increased ratio of body surface area to body weight
Increased total body water content
Anatomic
Noncompliant left ventricle
Residual fetal circulation
Difficult venous and arterial cannulation
Relatively larger head and tongue
Narrower nasal passages
Anterior and cephalad larynx
Relatively longer epiglottis
Shorter trachea and neck
More prominent adenoids and tonsils
Weaker intercostal and diaphragmatic muscles
Greater resistance to airflow
Pharmacological
Immature hepatic biotransformation
Decreased blood protein for drug binding
More rapid rise in FA/FI and more rapid induction 
and recovery from inhaled anesthetics
Increased minimum alveolar concentration
Relatively larger volume of distribution for 
water-soluble drugs
Immature neuromuscular junction
1FA/FI, Fractional alveolar concentration/fractional inspired 
concentration.
relatively higher rate of oxygen consumption. 
Moreover, hypoxic and hypercapnic ventilatory 
drives are not well developed in neonates and infants. 
In fact, unlike in adults, hypoxia and hypercapnia 
may depress respiration in these patients. 
 Neonates and infants have, compared with 
older children and adults, a proportion-
ately larger head and tongue, narrower nasal pas-
sages, an anterior and cephalad larynx (the glottis 
is at a vertebral level of C4 versus C6 in adults), a 
longer epiglottis, and a shorter trachea and neck 
( Figure 42–1 ). Th ese anatomic features make neo-
nates and young infants obligate nasal breathers 
until about 5 months of age.  Th e cricoid cartilage 
is the narrowest point of the airway in children 
2
880 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
a more thermogenic pathway. Yet, metabolism of 
brown fat is severely limited in premature infants 
and in sick neonates who are defi cient in fat stores. 
Furthermore, volatile anesthetics inhibit thermo-
genesis in brown adipocytes. 
 Renal & Gastrointestinal Function 
 Kidney function approaches normal values (cor-
rected for size) by 6 months of age, but this may 
be delayed until the child is 2 years old. Premature 
neonates oft en demonstrate multiple forms of 
renal immaturity, including decreased creatinine 
clearance; impaired sodium retention, impaired 
glucose excretion, and impaired bicarbonate reab-
sorption; and reduced diluting and concentrating 
ability. Th ese abnormalities underscore the impor-
tance of appropriate fl uid administration in the 
early days of life. 
 Neonates also have a relatively increased inci-
dence of gastroesophageal refl ux. Th e immature 
liver conjugates drugs and other molecules less read-
ily early in life. 
including delayed awakening from anesthesia, car-
diac irritability, respiratory depression, increased 
pulmonary 
vascular 
resistance, 
and 
altered 
responses to anesthetics, neuromuscular blockers, 
and other agents. Th e more important mechanisms 
for heat production in neonates are nonshivering 
thermogenesis by metabolism of brown fat and 
shift ing of hepatic oxidative phosphorylation to 
Mandible
Body of hyoid bone
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Mandible
B
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Hyoid cartilage
Manubrium sterni
 FIGURE 421  Sagittal section of the adult ( A ) and infant ( B ) airway. (Reproduced, with permission, from Snell RS, Katz J:  Clinical 
Anatomy for Anesthesiologists . Appleton & Lange, 1988.) 
 TABLE 422 Age-related changes in vital 
signs. 1 
Age
Respiratory 
Rate
Heart 
Rate
Arterial Blood Pressure
Systolic 
Diastolic
Neonate
40
140
65
40
12 months
30
120
95
65
3 years
25
100
100
70
12 years
20
80
110
60
 1 Values are mean averages derived from numerous sources. Normal 
ranges may include measurements that deviate from these as much 
as 25–50%.
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
881 
(continued)
 TABLE 423 Pediatric drug dosages. 
Drug
Comment
Dosage
Drug
Comment
Dosage
Ceftriaxone
IV
25–50 mg/kg
Cefuroxime
IV
25 mg/kg
Chloral hydrate
PO
Rectal
25–100 mg/kg
50 mg/kg
Cimetidine
IV or PO
5–10 mg/kg
Cisatracurium
Intubation (IV)
0.15 mg/kg
Clindamycin
IV
20 mg/kg
Dantrolene
Initial dose (IV)
Maximum dose
Subsequent attempts
2.5 mg/kg
10 mg/kg
4 J/kg
Desmopressin
IV
0.2–0.4 mcg/kg
Dexamethasone
IV
0.1–0.5 mg/kg
Dextrose
D 25 W or D 50 W (IV)
0.5–1 g/kg
Digoxin
IV
Three divided doses 
over 24 h (IV)
0.1–0.2 mg/kg
15–30 mcg/kg
Diltiazem
IV over 2 min
0.25 mg/kg
Diphenhydramine
IV, IM, or PO
1 mg/kg
Dobutamine
Infusion
2–20 mcg/kg/min
Dolasetron
IV
0.35 mg/kg
Dopamine
Infusion
2–20 mcg/kg/min
Droperidol
IV
50–75 mcg/kg
Edrophonium
Depends on degree 
of paralysis (IV)
0.5–1 mg/kg
Ephedrine
IV
0.1–0.3 mg/kg
Epinephrine
IV bolus
Endotracheal dose
Infusion
10 mcg/kg
100 mcg/kg
0.05–1 mcg/
kg/min
Epinephrine, 
2.25% racemic
Nebulized
0.05 mL/kg in 3 mL 
saline
Esmolol
IV bolus
IV infusion
100–500 mcg/kg
25–200 mcg/
kg/min
Famotidine
IV
0.15 mg/kg
Fentanyl
Pain relief (IV)
Pain relief (Intranasal)
Premedication 
(Actiq PO)
Anesthetic adjunct (IV)
Maintenance infusion
Main anesthetic (IV)
1–2 mcg/kg
2 mcg/kg
10–15 mcg/kg
1–5 mcg/kg
2–4 mcg/kg/h
50–100 mcg/kg
Acetaminophen
Rectal
PO
IV (age > 2 y)
Maximum (per day)
40 mg/kg
10–20 mg/kg
15 mg/kg
60 mg/kg
Adenosine
Rapid IV bolus
Repeat dose
Maximum dose
0.1 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
12 mg
Albuterol
Nebulized
1.25–2.5 mg in 
2 mL saline
Alfentanil
Anesthetic 
supplement (IV)
Maintenance 
infusion
20–25 mcg/kg
1–3 mcg/kg/min
Aminophylline
Loading dose 
administered over 
20 min (IV)
Maintenance dose 
(therapeutic level: 
10–20 mg/mL)
5–6 mg/kg
0.5–0.9 mg/kg/h
Amiodarone
Loading dose (IV)
Repeat dose (slowly)
Infusion
Maximum dose
5 mg/kg
5 mg/kg
5–10 mcg/
kg/min
20 mg/kg/day
Amoxicillin
PO
50 mg/kg
Ampicillin
IV
50 mg/kg
Ampicillin/
sulbactam
IV
25–50 mg/kg
Atracurium
Intubation (IV)
0.5 mg/kg
Atropine
IV
IM
Minimum dose
Premedication (PO)
0.01–0.02 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.1 mg
0.03–0.05 mg/kg
Bretylium
Loading dose (IV)
5 mg/kg
Caffeine
IV
10 mg/kg
Calcium chloride
IV (slowly)
5–20 mg/kg
Calcium gluconate IV (slowly)
15–100 mg/kg
Cefazolin
IV
25 mg/kg
Cefotaxime
Cefotetan
Cefoxitin
Ceftazidime
IV
IV
IV
IV
25–50 mg/kg
20–40 mg/kg
30–40 mg/kg
30–50 mg/kg
 PHARMACOLOGICAL 
DIFFERENCES 
 Pediatric drug dosing is typically adjusted on a per-
kilogram basis for convenience ( Table 42–3 ). In 
early childhood a patient’s weight can be approxi-
mated based on age: 
 50th percentile weight (kg) = (Age × 2) + 9 
 Glucose Homeostasis 
 Neonates have relatively reduced glycogen stores, 
predisposing them to hypoglycemia. Impaired glu-
cose excretion by the kidneys may partially off set 
this tendency. In general, neonates at greatest risk 
for hypoglycemia are either premature or small for 
gestational age, receiving hyperalimentation, and 
the off spring of diabetic mothers. 
882 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 TABLE 423 Pediatric drug dosages. (continued)
Drug
Comment
Dosage
Drug
Comment
Dosage
Morphine
Pain relief (IV)
Premedication (IM)
0.025–0.1 mg/kg
0.1 mg/kg
Naloxone
IV
0.01 mg/kg
Neostigmine
Depends on 
degree of 
paralysis (IV)
0.04–0.07 mg/kg
Nitroglycerin
IV
0.5–3 mcg/kg/min
Nitroprusside
Infusion
0.5–4 mcg/kg/min
Norepinephrine
Infusion
0.05–2 mcg/kg/min
Ondansetron
IV
0.1 mg/kg
Oxacillin
IV
50 mg/kg
Pancuronium
IV
0.1 mg/kg
Penicillin G
IV
50,000 units/kg
Pentobarbital
Premedication (IM)
1–2 mg/kg
Phenobarbital
Anticonvulsant 
dose (IV)
5–20 mg/kg
Phentolamine
IV
30 mcg/kg
Phenylephrine
IV
1–10 mcg/kg
Phenytoin
Slowly IV
5–20 mg/kg
Physostigmine
IV
0.01–0.03 mg/kg
Prednisone
PO
1 mg/kg
Procainamide
Loading dose (IV)
15 mg/kg
Propofol
Induction (IV)
Maintenance 
infusion
2–3 mg/kg
60–250 mcg/
kg/min
Propranolol
IV
10–25 mcg/kg
Prostaglandin E 1 
Infusion
0.05–0.1 mcg/
kg/min
Protamine
IV
1 mg/100 units 
heparin
Ranitidine
IV
0.25–1.0 mg/kg
Remifentanil
IV bolus
IV infusion
0.25–1 mcg/kg
0.05–2 mcg/
kg/min
Rocuronium
Intubation (IV)
0.6–1.2 mg/kg
Sodium bicarbonate
IV
1 mEq/kg
Succinylcholine
Intubation (IV)
Intubation (IM)
1–2mg/kg
4 mg/kg
Sufentanil
Premedication 
(Intranasal)
Anesthetic 
adjunct (IV)
Maintenance 
infusion
Main anesthetic 
(IV)
2 mcg/kg
0.5–1 mcg/kg
0.5–2 mcg/kg/h
10–15 mcg/kg
Thiopental
Induction 
(IV)
5–6 mg/kg
Trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole
IV
4–5 mg/kg
Vancomycin
IV
20 mg/kg
Vecuronium
IV
0.1 mg/kg
Verapamil
IV
0.1–0.3 mg/kg
Flumazenil
IV
0.01 mg/kg
Fosphenytoin
IV
15–20 mg/kg
Furosemide
IV
0.2–1 mg/kg
Gentamicin
IV
2 mg/kg
Glucagon
IV
0.5–1 mg
Glucose
IV
0.5–1 g/kg
Glycopyrrolate
IV
0.01 mg/kg
Granisetron
IV
0.04 mg/kg
Heparin
IV (not for cardiac 
surgery)
Cardiac surgery 
dose
100 units/kg
300–400 units/kg
Hydrocortisone
IV
1 mg/kg
Hydromorphone
IV
15–20 mcg/kg
Ibuprofen
PO
4–10 mg/kg
Imipenem
IV
15–25 mg/kg
Inamrinone
Loading (IV)
Maintenance
1.5 mg/kg
5–10 mcg/kg/min
Insulin
Infusion
0.02–0.1 units/
kg/h
Isoproterenol
Infusion
0.1–1 mcg/kg/min
Ketamine
Induction (IV)
Induction (IM)
Induction (per 
rectum)
Maintenance 
infusion
Premedication (PO)
Sedation (IV)
1–2 mg/kg
6–10 mg/kg
10 mg/kg
25–75 mcg/kg/
min
6–10 mg/kg
0.5–1 mg/kg
Ketorolac
IV
0.5–0.75 mg/kg
Labetalol
IV
0.25 mg/kg
Lidocaine
Loading
Maintenance
1 mg/kg
20–50 mcg/kg/
min
Magnesium 
sulphate
IV (slowly)
Maximum single 
dose
25–50 mg/kg
2 g
Mannitol
IV
0.25–1 g/kg
Meperidine
Pain relief (IV)
0.2–0.5 mg/kg
Methohexital
Induction (IV)
Induction (per 
rectum)
Induction (IM)
1–2 mg/kg
25–30 mg/kg
10 mg/kg
Methylprednisolone
IV
2–4 mg/kg
Metoclopramide
IV
0.15 mg/kg
Metronidazole
IV
7.5 mg/kg
Midazolam
Premedication (PO)
Maximum dose (PO)
Sedation (IM)
Sedation (IV)
0.5 mg/kg
20 mg
0.1–0.15 mg/kg
0.05 mg/kg
Milrinone
Loading (IV)
Maintenance
50–75 mcg/kg
0.375–0.75 mcg/
kg/min
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia
883
 Th e minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) 
for halogenated agents is greater in infants 
than in neonates and adults ( Table 42–4 ). In con-
trast to other agents, no increase in sevofl urane 
MAC can be demonstrated in neonates and infants. 
Nitrous oxide does not appear to reduce the MAC 
of desfl urane or sevofl urane in children to the same 
extent as it does for other agents. 
Th e blood pressure of neonates and infants 
appears to be especially sensitive to volatile 
anesthetics. Th is clinical observation has been 
attributed to less-well-developed compensatory 
mechanisms (eg, vasoconstriction, tachycardia) 
and greater sensitivity of the immature myocar-
dium to myocardial depressants . Halothane (now 
much less commonly used) sensitizes the heart to 
catecholamines. Th e maximum recommended dose 
of epinephrine in local anesthetic solutions during 
halothane anesthesia is 10 mcg/kg. Cardiovascular 
depression, bradycardia, and arrhythmias are less 
frequent with sevofl urane than with halothane. 
Halothane and sevofl urane are less likely than 
other volatile agents to irritate the airway or cause 
breath holding or laryngospasm during induction 
(see Chapter 8). In general, volatile anesthetics 
appear to depress ventilation more in infants than 
in older children. Sevofl urane appears to produce 
the least respiratory depression. Th e risk for hal-
othane-induced hepatic dysfunction appears to be 
much reduced in prepubertal children compared 
with adults. Th ere are no reported instances of 
renal toxicity attributed to inorganic fl uoride pro-
duction during sevofl urane anesthesia in children. 
 Weight-adjustment of drug dosing is incom-
pletely eff ective because it does not take into account 
the disproportionately larger pediatric intravas-
cular and extracellular fl uid compartments, the 
immaturity of hepatic biotransformation pathways, 
increased organ blood fl ow, decreased protein for 
drug binding, or higher metabolic rate. 
 Neonates and infants have a proportionately 
greater total water content (70–75%) than adults 
(50–60%). Total body water content decreases while 
fat and muscle content increase with age. As a direct 
result, the volume of distribution for most intra-
venous drugs is disproportionately greater in neo-
nates, infants, and young children, and the optimal 
dose (per kilogram) is usually greater than in older 
children and adults. A disproportionately smaller 
muscle mass in neonates prolongs the clinical dura-
tion of action (by delaying redistribution to muscle) 
of drugs such as thiopental and fentanyl. Neonates 
also have a relatively decreased glomerular fi ltration 
rate, hepatic blood fl ow, and renal tubular function, 
and immature hepatic enzyme systems. Increased 
intraabdominal pressure and abdominal surgery 
further reduce hepatic blood fl ow. All these factors 
may impair renal drug handling, hepatic metabo-
lism, or biliary excretion of drugs in neonates and 
young infants. Neonates also have decreased protein 
binding for some drugs, most notably thiopental, 
bupivacaine, and many antibiotics. In the case of 
thiopental, increased free drug enhances potency 
and reduces the induction dose in neonates com-
pared with older children. An increase in free bupi-
vacaine might increase the risk of systemic toxicity. 
 Inhalational Anesthetics 
 Neonates, infants, and young children have 
relatively greater alveolar ventilation and 
reduced FRC compared with older children and 
adults. Th is greater minute ventilation-to-FRC ratio 
with relatively greater blood fl ow to vessel-rich 
organs contributes to a rapid increase in alveolar 
anesthetic concentration and speeds inhalation 
induction. Furthermore, the blood/gas coeffi  cients 
of volatile anesthetics are reduced in neonates com-
pared with adults, resulting in even faster induction 
times and potentially increasing the risk of acciden-
tal overdosage. 
5
6
 TABLE 424 Approximate MAC 1 values 
for pediatric patients reported in % of an 
atmosphere. 2 
Agent
Neonates
Infants
Small 
Children
Adults
Halothane
0.90
1.1–1.2
0.9
0.75
Sevoflurane
3.2
3.2
2.5
2
Isoflurane
1.6
1.8–1.9
1.3–1.6
1.2
Desflurane
8–9
9–10
7–8
6
1 MAC, minimum alveolar concentration.
2 Values are derived from various sources.
884 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
capability, or increased sensitivity of the respiratory 
centers. Morphine sulfate, particularly in repeated 
doses, should be used with caution in neonates 
because hepatic conjugation is reduced and renal 
clearance of morphine metabolites is decreased. Th e 
cytochrome P-450 pathways mature at the end of 
the neonatal period. Older pediatric patients have 
relatively greater rates of biotransformation and 
elimination as a result of high hepatic blood fl ow. 
Sufentanil, alfentanil, and, possibly, fentanyl clear-
ances may be greater in children than in adults. 
Remifentanil clearance is increased in neonates and 
infants but elimination half-life is unaltered com-
pared with adults. Neonates and infants may be 
more resistant to the hypnotic eff ects of ketamine, 
requiring slightly higher doses than adults (but the 
“diff erences” are within the range of error in studies); 
pharmacokinetic values do not appear to be signifi -
cantly diff erent from those of adults. Etomidate has 
not been well-studied in pediatric patients younger 
than 10 years of age; its profi le in older children is 
similar to that in adults. Midazolam has the fastest 
clearance of all the benzodiazepines; however, mid-
azolam clearance is signifi cantly reduced in neonates 
compared with older children. Th e combination of 
midazolam and fentanyl can cause hypotension in 
patients of all ages. 
 Muscle Relaxants 
 For a wide variety of reasons (including pharmacol-
ogy, convenience, case mix, and convenience), muscle 
relaxants are less commonly used during induction 
of anesthesia in pediatric than in adult patients. 
Many children will have a laryngeal mask airway 
(LMA) or endotracheal tube placed aft er receiving 
a sevofl urane inhalation induction, placement of an 
intravenous catheter, and administration of various 
combinations of propofol, opioids, or lidocaine. 
 All muscle relaxants generally have a faster 
onset (up to 50% less delay) in pediatric patients 
because of shorter circulation times than adults. 
In both children and adults, intravenous succinyl-
choline (1–1.5 mg/kg) has the fastest onset (see 
Chapter 11). Infants require signifi cantly larger 
doses of succinylcholine (2–3 mg/kg) than older 
children and adults because of the relatively larger 
volume of distribution. Th is discrepancy disappears 
Overall, sevofl urane appears to have a greater ther-
apeutic index than halothane and has become the 
preferred agent for inhaled induction in pediatric 
anesthesia. 
 Emergence is fastest following desfl urane or 
sevofl urane, but both agents are associated with 
a greater incidence of agitation or delirium upon 
emergence, particularly in young children. Because 
of the latter, some clinicians switch to isofl urane 
for maintenance anesthesia following a sevofl urane 
induction (see below). 
 Nonvolatile Anesthetics 
 Aft er weight-adjustment of dosing, infants and 
young children require larger doses of propofol 
because of a larger volume of distribution compared 
with adults. Children also have a shorter elimina-
tion half-life and higher plasma clearance for 
propofol. Recovery from a single bolus is not appre-
ciably diff erent from that in adults; however, recov-
ery following a continuous infusion may be more 
rapid. For the same reasons, children may require 
increased weight-adjusted rates of infusion for 
maintenance of anesthesia (up to 250 mcg/kg/min). 
Propofol is not recommended for prolonged seda-
tion of critically ill pediatric patients in the intensive 
care unit (ICU) due to an association with greater 
mortality than other agents. Although the “propofol 
infusion syndrome” has been reported more oft en 
in critically ill children, it has also been reported 
in adults undergoing long-term propofol infusion 
(>48 h) for sedation, particularly at increased doses 
(>5 mg/kg/h). Its essential features include rhabdo-
myolysis, metabolic acidosis, hemodynamic insta-
bility, hepatomegaly, and multiorgan failure. 
 Children require relatively larger doses of thio-
pental compared with adults. Th e elimination half-
life is shorter and the plasma clearance is greater than 
in adults. In contrast, neonates, appear to be more 
sensitive to barbiturates. Neonates have less pro-
tein binding, a longer half-life, and impaired clear-
ance. Th e thiopental induction dose for neonates is 
3–4 mg/kg compared with 5–6 mg/kg for infants. 
 Opioids appear to be more potent in neo-
nates than in older children and adults. Unproven 
(but popular) explanations include “easier entry” 
across the blood–brain barrier, decreased metabolic 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia
885
with succinylcholine. When a child experiences car-
diac arrest following administration of succinylcho-
line, immediate treatment for hyperkalemia should 
be instituted. Prolonged, heroic (eg, potentially 
including cardiopulmonary bypass) resuscitative 
eff orts may be required. For this reason, succinylcho-
line is avoided for routine, elective paralysis for intu-
bation in children and adolescents.  Unlike 
adults, children may have profound bradycar-
dia and sinus node arrest following the fi rst dose of 
succinylcholine without atropine pretreatment. 
Atropine (0.1 mg minimum) must therefore always 
be administered prior to succinylcholine in children. 
Generally accepted indications for intravenous suc-
cinylcholine in children include rapid sequence 
induction with a “full” stomach and laryngospasm 
that does not respond to positive-pressure ventila-
tion. When rapid muscle relaxation is required prior 
to intravenous access (eg, with inhaled inductions in 
patients with full stomachs), intramuscular succinyl-
choline (4–6 mg/kg) can be used. Intramuscular 
atropine (0.02 mg/kg) should be administered with 
intramuscular succinylcholine to reduce the likeli-
hood of bradycardia. Some clinicians advocate intra-
lingual administration (2 mg/kg in the midline to 
avoid hematoma formation) as an alternate emer-
gency route for intramuscular succinylcholine. 
 Many clinicians consider rocuronium (0.6 mg/
kg intravenously) to be the drug of choice (when a 
relaxant will be used) during routine intubation in 
pediatric patients with intravenous access because 
it has the fastest onset of nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blocking agents (see Chapter 11). Larger 
doses of rocuronium (0.9–1.2 mg/kg) may be used 
for rapid sequence induction but a prolonged dura-
tion (up to 90 min) will likely follow. Rocuronium 
is the only nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocker 
that has been adequately studied for intramuscular 
administration (1.0–1.5 mg/kg), but this approach 
requires 3–4 min for onset. 
 Atracurium or cisatracurium may be preferred 
in young infants, particularly for short procedures, 
because these drugs consistently display short to 
intermediate duration. 
 As with adults, the eff ect of incremental doses 
of muscle relaxants (usually 25–30% of the initial 
dose) should be monitored with a peripheral nerve 
8
if dosage is based on body surface area.  Table 42–5
lists commonly used muscle relaxants and their ED 95
(the dose that produces 95% depression of evoked 
twitches). With the notable exclusion of succinyl-
choline and possibly cisatracurium, infants require 
signifi cantly smaller muscle relaxant doses than 
older children. Moreover, based on weight, older 
children require larger doses than adults for some 
neuromuscular blocking agents (eg, atracurium, see 
Chapter 11). As with adults, a more rapid intubation 
can be achieved with a muscle relaxant dose that is 
twice the ED 95 dose at the expense of prolonging the 
duration of action. 
 Th e response of neonates to nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants is variable. Popular (and unproven) 
explanations for this include “immaturity of the 
neuromuscular junction” (in premature neonates), 
tending to increase sensitivity (unproven), counter-
balanced by a disproportionately larger extracellular 
compartment, 
reducing 
drug 
concentrations 
(proven). Th e relative immaturity of neonatal 
hepatic function prolongs the duration of action for 
drugs that depend primarily on hepatic metabolism 
(eg, pancuronium, vecuronium, and rocuronium). 
Atracurium and cisatracurium do not depend on 
hepatic biotransformation and reliably behave as 
intermediate-acting muscle relaxants. 
 Children are more susceptible than adults to 
cardiac arrhythmias, hyperkalemia, rhabdo-
myolysis, myoglobinemia, masseter spasm, and 
malignant hyperthermia (see Chapter 52) associated 
7
 TABLE 425 Approximate ED 95 for muscle 
relaxants in infants and children. 1 
Agents
Infants ED 95 
(mg/kg)
Children ED 95 
(mg/kg)
Succinylcholine
0.7
0.4
Atracurium
0.25
0.35
Cisatracurium
0.05
0.06
Rocuronium
0.25
0.4
Vecuronium
0.05
0.08
Pancuronium
0.07
0.09
1 Average values during nitrous oxide/oxygen anesthesia.
886 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
66% of all medication-related arrests. Another 9% 
was due to intravascular injection of a local anes-
thetic, most oft en following a negative aspiration 
test during attempted caudal injection. Presumed 
cardiovascular mechanisms most oft en had no clear 
etiology; in more than 50% of those cases the patient 
had congenital heart disease. Where a cardiovascu-
lar mechanism could be identifi ed, it was most oft en 
related to hemorrhage, transfusion, or inadequate or 
inappropriate fl uid therapy. 
 Respiratory mechanisms included laryngo-
spasm, airway obstruction, and diffi  cult intubation 
(in decreasing order). In most cases the laryn-
gospasm occurred during induction. Nearly all 
patients who had airway obstruction or were dif-
fi cult to intubate had at least one other signifi cant 
underlying disease. 
 Th e most common equipment-related mecha-
nisms that led to a cardiac arrest were complications 
related to attempted central venous catheteriza-
tion (eg, pneumothorax, hemothorax, or cardiac 
tamponade). 
 In recent years there has been increased concern 
and scientifi c interest in the possibility that general 
anesthesia and general anesthetic agents are toxic 
to the brains of small children. Th e experimental 
data in animals are consistently worrisome, but the 
clinical data are (currently) inconclusive as to the 
extent of the risk and whether one technique is safer 
than another. Progress in this area can be followed 
on the SmartTots web site ( http://www.smarttots.
org ), maintained by the International Anesthesia 
Research Society. 
stimulator. Sensitivity can vary signifi cantly between 
patients. Nondepolarizing blockade can be reversed 
with neostigmine (0.03–0.07 mg/kg) or edropho-
nium (0.5–1 mg/kg) along with an anticholinergic 
agent (glycopyrrolate, 0.01 mg/kg, or atropine, 0.01–
0.02 mg/kg). Sugammadex, a specifi c antagonist for 
rocuronium and vecuronium, has yet to be released 
in the United States. 
 PEDIATRIC ANESTHETIC RISK 
 Th e Pediatric Perioperative Cardiac Arrest (POCA) 
Registry provides a useful database for  assessing 
 pediatric anesthetic risk. Th is registry includes 
reports derived from approximately one million 
pediatric anesthetics administered since 1994. Case 
records of children experiencing cardiac arrests or 
death during the administration of or recovery from 
anesthesia were investigated regarding any pos-
sible relationship with anesthesia. Nearly all patients 
received general anesthesia alone or combined with 
regional anesthesia. In a preliminary analysis that 
included 289 cases of cardiac arrest, anesthesia was 
judged to have contributed to 150 arrests. Th us the 
risk of cardiac arrest in pediatric anesthetic cases 
would appear to be approximately 1.4 in 10,000. 
Moreover, an overall mortality of 26% was reported 
following cardiac arrest. Approximately 6% suff ered 
permanent injury, but the majority (68%) had either 
no or only temporary injury. Mortality was 4% in 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physi-
cal status 1 and 2 patients compared with 37% in ASA 
physical status 3–5 patients. It is important to note 
that 33% of patients who suff ered a cardiac arrest 
were ASA physical status 1–2. Infants accounted 
for 55% of all anesthesia-related arrests, with those 
younger than 1 month of age (ie, neonates) having 
the greatest risk. As with adults, two major predic-
tors of mortality were ASA physical status 3–5 and 
emergency surgery. 
 Most (82%) arrests occurred during induction 
of anesthesia; bradycardia, hypotension, and a low 
Sp o 2 frequently preceded arrest. Th e most com-
mon mechanism of cardiac arrest was judged to be 
medication related ( Figure 42–2 ). Cardiovascular 
depression from halothane, alone or in combination 
with other drugs, was believed to be responsible in 
Cardiovascular
21%
Other
 4%
Medication-
related
37%
Respiratory
20%
Equipment
related 7%
 FIGURE 422  Mechanisms of cardiac arrest in 
pediatric patients, based on POCA Registry data. 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia
887
diff erentiate between an infectious cause of rhinor-
rhea and an allergic or vasomotor cause.  A viral 
infection within 2–4 weeks before general 
anesthesia and endotracheal intubation appears to 
place the child at an increased risk for perioperative 
pulmonary complications, such as wheezing (10-fold), 
laryngospasm (5-fold), hypoxemia, and atelectasis. 
Th is is particularly likely if the child has a severe 
cough, high fever, or a family history of reactive air-
way disease. Th e decision to anesthetize children 
with URIs remains controversial and depends on the 
presence of other coexisting illnesses, the severity of 
URI symptoms, and the urgency of the surgery. 
When surgery will be performed in a child with a 
URI, one should consider giving anticholinergic pre-
medication, avoiding intubation (if feasible), and 
humidifying inspired gases. In this circumstance one 
should anticipate that a longer-than-usual stay in the 
recovery room may be required. 
 C. Laboratory Tests 
 Few, if any, preoperative laboratory tests are cost 
eff ective. Some pediatric centers require  no preoper-
ative laboratory tests in  healthy children undergoing 
minor procedures. Obviously, this places responsibil-
ity on the anesthesiologist, surgeon, and pediatrician 
to correctly identify those patients who should have 
preoperative testing for specifi c surgical procedures. 
 Most asymptomatic patients with cardiac mur-
murs do not have signifi cant cardiac pathology. 
Innocent murmurs may occur in more than 30% of 
normal children. Th ese are typically soft , short sys-
tolic ejection murmurs that are best heard along the 
left  upper or left  lower sternal border and that do not 
radiate. Innocent murmurs at the left  upper sternal 
border typically are due to fl ow across the pulmonic 
valve (pulmonic ejection) whereas those at the lower 
left  border typically are due to fl ow from the left 
ventricle to the aorta (Still’s vibratory murmur). Th e 
pediatrician should carefully evaluate patients with 
a newly diagnosed murmur, particularly in infancy. 
Consultation with a pediatric cardiologist, echocar-
diography, or both, should be obtained if the patient 
is symptomatic (eg, poor feeding, failure to thrive, or 
easy fatigability); the murmur is harsh, loud, holo-
systolic, diastolic, or radiates widely; or pulses are 
either bounding or markedly diminished. 
9
 Children are at greater risk than adults of devel-
oping malignant hyperthermia. Th is complex and 
important topic is covered in depth in Chapter 52. 
 PEDIATRIC ANESTHETIC 
TECHNIQUES 
 Preoperative Considerations 
 A. Preoperative Interview 
 Depending on age, past experiences, and maturity, 
children present with varying degrees of fright (even 
terror) when faced with the prospect of surgery. In 
contrast to adults, who are usually most concerned 
about the possibility of death, children are princi-
pally worried about pain and separation from their 
parents. Presurgical preparation programs—such as 
brochures, videos, or tours—can be very helpful in 
preparing many children and parents. Unfortunately, 
outpatient and morning-of-admission surgery 
together with a busy operating room schedule oft en 
make it nearly impossible for an anesthesiologist to 
break through the barriers presented by pediatric 
patients. For this reason, premedication (below) can 
be helpful. When time permits, one can demystify 
the process of anesthesia and surgery by explaining 
in age-appropriate terms what lies ahead. For exam-
ple, the anesthesiologist might bring an anesthesia 
mask for the child to play with during the interview 
and describe it as like something the astronauts use. 
Alternatively, in some centers, someone the child 
trusts (eg, a parent, nurse, another physician) may 
be allowed to be in attendance during preanesthetic 
preparations and induction of anesthesia. Th is can 
have a particularly calming infl uence on children 
undergoing repeated procedures (eg, examination 
under anesthesia following glaucoma surgery). 
Some pediatric hospitals have induction rooms 
adjacent to their operating rooms to permit parental 
attendance and a quieter, less startling environment 
for anesthetic inductions. 
 B. Recent Upper Respiratory Tract Infection 
 Children frequently present for surgery with 
 evidence—a runny nose with fever, cough, or sore 
throat—of a coincidental viral upper respiratory 
tract infection (URI). Attempts should be made to 
888 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
fentanyl levels continue to rise intraoperatively and 
can contribute to postoperative analgesia. 
 In the past anesthesiologists routinely premedi-
cated young children with anticholinergic drugs 
(eg, atropine, 0.02 mg/kg intramuscularly) in hope 
of reducing the likelihood of bradycardia during 
induction. Atropine reduces the incidence of hypo-
tension during induction in neonates and in infants 
younger than 3 months. Atropine can also prevent 
accumulation of secretions that can block small air-
ways and endotracheal tubes. Secretions can be par-
ticularly problematic for patients with URIs or those 
who have been given ketamine. Atropine may be 
administered orally (0.05 mg/kg), intramuscularly, 
or occasionally rectally. In current practice, most 
anesthesiologists prefer to administer atropine intra-
venously at or shortly aft er induction. 
 Monitoring 
 Monitoring requirements for infants and children 
are generally similar to those for adults with some 
minor modifi cations. Alarm limits should be appro-
priately adjusted. Smaller electrocardiographic elec-
trode pads may be necessary so that they do not 
encroach on sterile surgical areas. Blood pressure 
cuff s must be properly fi tted. Noninvasive blood 
pressure monitors have proved to be reliable in 
infants and children. A precordial stethoscope pro-
vides an inexpensive means of monitoring heart rate, 
quality of heart sounds, and airway patency. Finally, 
monitors may sometimes need to be fi rst attached 
(or reattached) following induction of anesthesia in 
less cooperative patients. 
 Small pediatric patients have a reduced margin 
for error. Pulse oximetry and capnography assume 
an even more important role in infants and small 
children because hypoxia from inadequate ventila-
tion remains a common cause of perioperative mor-
bidity and mortality. In neonates, the pulse oximeter 
probe should preferably be placed on the right hand 
or earlobe to measure preductal oxygen saturation. 
As in adult patients, end-tidal CO 2 analysis allows 
assessment of the adequacy of ventilation, confi rma-
tion of endotracheal tube placement, and early 
warning of malignant hyperthermia. Flow-through 
(mainstream) analyzers are usually less accurate in 
patients weighing less than 10 kg. Even with 
 D. Preoperative Fasting 
 Because children are more prone to dehydration 
than adults, their preoperative fl uid restriction has 
always been more lenient. Several studies, how-
ever, have documented low gastric pH (<2.5) and 
relatively high residual volumes in pediatric patients 
scheduled for surgery, suggesting that children may 
be at a greater risk for aspiration than was previously 
thought. Th e incidence of aspiration is reported to 
be approximately 1:1000. Th ere is no convincing 
evidence that prolonged fasting decreases this risk. 
In fact, several studies have demonstrated lower 
residual volumes and higher gastric pH in pediat-
ric patients who received clear fl uids a few hours 
before induction (see Chapter 53). More specifi cally, 
infants are fed breast milk up to 4 h before induc-
tion, whereas formula or liquids and a “light” meal 
may be given up to 6 h before induction. Clear fl u-
ids are off ered until 2–3 h before induction. Th ese 
recommendations are for healthy neonates, infants, 
and children without risk factors for decreased gas-
tric emptying or aspiration. 
 E. Premedication 
 Th ere is great variation in the recommendations for 
premedication of pediatric patients. Sedative pre-
medication is generally omitted for neonates and 
sick infants. Children who appear likely to exhibit 
uncontrollable separation anxiety should be given a 
sedative, such as midazolam (0.3–0.5 mg/kg, 15 mg 
maximum). Th e oral route is generally preferred 
because it is less traumatic than intramuscular injec-
tion, but it requires 20–45 min for eff ect. Smaller 
doses of midazolam have been used in combination 
with oral ketamine (4–6 mg/kg) for inpatients. For 
uncooperative patients, intramuscular midazolam 
(0.1–0.15 mg/kg, 10 mg maximum) or ketamine 
(2–3 mg/kg) with atropine (0.02 mg/kg) may be 
helpful. Rectal midazolam (0.5–1 mg/kg, 20 mg 
maximum) or rectal methohexital (25–30 mg/kg 
of 10% solution) may also be administered in such 
cases while the child is in the parent’s arms. Th e nasal 
route can be used with some drugs but is unpleasant, 
and some concerns exist over potential neurotoxic-
ity of nasal midazolam. Nasal dexmedetomidine has 
also been used by some clinicians. Fentanyl can also 
be administered as a lollipop (Actiq, 5–15 mcg/kg); 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia
889
 Premature or small-for-gestational age neo-
nates, and neonates who have received total paren-
teral nutrition or whose mothers are diabetic, are 
prone to hypoglycemia. Th ese infants should have 
frequent blood glucose measurements: levels below 
30 mg/dL in the neonate, below 40 mg/dL in infants, 
and below 60 mg/dL in children and adults indi-
cate hypoglycemia requiring immediate treatment. 
Blood sampling for arterial blood gases, hemoglo-
bin, potassium, and ionized calcium concentration 
can be invaluable in critically ill patients, particu-
larly in those undergoing major surgery or who may 
be receiving transfusions. 
 Induction 
 General anesthesia is usually induced by an intra-
venous or inhalational technique. Induction with 
intramuscular ketamine (5–10 mg/kg) is reserved 
for specifi c situations, such as those involving 
combative, particularly mentally challenged, chil-
dren and adults. Intravenous induction is usually 
preferred when the patient comes to the operating 
room with a functional intravenous catheter or will 
allow awake venous cannulation. Prior applica-
tion of EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetic) 
cream (see Chapter 16) may render intravenous can-
nulation less painful for the patient, and less stressful 
for the parent and anesthesiologist. EMLA cream is 
not a perfect solution. Some children become anx-
ious at the sight of a needle, particularly those who 
have had multiple needle punctures in the past, with 
or without EMLA. Furthermore, it can be diffi  cult to 
anticipate in which extremity intravenous cannula-
tion will prove to be successful. Finally, to be eff ec-
tive, EMLA cream must remain in contact with the 
skin for at least 30–60 min. Awake or sedated-awake 
intubation with topical anesthesia should be con-
sidered for emergency procedures in neonates and 
small infants when they are critically ill or a poten-
tial diffi  cult airway is present. 
 Intravenous Induction 
 Th e same induction sequence can be used as in 
adults: propofol (2–3 mg/kg) followed by a non-
depolarizing muscle relaxant (eg, rocuronium, 
cisatracurium, atracurium) or succinylcholine. We 
recommend that atropine be given routinely prior to 
aspiration (sidestream) capnographs, the inspired 
(baseline) CO 2 can appear falsely elevated and the 
expired (peak) CO 2 can be falsely low. Th e degree of 
error depends on many factors but can be mini-
mized by placing the sampling site as close as possi-
ble to the tip of the endotracheal tube, using a short 
length of sampling line, and lowering gas-sampling 
fl ow rates (100–150 mL/min). Furthermore, the size 
of some fl ow-through sensors may lead to kinking of 
the endotracheal tube or hypercapnia as a result of 
increased equipment dead space. 
 Temperature must be closely monitored in 
pediatric patients because of the greater risk 
for malignant hyperthermia and greater potential 
for intraoperative hypothermia or hyperthermia. 
Th e risk of hypothermia can be reduced by main-
taining a warm operating room environment (26°C 
or warmer), by warming and humidifying inspired 
gases, by using a warming blanket and warming 
lights, and by warming all intravenous and irrigation 
fl uids. Th e room temperature required for a neutral 
thermal environment varies with age; it is greatest in 
premature newborns. Note that care must be taken 
to prevent accidental burns and hyperthermia from 
overzealous warming eff orts. 
 Invasive monitoring (eg, arterial cannulation, 
central venous catheterization) demands expertise 
and judgment. Air bubbles should be removed from 
pressure tubing and small volume fl ushes should be 
used to prevent air embolism, unintended heparin-
ization, or fl uid overload. Th e right radial artery is 
oft en chosen for cannulation in the neonate because 
its preductal location mirrors the oxygen content 
of the carotid and retinal arteries. A femoral artery 
catheter may be a suitable alternative in very small 
neonates, and left  radial or right or left  dorsalis 
pedis arteries are alternatives in infants. Critically 
ill neonates may retain an umbilical artery catheter. 
Internal jugular and subclavian approaches are oft en 
used for central lines. Ultrasonography should be 
used during placement of internal jugular catheters 
and provides useful information for arterial cannu-
lation as well. Urinary output is an important (but 
neither sensitive nor specifi c) indicator of the ade-
quacy of intravascular volume and cardiac output. 
Noninvasive monitors of stroke volume have only 
recently been tested in infants and young children. 
10
890 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Th ere are many diff erences between adult and 
pediatric anatomy that infl uence mask ventilation 
and intubation. Equipment appropriate for age and 
size should be selected ( Table 42–6 ). Neonates and 
most young infants are obligate nasal breathers 
and obstruct easily. Oral airways will help displace an 
oversized tongue; nasal airways, so useful in adults, 
can traumatize small nares or prominent adenoids 
in small children. Compression of submandibular 
soft  tissues should be avoided during mask ventila-
tion to prevent upper airway obstruction. 
 Typically, the child can be coaxed into breath-
ing an odorless mixture of nitrous oxide (70%) and 
oxygen (30%). Sevofl urane (or halothane) can be 
added to the gas mixture in 0.5% increments every 
few breaths. As previously discussed, we favor sevo-
fl urane in most situations. Desfl urane and isofl u-
rane are avoided for inhalation induction because 
they are pungent and associated with more cough-
ing, breath-holding, and laryngospasm. We use a 
single (sometimes two) breath induction technique 
with sevofl urane (7–8% sevofl urane in 60% nitrous 
oxide) to speed the induction. Aft er an adequate 
depth of anesthesia has been achieved, an intrave-
nous line can be started and propofol and an opi-
oid (or a muscle relaxant) administered to facilitate 
intubation. Patients typically pass through an excite-
ment stage during which any stimulation can induce 
succinylcholine. Th e advantages of an intravenous 
technique include availability of intravenous access 
if emergency drugs need to be administered and 
rapidity of induction in the child at risk for aspira-
tion. Alternatively (and very commonly in pediatric 
practice), intubation can be accomplished with the 
combination of propofol, lidocaine, and an opiate, 
with or without an inhaled agent, avoiding the need 
for a paralytic agent. Finally, paralytic agents are 
not needed for placement of LMAs, which are com-
monly used in pediatric anesthesia. 
 Inhalational Induction 
 Many children do not arrive in the operating room 
with an intravenous line in place and nearly all 
dread the prospect of being stuck with a needle. 
Fortunately, sevofl urane can render small children 
unconscious within minutes. We fi nd this easier in 
children who have been sedated (most oft en with 
oral midazolam) prior to entering the operating 
room and who are sleepy enough to be anesthetized 
without ever knowing what has happened (“steal” 
induction). One can also insuffl  ate the anesthetic 
gases over the face, place a drop of food fl avoring on 
the inside of the mask (eg, oil of orange), and allow 
the child to sit during the early stages of induction. 
Specially contoured masks minimize dead space 
(see  Figure 19–8 ). 
 TABLE 426 Sizing of airway equipment in children. 
Premature
Neonate
Infant
Toddler
Small Child
Large Child
Age
0–1 month
0–1 month
1–12 months
1–3 years
3–8 years
8–12 years
Weight (kg)
0.5–3
3–5
4–10
8–16
14–30
25–50
Tracheal (ET) 1 tube (mm i.d.)
2.5–3
3–3.5
3.5–4
4–4.5
4.5–5.5
5.5–6 (cuffed)
ET depth (cm at lips)
6–9
9–10
10–12
12–14
14–16
16–18
Suction catheter (F)
6
6
8
8
10
12
Laryngoscope blade
00
0
1
1.5
2
3
Mask size
00
0
0
1
2
3
Oral airway
000–00
00
0 (40 mm)
1 (50 mm)
2 (70 mm)
3 (80 mm)
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA#)
—
1
1
2
2.5
3
 1 ET, endotracheal tube.
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
891 
sinusoids within the tibial bone. Th is intraosseous 
infusion can be used for all medications normally 
given intravenously, with almost as rapid results (see 
Chapter 55), and is considered part of the standard 
trauma resuscitation (ACLS) protocol when large-
bore intravenous access cannot be obtained. 
 Tracheal Intubation 
 One hundred percent oxygen should be adminis-
tered prior to intubation to increase patient safety 
during the obligatory period of apnea prior to and 
during intubation. Th e choice of muscle relaxant 
has been discussed earlier in the chapter. For awake 
intubations in neonates or infants, adequate pre-
oxygenation and continued oxygen insuffl  ation dur-
ing laryngoscopy (eg, Oxyscope) may help prevent 
hypoxemia. 
 Th e infant’s prominent occiput tends to place 
the head in a fl exed position prior to intubation. 
Th is is easily corrected by slightly elevating the 
shoulders with towels and placing the head on a 
doughnut-shaped pillow. In older children, promi-
nent tonsillar tissue can obstruct visualization of 
the larynx. Straight laryngoscope blades aid intuba-
tion of the anterior larynx in neonates, infants, and 
young children ( Table 42–6 ). Endotracheal tubes 
that pass through the glottis may still impinge upon 
the cricoid cartilage, which is the narrowest point of 
the airway in children younger than 5 years of age. 
Mucosal trauma from trying to force a tube through 
the cricoid cartilage can cause postoperative edema, 
stridor, croup, and airway obstruction. 
 The appropriate diameter inside the endotra-
cheal tube can be estimated by a formula based 
on age: 
 4 + Age/4 = Tube diameter (in mm) 
 For example, a 4-year-old child would be pre-
dicted to require a 5-mm tube. Th is formula provides 
only a rough guideline, however. Exceptions include 
premature neonates (2.5–3 mm tube) and full-term 
neonates (3–3.5 mm tube). Alternatively, the practi-
tioner can remember that a newborn takes a 2.5- or 
3-mm tube, and a 5-year-old takes a 5-mm tube. It 
should not be that diffi  cult to identify which of the 
three sizes of tube between 3 and 5 mm is required 
in small children. In larger children, small (5–6 mm) 
laryngospasm. Breath-holding must be distin-
guished from laryngospasm. Steady application of 
10 cm of positive end-expiratory pressure will usu-
ally overcome laryngospasm. 
 Alternatively, the anesthesiologist can deepen 
the level of anesthesia by increasing the concen-
tration of volatile anesthetic, and place an LMA 
or intubate the patient under “deep” sevofl urane 
anesthesia. Because of the greater anesthetic depth 
required for tracheal intubation with the latter tech-
nique, the risk of cardiac depression, bradycardia, 
or laryngospasm occurring without intravenous 
access detracts from this technique. Intramuscular 
succinylcholine (4–6 mg/kg, not to exceed 150 mg) 
and atropine (0.02 mg/kg, not to exceed 0.4 mg) 
should be available if laryngospasm or bradycar-
dia occurs before an intravenous line is established; 
intralingual succinylcholine may be an alterative 
route (see above). 
 Positive-pressure ventilation during mask induc-
tion and prior to intubation sometimes causes gastric 
distention, resulting in impairment of lung expansion. 
Suctioning with an orogastric or nasogastric tube will 
decompress the stomach, but it must be done without 
traumatizing fragile mucous membranes. 
 Intravenous Access 
 Intravenous cannulation in infants can be a vex-
ing ordeal. Th is is particularly true for infants who 
have spent weeks in a neonatal intensive care unit 
and have few unpunctured veins left . Even healthy 
1-year-old children can prove a challenge because of 
extensive subcutaneous fat. Venous cannulation usu-
ally becomes easier aft er 2 years of age. Th e saphe-
nous vein has a consistent location at the ankle and 
an experienced practitioner can usually cannulate it 
even if it is not visible or palpable. Transillumination 
of the hands or ultrasonography will oft en reveal 
previously hidden cannulation sites. Twenty-four-
gauge over-the-needle catheters are adequate in neo-
nates and infants when blood transfusions are not 
anticipated. All air bubbles should be removed from 
the intravenous line, to reduce the risk of paradoxi-
cal air embolism from occult patent foramen ovale. 
In emergency situations where intravenous access is 
impossible, fl uids can be eff ectively infused through 
an 18-gauge needle inserted into the medullary 
892 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
easily overcome by positive-pressure ventilation, 
the circle system can be safely used in patients of 
all ages if ventilation is controlled. Monitoring of 
airway pressure may provide early evidence of 
obstruction from a kinked endotracheal tube or 
accidental advancement of the tube into a main-
stem bronchus. 
 Many anesthesia ventilators on older machines 
are designed for adult patients and cannot reliably 
provide the reduced tidal volumes and rapid rates 
required by neonates and infants. Unintentional 
delivery of large tidal volumes to a small child can 
generate excessive peak airway pressures and cause 
barotrauma. Th e pressure-limited mode, which is 
found on nearly all newer anesthesia ventilators, 
should be used for neonates, infants, and toddlers. 
Small tidal volumes can also be manually delivered 
with greater ease with a 1-L breathing bag than with 
a 3-L adult bag. For children less than 10 kg, ade-
quate tidal volumes are achieved with peak inspira-
tory pressures of 15–18 cm H 2 O. For larger children 
the volume control ventilation may be used and 
tidal volumes may be set at 6–8 mL/kg. Many spi-
rometers are less accurate at lower tidal volumes. 
In addition, the gas lost in long, compliant adult 
breathing circuits becomes large relative to a child’s 
small tidal volume. For this reason, pediatric tubing 
is usually shorter, lighter, and stiff er (less compli-
ant). Nevertheless, one should recall that the dead 
space contributed by the tube and circle system 
consists only of the volume of the distal limb of the 
Y-connector and that portion of the endotracheal 
tube that extends beyond the airway. In other words, 
the dead space is unchanged by switching from adult 
to pediatric tubing. Condenser humidifi ers or heat 
and moisture exchangers (HMEs) can add consider-
able dead space; depending on the size of the patient, 
they either should not be used or an appropriately 
sized, pediatric HME should be employed. 
 Anesthesia can be maintained in pediatric 
patients with the same agents as in adults. Some cli-
nicians switch to isofl urane following a sevofl urane 
induction in the hope of reducing the likelihood 
of emergence agitation or postoperative delirium 
(see above). If sevofl urane is continued for main-
tenance, administration of an opioid (eg, fentanyl, 
1–1.5  mcg/kg) 15–20 min before the end of the 
cuff ed tubes can be used either with or without the 
cuff  infl ated to minimize the need for precise sizing. 
Endotracheal tubes 0.5 mm larger and smaller than 
predicted should be readily available in or on the 
anesthetic cart. Uncuff ed endotracheal tubes tradi-
tionally have been selected for children aged 5 years 
or younger to decrease the risk of postintubation 
croup, but many anesthesiologists no longer use size 
4.0 or larger uncuff ed tubes. Th e leak test will mini-
mize the likelihood that an excessively large tube has 
been inserted. Correct tube size is confi rmed by easy 
passage into the larynx and the development of a gas 
leak at 15–20 cm H 2 O pressure for an uncuff ed tube. 
No leak indicates an oversized tube that should be 
replaced to prevent postoperative edema, whereas 
an excessive leak may preclude adequate ventilation 
and contaminate the operating room with anesthetic 
gases. As noted above, many clinicians use a down-
sized cuff ed tube with the cuff  completely defl ated in 
younger patients at high risk for aspiration; minimal 
infl ation of the cuff  can stop any air leak. Th ere is 
also a formula to estimate endotracheal length: 
 12 + Age/2 = Length of tube (in cm) 
 Again, this formula provides only a guideline, 
and the result must be confi rmed by auscultation 
and clinical judgment. To avoid endobronchial intu-
bation, the tip of the endotracheal tube should pass 
only 1–2 cm beyond an infant’s glottis. We favor an 
alternative approach: to intentionally place the tip of 
the endotracheal tube into the right mainstem bron-
chus and then withdraw it until breath sounds are 
equal over both lung fi elds. 
 Maintenance 
 Ventilation is almost always controlled during 
anesthesia of neonates and infants with a conven-
tional semiclosed circle system. During spontane-
ous ventilation, even the low resistance of a circle 
system can become a signifi cant obstacle for a sick 
neonate to overcome. Unidirectional valves, breath-
ing tubes, and carbon dioxide absorbers account 
for most of this resistance. For patients weighing 
less than 10 kg, some anesthesiologists prefer the 
Mapleson D circuit or the Bain system because of 
their low resistance and light weight (see Chapter 3). 
Nonetheless, because breathing-circuit resistance is 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia
893
during longer surgeries, particularly in neonates and 
infants, should be adjusted based on blood glucose 
measurements. 
 B. Deﬁ cits 
 In addition to a maintenance infusion, any preoper-
ative fl uid defi cits must be replaced. For example, if a 
5-kg infant has not received oral or intravenous fl uids 
for 4 h prior to surgery, a defi cit of 80 mL has accrued 
(5 kg × 4 mL/kg/h × 4 h). In contrast to adults, infants 
respond to dehydration with decreased blood pres-
sure and without increased heart rate. Preoperative 
fl uid defi cits are oft en administered with hourly 
maintenance requirements in aliquots of 50% in the 
fi rst hour and 25% in the second and third hours. In 
the example above, a total of 60 mL would be given 
in the fi rst hour (80/2 + 20) and 40 mL in the second 
and third hours (80/4 + 20). Bolus administration of 
dextrose-containing solutions is avoided to prevent 
hyperglycemia. Preoperative fl uid defi cits are usually 
replaced with a balanced salt solution (eg, lactated 
Ringer’s injection) or ½NS. In both cases, glucose is 
omitted to prevent hyperglycemia. Compared with 
lactated Ringer’s injection, normal saline has the dis-
advantage of promoting hyperchloremic acidosis. 
 C. Replacement Requirements 
 Replacement can be subdivided into blood loss and 
third-space loss. 
 1. Blood loss —Th e blood volume of premature 
neonates (100 mL/kg), full-term neonates (85–90 
mL/kg), and infants (80 mL/kg) is proportionately 
larger than that of adults (65–75 mL/kg). An initial 
hematocrit of 55% in the healthy full-term neonate 
gradually falls to as low as 30% in the 3-month-old 
infant before rising to 35% by 6 months. Hemoglobin 
(Hb) type is also changing during this period: from 
a 75% concentration of HbF (greater oxygen affi  n-
ity, reduced Pa o 2 , poor tissue unloading) at birth to 
almost 100% HbA (reduced oxygen affi  nity, high 
Pa o 2 , good tissue unloading) by 6 months. 
 Blood loss has been typically replaced with 
non–glucose-containing crystalloid (eg, 3 mL of 
lactated Ringer’s injection for each milliliter of 
blood lost) or colloid solutions (eg, 1 mL of 5% 
albumin for each milliliter of blood lost) until the 
patient’s hematocrit reaches a predetermined lower 
limit. In recent years there has been increased 
procedure can reduce the incidence of emergence 
delirium and agitation if the surgical procedure 
is likely to produce postoperative pain. Although 
the MAC is greater in children than in adults 
(see  Table 42–4 ), neonates may be particularly sus-
ceptible to the cardiodepressant eff ects of general 
anesthetics. Neonates and sick children may not 
tolerate increased concentrations of volatile agents 
required when the volatile agent alone is used to 
maintain good surgical operating conditions. 
 Perioperative Fluid Requirements 
 One must pay particular attention to fl uid 
management in younger pediatric patients 
because these patients have limited margins for 
error. A programmable infusion pump or a buret 
with a microdrip chamber is useful for accurate 
measurements. Drugs can be fl ushed through low 
dead-space tubing to minimize unnecessary fl uid 
administration. Fluid overload is diagnosed by 
prominent veins, fl ushed skin, increased blood 
pressure, decreased serum sodium, and a loss of the 
folds in the upper eyelids. 
 Fluid therapy can be divided into maintenance, 
defi cit, and replacement requirements. 
 A. Maintenance Fluid Requirements 
 Maintenance requirements for pediatric patients can 
be determined by the “4:2:1 rule”: 4 mL/kg/h for the 
fi rst 10 kg of weight, 2 mL/kg/h for the second 10 kg, 
and 1 mL/kg/h for each remaining kilogram. Th e 
choice of maintenance fl uid remains controversial. 
A solution such as D 5 ½ NS with 20 mEq/L of potas-
sium chloride provides adequate dextrose and elec-
trolytes at these maintenance infusion rates. D 5 ¼ NS 
may be a better choice in neonates because of their 
limited ability to handle sodium loads. Children up 
to the age of 8 years require 6 mg/kg/min of glucose 
to maintain euglycemia (40–125 mg/dL); premature 
neonates require 6–8 mg/kg/min. Older children 
and adults require only 2 mg/kg/min and in these 
patients euglycemia is normally well maintained 
by hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. 
Both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia should be 
avoided; however, the amount of hepatic glucose 
production is widely variable during major sur-
gery and critical illness. Th us glucose infusion rates 
11
894 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Caudal blocks have proved useful following a 
variety of surgeries, including circumcision, ingui-
nal herniorrhaphy, hypospadias repair, anal surgery, 
clubfoot repair, and other subumbilical procedures. 
Contraindications include infection around the 
sacral hiatus, coagulopathy, or anatomic abnormali-
ties. Th e patient is usually lightly anesthetized or 
sedated and placed in the lateral position. 
 For pediatric caudal anesthesia, a short-bevel 
22-gauge needle can be used. If the loss-of- resistance 
technique is used, the glass syringe should be fi lled 
with saline, not air, because of the latter’s possible 
association with air embolism. Aft er the characteris-
tic pop that signals penetration of the sacrococcygeal 
membrane, the needle angle of approach is reduced 
and the needle is advanced only a few more milli-
meters to avoid entering the dural sac or the ante-
rior body of the sacrum. Aspiration is used to check 
for blood or cerebrospinal fl uid; local anesthetic can 
then be slowly injected; failure of a 2-mL test dose 
of local anesthetic with epinephrine (1:200,000) to 
produce tachycardia helps exclude intravascular 
placement. 
 Many anesthetic agents have been used for 
caudal anesthesia in pediatric patients, with 0.125–
0.25% bupivacaine (up to 2.5 mg/kg) or 0.2% ropi-
vacaine being most common. Ropivacaine, 0.2%, 
can provide analgesia similar to bupivacaine but 
with less motor blockade. Ropivacaine appears to 
have less cardiac toxicity than bupivacaine when 
compared milligram to milligram. Addition of epi-
nephrine to caudal solutions tends to increase the 
degree of motor block. Clonidine, either by itself 
or combined with local anesthetics, has also been 
widely used. Morphine sulfate (25 mcg/kg) or 
hydromorphone (6 mcg/kg) may be added to the 
local anesthetic solution to prolong postoperative 
analgesia for inpatients, but it increases the risk of 
delayed postoperative respiratory depression. Th e 
volume of local anesthetic required depends on the 
level of blockade desired, ranging from 0.5 mL/kg 
for a sacral block to 1.25 mL/kg for a midthoracic 
block. Single-shot injections generally last 4–12 h. 
Placement of 20-gauge caudal catheters with contin-
uous infusion of local anesthetic (eg, 0.125% bupi-
vacaine or 0.1% ropivacaine at 0.2–0.4 mg/kg/h) or 
an opioid (eg, fentanyl, 2 mcg/mL at 0.6 mcg/kg/h) 
emphasis on avoiding excessive fl uid administra-
tion; thus blood loss is now commonly replaced by 
either colloid (eg, albumin) or packed red cells. In 
premature and sick neonates, the target hematocrit 
(for transfusion) may be as great as 40%, whereas 
in healthy older children a hematocrit of 20–26% 
is generally well tolerated. Because of their small 
intravascular volume, neonates and infants are at 
an increased risk for electrolyte disturbances (eg, 
hyperglycemia, hyperkalemia, and hypocalce-
mia) that can accompany rapid blood transfusion. 
Dosing of packed red blood cell transfusions is 
discussed in Chapter 51. Platelets and fresh frozen 
plasma, 10–15 mL/kg, should be given when blood 
loss exceeds 1–2 blood volumes. Recent practice, 
particularly with blood loss from trauma, favors 
“earlier” administration of plasma and platelets. 
One unit of platelets per 10 kg weight raises the 
platelet count by about 50,000/µL. Th e pediatric 
dose of cryoprecipitate is 1 unit/10 kg weight. 
 2. “Th ird-space” loss —Th ese losses are impossible 
to measure and must be estimated by the extent 
of the surgical procedure. In recent years the third 
space has even been attributed to overzealous fl uid 
administration during resuscitation. 
 One popular fl uid administration guideline is 
0–2 mL/kg/h for relatively atraumatic surgery (eg, 
strabismus correction where there should be  no 
third-space loss) and up to 6–10 mL/kg/h for trau-
matic procedures (eg, abdominal abscess). Th ird-
space loss is usually replaced with lactated Ringer’s 
injection (see Chapter 49). It is safe to say that all 
issues relating to the third space have never been 
more controversial. 
 Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
 Th e primary uses of regional techniques in pediat-
ric anesthesia have been to supplement and reduce 
general anesthetic requirements and to provide bet-
ter postoperative pain relief. Blocks range in com-
plexity from the relatively simple peripheral nerve 
blocks (eg, penile block, ilioinguinal block); to bra-
chial plexus, sciatic nerve, and femoral nerve blocks; 
to major conduction blocks (eg, spinal or epidural 
techniques). Regional blocks in children (as in 
adults) are oft en facilitated by ultrasound guidance, 
sometimes with nerve stimulation. 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
895 
ultrasound guidance. Th e latter can be performed 
using either a gluteal or a popliteal approach. 
 A wide variety of other terminal nerve blocks 
(eg, digital nerve, median nerve, occipital nerve, etc) 
are easily performed to reduce postoperative pain in 
children. 
 Sedation for Procedures in 
and out of the Operating Room 
 Sedation is oft en requested for pediatric patients 
inside and outside the operating room for nonsur-
gical procedures. Cooperation and motionlessness 
may be required for imaging studies, bronchoscopy, 
gastrointestinal endoscopy, cardiac catheterization, 
dressing changes, and minor procedures (eg, cast-
ing and bone marrow aspiration). Requirements 
vary depending on the patient and the procedure, 
ranging from anxiolysis (minimal sedation), to 
conscious sedation (moderate sedation and analge-
sia), to deep sedation/analgesia, and fi nally to gen-
eral anesthesia. Anesthesiologists are usually held 
to the same standards when they provide moder-
ate or deep sedation as when they provide general 
anesthesia. Th is includes preoperative preparation 
(eg, fasting), assessment, monitoring, and postop-
erative care. Airway obstruction and hypoventila-
tion are the most commonly encountered problems 
associated with moderate or deep sedation. With 
deep sedation and general anesthesia cardiovascular 
depression can also be a problem. 
 Table 42–3 includes doses of sedative-hypnotic 
drugs. One of the sedatives commonly used by non-
anesthesia personnel in the past was chloral hydrate, 
25–100 mg/kg orally or rectally. It has a slow onset of 
up to 60 min and a long half-life (8–11 h) that results 
in prolonged somnolence. Although it generally has 
little eff ect on ventilation, it can cause fatal airway 
obstruction in patients with sleep apnea. Overall, 
chloral hydrate is a poor choice given its propensity 
for producing cardiac arrhythmias when it is used 
in the larger doses needed for moderate sedation. 
Midazolam, 0.5 mg/kg orally or 0.1–0.15 mg/kg 
intravenously, is particularly useful because its eff ects 
can be readily reversed with fl umazenil. Doses 
should be reduced whenever more than one agent is 
used because of the potential for synergistic respira-
tory and cardiovascular depression. 
allows prolonged anesthesia and postoperative anal-
gesia. Complications are rare but include local anes-
thetic toxicity from increased blood concentrations 
(eg, seizures, hypotension, arrhythmias), spinal 
blockade, and respiratory depression. Postoperative 
urinary retention does not appear to be a problem 
following single-dose caudal anesthesia. 
 Lumbar and thoracic epidural catheters can be 
placed in anesthetized children using the standard 
loss-of-resistance technique and either a midline 
or paramedian approach. In small children, caudal 
epidural catheters have been passed into a thoracic 
position with the tip localized radiographically. 
 Unilateral transversus abdominis plane (TAP) 
blocks are commonly used to provide analgesia 
aft er hernia repair. Bilateral TAP blocks can be used 
to provide eff ective postoperative analgesia aft er 
abdominal surgery with a lower midline incision. 
Rectus sheath blocks can be used for midline inci-
sion in the upper abdomen. 
 Spinal anesthesia has been used in some cen-
ters for infraumbilical procedures in neonates and 
infants. Infants and children typically have mini-
mal hypotension from sympathectomy. Intravenous 
access can be established (conveniently in the foot) 
aft er the spinal anesthetic has been administered. 
Th is technique has become more widely used for 
neonates and infants as the potential neurotoxic-
ity risks of general anesthesia in these patients have 
received greater attention. 
 Most children will not tolerate placement of 
nerve blocks or nerve block catheters while awake; 
however, most peripheral block techniques can be 
performed safely in anesthetized children. When the 
area of operation is the upper extremity we recom-
mend those brachial plexus procedures that can most 
readily be performed using ultrasound guidance, 
specifi cally axillary, supraclavicular, and infracla-
vicular blocks. We suggest that interscalene block be 
performed only by those having experience and skill 
with ultrasound guidance and only for procedures 
where other block techniques would be inferior (eg, 
upper shoulder procedures) due to the reported rare 
occurrence of accidental intramedullary injections 
when interscalene blocks were performed in anes-
thetized adults. Single-shot and continuous femo-
ral and sciatic blocks are easily performed using 
896 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
coughing); both techniques have advocates and 
despite strong opinions, evidence is lacking as to 
which is the better approach. Extubation during the 
interval between these extremes, however, is gener-
ally recognized as more hazardous. Recent URI or 
exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke predisposes 
children to laryngospasm on emergence. Treatment 
of laryngospasm includes gentle positive-pressure 
ventilation, forward jaw thrust, intravenous lido-
caine (1–1.5 mg/kg), or paralysis with intravenous 
succinylcholine (0.5–1 mg/kg), or rocuronium 
(0.4 mg/kg) and controlled ventilation. Intra-
muscular succinylcholine (4–6 mg/kg) remains an 
acceptable alternative in patients without intrave-
nous access and in whom conservative measures 
have failed. Laryngospasm is usually an immediate 
postoperative event but may occur in the recovery 
room as the patient wakes up and chokes on pharyn-
geal secretions. For this reason, recovering pediatric 
patients should be positioned in the lateral position 
so that oral secretions pool and drain away from the 
vocal cords. When the child begins to regain con-
sciousness, having the parents at the bedside may 
reduce his or her anxiety. 
 B. Postintubation Croup 
 Croup is due to glottic or tracheal edema. Because the 
narrowest part of the pediatric airway is the cricoid 
cartilage, this is the most susceptible area. Croup is 
less common with endotracheal tubes that are small 
enough to allow a slight gas leak at 10–25 cm H 2 O. 
Postintubation croup is associated with early child-
hood (age 1–4 years), repeated intubation attempts, 
overly large endotracheal tubes, prolonged surgery, 
head and neck procedures, and excessive movement 
of the tube (eg, coughing with the tube in place, mov-
ing the patient’s head). Intravenous dexamethasone 
(0.25–0.5 mg/kg) may prevent formation of edema, 
and inhalation of nebulized racemic epinephrine 
(0.25–0.5 mL of a 2.25% solution in 2.5 mL nor-
mal saline) is an oft en eff ective treatment. Although 
postintubation croup is a complication that occurs 
later than laryngospasm, it will almost always appear 
within 3 h aft er extubation. 
 C. Postoperative Pain Management 
 Pain in pediatric patients has received considerable 
attention in recent years, and over that time the use 
 Propofol is by far the most useful sedative-
hypnotic drug. Although the drug is not approved 
for sedation of pediatric ICU patients and is not 
approved for administration by anyone other than 
those trained in the administration of general anes-
thesia, it can be dosed safely for most procedures 
at infusion rates up to 200 mcg/kg/min. In coun-
tries other than the United States, propofol is oft en 
administered using the Diprifusor, a computer-
controlled infusion pump that maintains a constant 
target site concentration. Supplemental oxygen and 
close monitoring of the airway, ventilation, and other 
vital signs are mandatory (as with other agents). An 
LMA is usually well tolerated at higher doses. 
 Emergence & Recovery 
 Pediatric patients are particularly vulnerable to 
two postanesthetic complications: laryngospasm 
and postintubation croup. As with adult patients, 
postoperative pain requires close, careful attention. 
Pediatric anesthesia practice varies widely, particu-
larly in regard to extubation following a general 
anesthetic. In some pediatric hospitals, all children 
who will be extubated aft er a general anesthetic 
arrive in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) with 
the tube still in place. Th ey are subsequently extu-
bated by the PACU nurse when defi ned criteria are 
reached. In other centers, nearly all children are 
extubated in the operating room before arriving in 
the PACU. High quality and safety are reported at 
centers following either protocol. 
 A. Laryngospasm 
 Laryngospasm is a forceful, involuntary spasm of 
the laryngeal musculature caused by stimulation of 
the superior laryngeal nerve (see Chapter 19). It may 
occur at induction, emergence, or any time in 
between without an endotracheal tube. Presumably 
it can also occur when a tube is in place, but its 
occurrence will not be recognized. Laryngospasm is 
more common in young pediatric patients (almost 1 
in 50 anesthetics) than in adults, and is most com-
mon in infants 1–3 months old.  Laryngospasm 
at the end of a procedure can usually be 
avoided by extubating the patient either while awake 
(opening the eyes) or while deeply anesthetized 
(spontaneously breathing but not swallowing or 
12
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
897 
premature) whose age-adjusted weight is less than 
the fi ft h percentile. Th e multiple medical problems 
of premature neonates are usually due to immaturity 
of major organ systems or to intrauterine asphyxia. 
Pulmonary complications include hyaline mem-
brane disease, apneic spells, and bronchopulmo-
nary dysplasia. Exogenous pulmonary surfactant 
has proved to be an eff ective treatment for respira-
tory distress syndrome in premature infants. A pat-
ent ductus arteriosus leads to shunting, and may 
possibly lead to pulmonary edema and conges-
tive heart failure. Persistent hypoxia or shock may 
result in ischemic gut and necrotizing enterocolitis. 
Prematurity increases susceptibility to infection, 
hypothermia, intracranial hemorrhage, and kernic-
terus. Premature neonates also have an increased 
incidence of congenital anomalies. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th e small size (oft en <1000 g) and fragile medical 
condition of premature neonates demand that spe-
cial attention be paid to airway control, fl uid man-
agement, and temperature regulation. Th e problem 
of retinopathy of prematurity, a fi brovascular pro-
liferation overlying the retina that may lead to pro-
gressive visual loss, deserves special consideration. 
While hyperoxia is associated with this blinding 
disease, the presence of fetal hemoglobin and treat-
ment with vitamin E may be protective. Recent evi-
dence suggests that fl uctuating oxygen levels may 
be more damaging than increased oxygen tensions. 
Moreover, other major risk factors, such as respira-
tory distress, apnea, mechanical ventilation, hypoxia, 
hypercarbia, acidosis, heart disease, bradycardia, 
infection, parenteral nutrition, anemia, and multiple 
blood transfusions, must be present. Nonetheless, 
oxygenation should be continuously monitored with 
pulse oximetry or transcutaneous oxygen analysis, 
with particular attention given to infants younger 
than 44 weeks postconception. Normal Pa o 2 is 
60–80 mm Hg in neonates. Excessive inspired oxy-
gen concentrations are avoided by blending oxygen 
with air. Excessive inspired oxygen tensions can also 
predispose to chronic lung disease. 
 Anesthetic requirements of premature neo-
nates are reduced. Opioid-based anesthetics are 
oft en favored over pure volatile anesthetic-based 
of regional anesthetic and analgesic techniques (as 
described above) has greatly increased. Commonly 
used parenteral opioids include fentanyl (1–2 mcg/
kg), morphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg), hydromorphone 
(15 mcg/kg), and meperidine (0.5 mg/kg). A multi-
modal technique incorporating ketorolac (0.5–0.75 
mg/kg) will reduce opioid requirements. Oral, rec-
tal, or intravenous acetaminophen may also be a 
helpful substitute for ketorolac. 
 Patient-controlled analgesia (see Chapter 48) 
can also be successfully used in patients as young 
as 6–7 years old, depending on their maturity and 
on preoperative preparation. Commonly used opi-
oids include morphine and hydromorphone. With a 
10-min lockout interval, the recommended interval 
dose is either morphine, 20 mcg/kg, or hydromor-
phone, 5 mcg/kg. As with adults, continuous infu-
sions increase the risk of respiratory depression; 
typical continuous infusion doses are morphine, 
0–12 mcg/kg/h, or hydromorphone, 0–3 mcg/kg/h. 
Th e subcutaneous route may be used with morphine. 
Nurse-controlled and parent-controlled analgesia 
remain controversial but widely used techniques for 
pain control in children. 
 As with adults, epidural infusions for postopera-
tive analgesia oft en consist of a local anesthetic com-
bined with an opioid. Bupivacaine, 0.1–0.125%, or 
ropivacaine, 0.1–0.2%, are oft en combined with fen-
tanyl, 2–2.5 mcg/mL (or equivalent concentrations 
of morphine or hydromorphone). Recommended 
infusion rates depend on the size of the patient, the 
fi nal drug concentration, and the location of the epi-
dural catheter, and range from 0.1 to 0.4 mL/kg/h. 
Local anesthetic infusions can also be used with 
continuous nerve block techniques, but this is less 
common than in adults. 
 Anesthetic Considerations in 
Speciﬁ c Pediatric Conditions 
 PREMATURITY 
 Pathophysiology 
 Prematurity is defi ned as birth before 37 weeks 
of gestation. Th is is in contrast to  small for gesta-
tional age , which describes an infant (full-term or 
898 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
patients with malrotation of the midgut present 
during infancy with symptoms of bowel obstruc-
tion. Coiling of the duodenum with the ascending 
colon can produce complete or partial duodenal 
obstruction. Th e most serious complication of mal-
rotation, a midgut volvulus, can rapidly compro-
mise intestinal blood supply causing infarction. 
Midgut volvulus is a true surgical emergency that 
most commonly occurs in infancy, with up to one 
third occurring in the fi rst week of life. Th e mor-
tality rate is high (up to 25%). Typical symptoms 
are bilious vomiting, progressive abdominal dis-
tention and tenderness, metabolic acidosis, and 
hemodynamic instability. Bloody diarrhea may be 
indicative of bowel infarction. Abdominal ultraso-
nography or upper gastrointestinal imaging con-
fi rms the diagnosis. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Surgery provides the only defi nitive treatment of 
malrotation and midgut volvulus. If obstruction is 
present but obvious volvulus has not yet occurred, 
preoperative preparation may include stabilization 
of any coexisting conditions, insertion of a nasogas-
tric (or orogastric tube) to decompress the stomach, 
broad-spectrum antibiotics, fl uid and electrolyte 
replacement, and prompt transport to the operating 
room. 
 Th ese patients are at increased risk for pul-
monary aspiration. Depending on the size of the 
patient, rapid sequence induction (or awake intuba-
tion) should be employed. Patients with volvulus are 
usually hypovolemic and acidotic, and may tolerate 
anesthesia poorly. Ketamine may be the preferred 
anesthetic induction agent. An opioid-based anes-
thetic can also be used as postoperative ventilation 
will oft en be necessary. Fluid resuscitation, likely 
including blood products, and sodium bicarbonate 
therapy are usually necessary. Arterial and central 
venous lines are helpful. Surgical treatment includes 
reducing the volvulus, freeing the obstruction, wid-
ening the base of mesenteric attachments, and resect-
ing any obviously necrotic bowel. Bowel edema can 
complicate abdominal closure and has the potential 
to produce an abdominal compartment syndrome. 
Th e latter can impair ventilation, hinder venous 
return, and produce renal compromise; delayed 
techniques because of the perceived tendency of the 
latter to cause myocardial depression. 
 Premature infants whose age is less than 50 
(some authorities would say 60) weeks postconcep-
tion at the time of surgery are prone to postoperative 
episodes of obstructive and central apnea for up to 
24 h. In fact, even term infants can experience rare 
apneic spells following general anesthesia.  Risk fac-
tors for postanesthetic apnea include a low gesta-
tional age at birth, anemia (<30%), hypothermia, 
sepsis, and neurological abnormalities . Th e risk 
of postanesthetic apnea may be decreased by intra-
venous administration of caff eine (10 mg/kg) or 
aminophylline. 
 Th us, elective (particularly outpatient) proce-
dures should be deferred until the preterm infant 
reaches the age of at least 50 weeks postconception. 
A 6-month symptom-free interval has been sug-
gested for infants with a history of apneic episodes 
or bronchopulmonary dysplasia. If surgery must be 
performed earlier, monitoring with pulse oximetry 
for 12–24 h postoperatively is mandatory for infants 
less than 50 weeks postconception; infants between 
50 and 60 weeks postconception should be closely 
observed in the postanesthesia recovery unit for at 
least 2 h. 
 Sick, premature neonates oft en receive multiple 
transfusions of blood during their stay in the inten-
sive care nursery. Th eir immunocompromised sta-
tus predisposes them to cytomegalovirus infection 
following transfusion. Signs of infection include 
generalized lymphadenopathy, fever, pneumonia, 
hepatitis, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytope-
nia. Preventive measures include using cytomegalo-
virus-seronegative donor blood or, more commonly, 
leukocyte-reduced blood cells. 
 INTESTINAL MALROTATION 
& VOLVULUS 
 Pathophysiology 
 Malrotation of the intestines is a developmental 
abnormality that permits spontaneous abnormal 
rotation of the midgut around the mesentery (supe-
rior mesenteric artery). Th e incidence of malrota-
tion is estimated to be about 1:500 live births. Most 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
899 
may be undertaken. If the patient fails to stabilize, 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) 
may be undertaken. When initiated in the critical 
care unit in a neonate, venoarterial ECMO usu-
ally involves pumping blood from the jugular vein 
through a membrane oxygenator and countercur-
rent heat exchanger before returning it to ipsilat-
eral carotid artery. Timing of the repair following 
ECMO is controversial. Treatment with prena-
tal intrauterine surgery has not been shown to 
improve outcomes. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Gastric distention must be minimized by placement 
of a nasogastric tube and avoidance of high levels of 
positive-pressure ventilation. Th e neonate is preoxy-
genated and intubated awake, or without the aid of 
muscle relaxants. Anesthesia is maintained with low 
concentrations of volatile agents or opioids, muscle 
relaxants, and air as tolerated. Hypoxia and expan-
sion of air in the bowel contraindicate the use of 
nitrous oxide. If possible, peak inspiratory airway 
pressures should be less than 30 cm H 2 O.  A sud-
den fall in lung compliance, blood pressure, or 
oxygenation may signal a contralateral (usually 
right-sided) pneumothorax and necessitate place-
ment of a chest tube . Arterial blood gases are pref-
erably monitored by sampling a preductal artery if 
an umbilical artery catheter is not already in place. 
Surgical repair is performed via a subcostal incision 
of the aff ected side; the bowel is reduced into the 
abdomen and the diaphragm is closed. Aggressive 
attempts at expansion of the ipsilateral lung fol-
lowing surgical decompression are detrimental. 
Postoperative prognosis parallels the extent of pul-
monary hypoplasia and the presence of other con-
genital defects. 
 TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL 
FISTULA 
 Pathophysiology 
 Th ere are several types of tracheoesophageal fi stula 
( Figure 42–3 ). Th e most common (type IIIB) is the 
combination of an upper esophagus that ends in a 
blind pouch and a lower esophagus that connects to 
fascial closure or temporary closure with a Silastic 
“silo” may be necessary. A second-look laparotomy 
may be required 24–48 h later to ensure viability of 
the remaining bowel. 
 CONGENITAL 
DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA 
 Pathophysiology 
 During fetal development, the gut can herniate 
into the thorax through one of three possible dia-
phragmatic defects: the left  or right posterolateral 
foramen of Bochdalek or the anterior foramen of 
Morgagni. Th e reported incidence of diaphrag-
matic hernia is 1 in 3000–5000 live births. Left -
sided herniation is the most common type (90%). 
Hallmarks of  diaphragmatic herniation include 
hypoxia, a scaphoid abdomen, and evidence of 
bowel in the thorax by auscultation or radiogra-
phy. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia is oft en 
diagnosed antenatally during a routine obstetric 
ultrasound examination. A reduction in alveoli 
and bronchioli (pulmonary hypoplasia) and mal-
rotation of the intestines are almost always pres-
ent. Th e ipsilateral lung is particularly impaired 
and the herniated gut can compress and retard the 
maturation of both lungs. Diaphragmatic hernia is 
oft en accompanied by marked pulmonary hyper-
tension and is associated with 40–50% mortality. 
Cardiopulmonary compromise is primarily due to 
pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hyperten-
sion rather than to the mass eff ect of the herniated 
viscera. 
 Treatment is aimed at immediate stabilization 
with sedation, paralysis, and moderate hyperven-
tilation. Pressure-limited ventilation is used. Some 
centers employ permissive hypercapnia (postductal 
Pa co 2 < 65 mm Hg) and accept mild hypoxemia 
(preductal Sp o 2 > 85%) in an eff ort to reduce pul-
monary barotrauma. High-frequency oscillatory 
ventilation (HFOV) can improve ventilation and 
oxygenation with less barotrauma. Inhaled nitric 
oxide may be used to lower pulmonary artery pres-
sures but does not appear to improve survival. If 
the pulmonary hypertension stabilizes and there 
is little right-to-left  shunting, early surgical repair 
900 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
muscle relaxants. Th ese neonates are oft en dehy-
drated and malnourished due to poor oral intake. 
 Th e key to successful management is correct 
endotracheal tube position. Ideally, the tip of the 
tube lies distal to the fi stula and proximal to the 
carina, so that anesthetic gases pass into the lungs 
instead of the stomach. Th is is impossible if the fi s-
tula connects to the carina or a mainstem bronchus. 
In these situations, intermittent venting of a gastros-
tomy tube may permit positive-pressure ventilation 
without excessive gastric distention. Suctioning of 
the gastrostomy tube and upper esophageal pouch 
tube helps prevent aspiration pneumonia. Surgical 
division of the fi stula and esophageal anastomosis is 
performed via a right extrapleural thoracotomy with 
the patient in the left  lateral position. A precordial 
stethoscope should be placed in the dependent (left ) 
axilla, since obstruction of the mainstem bronchus 
during surgical retraction is not uncommon. A drop 
in oxygen saturation indicates that the retracted 
lung needs to be reexpanded. Surgical retraction 
can also compress the great vessels, trachea, heart, 
and vagus nerve. Blood pressure should be continu-
ously monitored with an arterial line. Th ese infants 
oft en require ventilation with 100% oxygen. Blood 
should be immediately available for transfusion. 
Postoperative complications include gastroesopha-
geal refl ux, aspiration pneumonia, tracheal com-
pression, and anastomotic leakage. Most patients 
the trachea. Breathing results in gastric distention, 
whereas feeding leads to choking, coughing, and 
cyanosis (three Cs). Th e diagnosis is suspected by 
failure to pass a catheter into the stomach and con-
fi rmed by visualization of the catheter coiled in a 
blind, upper esophageal pouch. Aspiration pneumo-
nia and the coexistence of other congenital anoma-
lies (eg, cardiac) are common. Th ese may include 
the association of  v ertebral defects,  a nal atresia, 
 t racheoesophageal fi stula with  e sophageal atresia, 
and  r adial dysplasia, known as the VATER syn-
drome. Th e VACTERL variant also includes  c ardiac 
and  l imb anomalies. Preoperative management is 
directed at identifying all congenital anomalies and 
preventing aspiration pneumonia. Th is may include 
maintaining the patient in a head-up position, using 
an oral-esophageal tube, and avoiding feedings. 
In some instances gastrostomy may be performed 
under local anesthesia. Defi nitive surgical treatment 
is usually postponed until any pneumonia clears or 
improves with antibiotic therapy. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th ese neonates tend to have copious pharyngeal 
secretions that require frequent suctioning before 
and during surgery. Positive-pressure ventilation 
is avoided prior to intubation, as the resulting gas-
tric distention may interfere with lung expansion. 
Intubation is oft en performed awake and without 
 FIGURE 423  Of the ﬁ ve types of tracheoesophageal ﬁ stula, type IIIB represents 90% of cases. 
Trachea
Esophagus
Diaphragm
Stomach
IIIA
IIIB
IIIC
II
I
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
901 
albumin . Th e neonate remains intubated aft er the 
procedure and is weaned from the ventilator over 
the next 1–2 days in the ICU. 
 HYPERTROPHIC 
PYLORIC STENOSIS 
 Pathophysiology 
 Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis impedes emptying 
of gastric contents.  Persistent vomiting depletes 
potassium, chloride, hydrogen, and sodium 
ions, causing hypochloremic metabolic alkalo-
sis . Initially, the kidney tries to compensate for 
the alkalosis by excreting sodium bicarbonate in 
the urine. Later, as hyponatremia and dehydration 
worsen, the kidneys must conserve sodium even 
at the expense of hydrogen ion excretion (para-
doxic aciduria). Correction of the volume and ion 
defi cits and metabolic alkalosis requires hydra-
tion with a sodium chloride (rather than lactated 
Ringer’s) solution supplemented with potassium 
chloride. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Surgery should be delayed until fl uid and electro-
lyte abnormalities have been corrected. Operation 
for correction of pyloric stenosis is never an emer-
gency. Th e stomach should be emptied with a 
nasogastric or orogastric tube; the tube should be 
suctioned with the patient in the supine, lateral, 
and prone positions. Diagnosis oft en requires 
contrast radiography, and all contrast media will 
need to be suctioned from the stomach before 
induction. Techniques for intubation and induc-
tion vary, but in all cases the patient’s increased 
risk of aspiration must be considered. Experienced 
clinicians have variously advocated awake intu-
bation, rapid sequence intravenous induction, 
and even careful inhalation induction in selected 
patients. Pyloromyotomy is a short procedure that 
requires muscle relaxation. Th ese neonates may 
be at increased risk for respiratory depression and 
hypoventilation in the recovery room because of 
persistent metabolic (measurable in arterial blood) 
or cerebrospinal fl uid alkalosis (despite neutral 
arterial pH). 
must remain intubated and receive positive- pressure 
ventilation in the immediate postoperative period. 
Neck extension and instrumentation (eg, suction-
ing) of the esophagus may disrupt the surgical repair 
and should be avoided. 
 GASTROSCHISIS 
& OMPHALOCELE 
 Pathophysiology 
 Gastroschisis and omphalocele are congenital 
disorders characterized by defects in the abdomi-
nal wall that allow external herniation of viscera. 
Omphaloceles occur at the base of the umbili-
cus, have a hernia sac, and are oft en associated 
with other congenital anomalies such as trisomy 
21, diaphragmatic hernia, and cardiac and blad-
der malformations. In contrast, the gastroschisis 
defect is usually lateral to the umbilicus, does not 
have a hernia sac, and is oft en an isolated fi nding. 
Antenatal diagnosis by ultrasound can be followed 
by elective cesarean section at 38 weeks and imme-
diate surgical repair. Perioperative management 
centers around preventing hypothermia, infection, 
and dehydration. Th ese problems are usually more 
serious in gastroschisis, as the protective hernial 
sac is absent. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th e stomach is decompressed with a nasogastric 
tube before induction. Intubation can be accom-
plished with the patient awake or asleep and with or 
without muscle relaxation. Nitrous oxide should be 
avoided to prevent further bowel distention. Muscle 
relaxation is required for replacing the bowel into 
the abdominal cavity. A one-stage closure (primary 
repair) is oft en not advisable, as it can cause an 
abdominal compartment syndrome. A staged clo-
sure with a temporary Silastic “silo” may be neces-
sary, followed by a second procedure a few days later 
for complete closure. Suggested criteria for a staged 
closure include intragastric or intravesical pressure 
greater than 20 cm H 2 O, peak inspiratory pres-
sure greater than 35 cm H 2 O, or an end-tidal CO 2 
greater than 50 mm Hg.  Th ird-space fl uid losses 
are replaced with a balanced salt solution and 5% 
902 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
obstruction. Experts recommend careful inhala-
tional induction for a supraglottic object and gen-
tle upper airway endoscopy to remove the object, 
secure the airway, or both. When the object is 
subglottic, a rapid-sequence or inhalational induc-
tion is usually followed by rigid bronchoscopy by 
the surgeon or endotracheal intubation and fl ex-
ible bronchoscopy. Surgical preferences may vary 
according to the size of the patient and the nature 
and location of the foreign body. Close coopera-
tion between the surgeon and anesthesiologist is 
essential. 
 Children with impending airway obstruction 
from epiglottitis present in the operating room for 
defi nitive diagnosis by laryngoscopy followed by 
intubation. A preoperative lateral neck radiograph 
may show a characteristic thumblike epiglottic 
shadow, which is very specifi c but oft en absent. Th e 
radiograph is also helpful in revealing other causes 
of obstruction, such as foreign bodies. Stridor, 
drooling, hoarseness, rapid onset and progression, 
tachypnea, chest retractions, and a preference for the 
upright position are predictive of airway obstruc-
tion. Total obstruction can occur at any moment, 
and adequate preparations for a possible tracheos-
tomy must be made prior to induction of general 
anesthesia. Laryngoscopy should not be performed 
before induction of anesthesia because of the possi-
bility of laryngospasm. In most cases, an inhalational 
induction is performed with the patient in the sit-
ting position, using a volatile anesthetic and oxygen. 
Oral intubation with an endotracheal tube one half 
to one size smaller than usual is attempted as soon as 
an adequate depth of anesthesia is established. Th e 
oral tube may be replaced with a well-secured nasal 
endotracheal tube at the end of the procedure, as the 
latter is better tolerated in the postoperative period. 
If intubation is impossible, rigid bronchoscopy or 
emergency tracheostomy must be performed. 
 TONSILLECTOMY & 
ADENOIDECTOMY 
 Pathophysiology 
 Lymphoid hyperplasia can lead to upper airway 
obstruction, obligate mouth breathing, and even 
 INFECTIOUS CROUP, FOREIGN 
BODY ASPIRATION, & ACUTE 
EPIGLOTTITIS 
 Pathophysiology 
 Croup is obstruction of the airway characterized by 
a barking cough. One type of croup, postintubation 
croup, has already been discussed. Another type is 
due to viral infection.  Infectious croup usually fol-
lows a viral URI in children aged 3 months to 3 years. 
Th e airway  below the epiglottis is involved (laryn-
gotracheobronchitis). Infectious croup progresses 
slowly and rarely requires intubation. Foreign body 
aspiration is typically encountered in children aged 
6 months to 5 years. Commonly aspirated objects 
include peanuts, coins, screws, nails, tacks, and 
small pieces of toys. Onset is typically acute and the 
obstruction may be supraglottic, glottic, or subglot-
tic. Stridor is prominent with the fi rst two, whereas 
wheezing is more common with the latter. A clear 
history of an aspiration may be absent.  Acute epi-
glottitis is a bacterial infection (most commonly 
 Haemophilus infl uenzae type B) classically aff ect-
ing 2- to 6-year-old children but also occasionally 
appearing in older children and adults. It rapidly 
progresses from a sore throat to dysphagia and com-
plete airway obstruction. Th e term  supraglottitis has 
been suggested because the infl ammation typically 
involves all supraglottic structures. Endotracheal 
intubation and antibiotic therapy can be lifesaving. 
Epiglottitis has increasingly become a disease of 
adults because of the widespread use of  H infl uenza 
vaccines in children. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Patients with croup are managed conservatively 
with oxygen and mist therapy. Nebulized racemic 
epinephrine (0.5 mL of a 2.25% solution in 2.5 mL 
normal saline) and intravenous dexamethasone 
(0.25–0.5 mg/kg) are used. Indications for intuba-
tion include progressive intercostal retractions, 
obvious respiratory fatigue, and central cyanosis. 
 Anesthetic management of a foreign body 
 aspiration is challenging, particularly with supra-
glottic and glottic obstruction. Minor manipula-
tion of the airway can convert partial into complete 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
903 
of URIs  that have spread through the eustachian 
tube, causing repeated episodes of otitis media. 
Causative organisms are usually bacterial and 
include  Pneumococcus, H infl uenza, Streptococcus , 
and  Mycoplasma pneumoniae . Myringotomy, a 
radial incision in the tympanic membrane, releases 
any fl uid that has accumulated in the middle ear. 
Tympanostomy tubes provide long-term drainage. 
Because of the chronic and recurring nature of this 
illness, it is not surprising that these patients oft en 
have symptoms of a URI on the day of scheduled 
surgery. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Th ese are typically very short (10–15 min) outpa-
tient procedures. Inhalational induction is a com-
mon technique. Unlike tympanoplasty surgery, 
nitrous oxide diff usion into the middle ear is not a 
problem during myringotomy because of the brief 
period of anesthetic exposure before the middle ear 
is vented. Because most of these patients are other-
wise healthy and there is no blood loss, intravenous 
access is usually not necessary. Ventilation with a 
face mask or LMA minimizes the risk of periopera-
tive respiratory complications (eg, laryngospasm) 
associated with intubation. 
 TRISOMY 21 SYNDROME 
DOWN SYNDROME 
 Pathophysiology 
 An additional chromosome 21—part or whole—
results in the most common pattern of con-
genital human malformation: Down syndrome. 
Characteristic abnormalities of interest to the anes-
thesiologist include a short neck, irregular dentition, 
mental retardation, hypotonia, and a large tongue. 
Associated abnormalities include congenital heart 
disease in 40% of patients (particularly endocardial 
cushion defects and ventricular septal defect), sub-
glottic stenosis, tracheoesophageal fi stula, chronic 
pulmonary infections, and seizures. Th ese neonates 
are oft en premature and small for their gestational 
age. Later in life many patients with Down syndrome 
undergo multiple procedures requiring general 
anesthesia. 
pulmonary hypertension with cor pulmonale. 
Although these extremes of pathology are unusual, 
all children undergoing tonsillectomy or adenoidec-
tomy should be considered to be at increased risk for 
perioperative airway problems. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Surgery should be postponed if there is evidence of 
acute infection or suspicion of a clotting dysfunc-
tion (eg, recent aspirin ingestion). Administration 
of an anticholinergic agent will decrease pharyn-
geal secretions. A history of airway obstruction or 
apnea suggests an inhalational induction without 
paralysis until the ability to ventilate with posi-
tive pressure is established. A reinforced or pre-
formed endotracheal tube (eg, RAE tube) may 
decrease the risk of kinking by the surgeon’s self-
retaining mouth gag. Blood transfusion is usually 
not necessary, but the anesthesiologist must be 
wary of occult blood loss. Gentle inspection and 
suctioning of the pharynx precede extubation. 
Although deep extubation decreases the chance 
of laryngospasm and may prevent blood clot dis-
lodgment from coughing, most anesthesiologists 
prefer an awake extubation because of the risks 
of aspiration. Postoperative vomiting is common. 
Th e anesthesiologist must be alert in the recovery 
room for postoperative bleeding, which may be 
evidenced by restlessness, pallor, tachycardia, or 
hypotension. If reoperation is necessary to con-
trol bleeding, intravascular volume must fi rst be 
restored. Evacuation of stomach contents with a 
nasogastric tube is followed by a rapid-sequence 
induction with cricoid pressure. Because of the 
possibility of bleeding and airway obstruction, 
children younger than 3 years old may be hospital-
ized for the fi rst postoperative night. Sleep apnea 
and recent infection increase the risk of postop-
erative complications. 
 MYRINGOTOMY & INSERTION 
OF TYMPANOSTOMY TUBES 
 Pathophysiology 
 Children presenting for myringotomy and inser-
tion of tympanostomy tubes have a long history 
904 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 SCOLIOSIS 
 Pathophysiology 
 Scoliosis is lateral rotation and curvature of the ver-
tebrae and a deformity of the rib cage. It can have 
many etiologies, including idiopathic, congenital, 
neuromuscular, and traumatic. Scoliosis can aff ect 
cardiac and respiratory function. Elevated pul-
monary vascular resistance from chronic hypoxia 
causes pulmonary hypertension and right ventricu-
lar hypertrophy. Respiratory abnormalities include 
reduced lung volumes and chest wall compliance. 
Pa o 2 is reduced as a result of ventilation/perfusion 
mismatching, whereas an increased Pa co 2 signals 
severe disease. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Preoperative evaluation may include pulmonary 
function tests, arterial blood gases, and electrocar-
diography. Corrective surgery is complicated by 
the prone position, signifi cant blood loss, and the 
possibility of paraplegia. Spinal cord function can 
be assessed by neurophysiological monitoring 
(somatosensory and motor evoked potentials, see 
Chapters 6 and 26) or by awakening the patient 
intraoperatively to test lower limb muscle strength. 
Patients with severe respiratory disease oft en 
remain intubated postoperatively.  Patients 
with scoliosis due to muscular dystrophy are 
predisposed to malignant hyperthermia, cardiac 
arrhythmias, and untoward eff ects of succinylcho-
line (hyperkalemia, myoglobinuria, and sustained 
muscular contractures). 
 WEB SITE & GUIDELINES
 Smart Tots.  http://www.smarttots.org/ . 
 American Academy of Pediatrics—Section on 
Anesthesiology: Guidelines for the pediatric 
anesthesia environment. Pediatrics 1999;103:512. 
 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee: 
Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the 
use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of 
pulmonary aspiration: Application to healthy patients 
undergoing elective procedures: An updated report by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee 
on Standards and Practice Parameters. Anesthesiology 
2011;114:495. 
13
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Because of anatomic diff erences, these patients 
oft en have diffi  cult airways, particularly during 
infancy. Th e size of the endotracheal tube required 
is typically smaller than that predicted by age. 
Respiratory complications such as postopera-
tive stridor and apnea are common. Neck fl exion 
during laryngoscopy and intubation may result 
in atlantooccipital dislocation because of the con-
genital laxity of these ligaments. Th e possibility of 
associated congenital diseases must always be con-
sidered. As in all pediatric patients, care must be 
taken to avoid air bubbles in the intravenous line 
because of possible right-to-left  shunts and para-
doxical air emboli. 
 CYSTIC FIBROSIS 
 Pathophysiology 
 Cystic fi brosis is a genetic disease of the exocrine 
glands primarily aff ecting the pulmonary and gas-
trointestinal systems. Abnormally thick and viscous 
secretions coupled with decreased ciliary activity 
lead to pneumonia, wheezing, and bronchiectasis. 
Pulmonary function studies reveal increased residual 
volume and airway resistance with decreased vital 
capacity and expiratory fl ow rate. Malabsorption 
syndrome may lead to dehydration and electrolyte 
abnormalities. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Premedication should not include respiratory 
depressants. Anticholinergic drugs have been used 
in large series without ill eff ects, and the choice 
either to use or not to use them appears to be incon-
sequential. Induction with inhalational anesthetics 
may be prolonged in patients with severe pulmonary 
disease. Intubation should not be performed until 
the patient is deeply anesthetized to avoid coughing 
and stimulation of mucus secretions. Th e patient’s 
lungs should be suctioned during general anesthesia 
and before extubation to minimize the accumulation 
of secretions. Outcome is favorably infl uenced by 
preoperative and postoperative respiratory therapy 
that includes bronchodilators, incentive spirometry, 
postural drainage, and pathogen-specifi c antibiotic 
therapy. 
 
CHAPTER 42 Pediatric Anesthesia 
905 
 Fidkowski CW, Zheng H, Firth PG: Th e anesthetic 
considerations of tracheobronchial foreign bodies in 
children: A literature review of 12,979 cases. Anesth 
Analg 2010;111:1016. 
 Meretoja OA: Neuromuscular block and current 
treatment strategies for its reversal in children. 
Paediatr Anaesth 2010;20:591. 
 Morray JP: Cardiac arrest in anesthetized children: 
Recent advances and challenges for the future. 
Paediatr Anaesth 2011;21:722. 
 Tsui B, Suresh S: Ultrasound imaging for regional 
anesthesia in infants, children, and adolescents: 
A review of current literature and its application 
in the practice of extremity and trunk blocks. 
Anesthesiology 2010;112:473. 
 Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, et al: Perioperative fasting in 
adults and children: Guidelines from the European 
Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol 
2011;28:556. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Butler MG, Hayes BG, Hathaway MM, Begleiter ML: 
Specifi c genetic diseases at risk for sedation/anesthesia 
complications. Anesth Analg 2000;91:837. 
 Cravero JP, Havidich JE: Pediatric sedation—evolution 
and revolution. Paediatr Anaesth 2011;21:800. 
 De Beer DAH, Th omas ML: Caudal additives in 
children—solutions or problems? Br J Anaesth 
2003;90:487. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 907
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 In the absence of coexisting disease, resting 
systolic cardiac function seems to be 
preserved, even in octogenarians. Increased 
vagal tone and decreased sensitivity of 
adrenergic receptors lead to a decline in 
heart rate . 
 Elderly patients undergoing echocardio-
graphic evaluation for surgery have an 
increased incidence of diastolic dysfunction 
compared with younger patients . 
 Diminished cardiac reserve in many elderly 
patients may be manifested as exaggerated 
drops in blood pressure during induction of 
general anesthesia. A prolonged circulation 
time delays the onset of intravenous drugs, 
but speeds induction with inhalational 
agents . 
 Aging decreases elasticity of lung tissue, 
allowing overdistention of alveoli and 
collapse of small airways. Residual volume 
and the functional residual capacity increase 
with aging. Airway collapse increases 
residual volume and closing capacity. Even 
in normal persons, closing capacity exceeds 
functional residual capacity at age 45 years 
in the supine position and age 65 years in 
the sitting position . 
1
2
3
4
 The neuroendocrine response to stress 
seems to be largely preserved, or, at 
most, only slightly decreased in healthy 
elderly patients. Aging is associated with a 
decreasing response to β-adrenergic agents . 
 Impairment of Na +  handling, concentrating 
ability, and diluting capacity predispose 
elderly patients to both dehydration and 
ﬂ uid overload . 
 Liver mass and hepatic blood ﬂ ow decline 
with aging. Hepatic function declines in 
proportion to the decrease in liver mass . 
 Dosage requirements for local and 
general (minimum alveolar concentration) 
anesthetics are reduced. Administration 
of a given volume of epidural local anesthetic 
tends to result in more extensive spread 
in elderly patients. A longer duration of action 
should be expected from a spinal anesthetic . 
 Aging produces both pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic changes. Disease-
related changes and wide variations among 
individuals in similar populations prevent 
convenient generalizations . 
 Elderly patients display a lower dose 
requirement for propofol, etomidate, 
barbiturates, opioids, and benzodiazepines . 
5
6
7
8
9
10
 By the year 2040, persons aged 65 years or older 
are expected to comprise 24% of the population 
and account for 50% of health care expenditures. In 
Europe, persons aged 65 years or older are expected 
to comprise 30% of the population within the next 
40 years. Of these individuals, many will require 
surgery. Th e elderly patient typically presents for 
surgery with multiple chronic medical conditions, 
 Geriatric Anesthesia 
43
908 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
vexing problems. Th eir management should be 
closely coordinated between the surgeon, cardi-
ologist, and anesthesiologist. At no time should the 
anesthesia staff  discontinue antiplatelet therapy 
without discussing the plan with the patient’s pri-
mary physicians. 
 Age-Related Anatomic 
& Physiological Changes 
 CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 
 Cardiovascular diseases are more prevalent in the 
geriatric than general population. Still, it is impor-
tant to distinguish between changes in physiology 
that normally accompany aging and the pathophysi-
ology of diseases common in the geriatric popula-
tion ( Table 43–2 ). For example, atherosclerosis is 
pathological—it is not present in healthy elderly 
patients. On the other hand, a reduction in arterial 
elasticity caused by fi brosis of the media is part of 
the normal aging process. Changes in the cardiovas-
cular system that accompany aging include 
decreased vascular and myocardial compliance and 
autonomic responsiveness. In addition to myocar-
dial fi brosis, calcifi cation of the valves can occur. 
Elderly patients with systolic murmurs should be 
suspected of having aortic stenosis.  However, 
in the absence of co-existing disease, resting 
systolic cardiac function seems to be preserved, even 
in octogenarians. Functional capacity of less than 
4 metabolic equivalents (METS) is associated with 
potential adverse outcomes (see Table 21–2). 
Increased vagal tone and decreased sensitivity of 
adrenergic receptors lead to a decline in heart rate; 
maximal heart rate declines by approximately one 
beat per minute per year of age over 50. Fibrosis of 
the conduction system and loss of sinoatrial node 
cells increase the incidence of dysrhythmias, partic-
ularly atrial fi brillation and fl utter.  Preoperative risk 
assessment and evaluation of the patient with car-
diac disease were previously reviewed in this text 
(see Chapters 18, 20, & 21). Age per se does not man-
date any particular battery of tests or evaluative 
tools, although there is a long tradition of routinely 
requesting tests such as 12-lead electrocardiography 
1
in addition to the acute surgical illness. Age is not a 
contraindication to anesthesia and surgery; however, 
perioperative morbidity and mortality are greater in 
elderly than younger surgical patients. 
 As with pediatric patients, optimal anesthetic 
management of geriatric patients depends upon 
an understanding of the normal changes in physi-
ology, anatomy, and response to pharmacological 
agents that accompany aging. In fact, there are many 
similarities between elderly and pediatric patients 
( Table 43–1 ). Individual genetic polymorphisms 
and lifestyle choices can modulate the infl ammatory 
response, which contributes to the development of 
many systemic diseases. Consequently, chronologic 
age may not fully refl ect an individual patient’s true 
physical condition. Th e relatively high frequency 
of serious physiological abnormalities in elderly 
patients demands a particularly careful preoperative 
evaluation. 
 Elderly patients are frequently treated with 
β-blockers. β-Blockers should be continued peri-
operatively, if patients are taking such medications 
chronically, to avoid the eff ects of β-blocker with-
drawal. A careful review of patients’ oft en exten-
sive medication lists can reveal the routine use of 
oral hypoglycemic agents, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor block-
ers, antiplatelet agents, statins, and anticoagulants. 
Because elderly patients frequently take multiple 
drugs for multiple conditions, they oft en benefi t 
from an evaluation before the day of surgery, even 
when scheduled for outpatient surgery. Preoperative 
laboratory studies should be guided by patient con-
dition and history. Patients who have cardiac stents 
requiring antiplatelet therapy present particularly 
 TABLE 431 Similarities between elderly 
people and infants, compared with the 
general population. 
Decreased ability to increase heart rate in response 
to hypovolemia, hypotension, or hypoxia
Decreased lung compliance
Decreased arterial oxygen tension
Impaired ability to cough
Decreased renal tubular function
Increased susceptibility to hypothermia
 
CHAPTER 43 Geriatric Anesthesia
909
such as arrhythmias, congestive heart failure, or 
myocardial ischemia. Cardiovascular evaluation 
should be guided by American Heart Association 
guidelines. 
 Elderly patients undergoing echocardio-
graphic evaluation for surgery have an 
increased incidence of diastolic dysfunction com-
pared with younger patients. Diastolic dysfunction 
prevents the ventricle from relaxing and conse-
quently inhibits diastolic ventricular fi lling at rela-
tively low pressures. Th e ventricle becomes less 
compliant, and fi lling pressures are increased. Dia-
stolic dysfunction is NOT equivalent to diastolic 
heart failure. In some patients, systolic ventricular 
function can be well preserved; however, the patient 
can have signs of congestion secondary to severe 
diastolic dysfunction. Diastolic heart failure most 
oft en coexists with systolic dysfunction. 
 Echocardiography is used to assess diastolic 
dysfunction. A ratio of greater than 15 between 
the peak E velocity of transmitral diastolic fi lling 
and the e’ tissue Doppler wave is associated with 
elevated left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure and 
diastolic dysfunction. Conversely, a ratio of less than 
8 is consistent with normal diastolic function (see 
Figure 43–1 ). 
 Marked diastolic dysfunction may be seen with 
systemic hypertension, coronary artery disease, car-
diomyopathies, and valvular heart disease, particu-
larly aortic stenosis. Patients may be asymptomatic 
or complain of exercise intolerance, dyspnea, cough, 
or fatigue. Diastolic dysfunction results in relatively 
large increases in ventricular end-diastolic pressure, 
with small changes of left  ventricular volume; the 
atrial contribution to ventricular fi lling becomes 
even more important than in younger patients. 
Atrial enlargement predisposes patients to atrial 
fi brillation and fl utter. Patients are at increased risk 
of developing congestive heart failure. Th e elderly 
patient with diastolic dysfunction may poorly toler-
ate perioperative fl uid administration, resulting in 
elevated left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure and 
pulmonary congestion. 
 Diminished cardiac reserve in many elderly 
patients may be manifested as exaggerated 
drops in blood pressure during induction of gen-
eral anesthesia. A prolonged circulation time delays 
2
3
 TABLE 432 Age-related physiological 
changes and common diseases of the elderly. 
Normal Physiological 
Changes
Common 
Pathophysiology
 Cardiovascular 
Decreased arterial elasticity
Elevated afterload
Elevated systolic blood 
pressure
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Decreased adrenergic activity
Decreased resting heart rate
Decreased maximal heart rate
Decreased baroreceptor reflex
Atherosclerosis
Coronary artery disease
Essential hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Cardiac arrhythmias
Aortic stenosis
 Respiratory 
Decreased pulmonary elasticity
Decreased alveolar surface 
area
Increased residual volume
Increased closing capacity
Ventilation/perfusion 
mismatching
Decreased arterial oxygen 
tension
Increased chest wall rigidity
Decreased muscle strength
Decreased cough
Decreased maximal 
breathing capacity
Blunted response to 
hypercapnia and hypoxia
Emphysema
Chronic bronchitis
Pneumonia
 Renal 
Decreased renal blood flow
Decreased renal plasma flow
Decreased glomerular 
filtration rate
Decreased renal mass
Decreased tubular function
Impaired sodium handling
Decreased concentrating 
ability
Decreased diluting capacity
Impaired fluid handling
Decreased drug excretion
Decreased renin–aldosterone 
responsiveness
Impaired potassium excretion
Diabetic nephropathy
Hypertensive nephropathy
Prostatic obstruction
Congestive heart failure
(ECG) in patients who are older than a defi ned 
age. Nonetheless, elderly individuals are more 
likely to present for surgery with previously unde-
tected conditions that require an intervention, 
910 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
 Aging decreases the elasticity of lung tissue, 
allowing overdistention of alveoli and collapse 
of small airways. Residual volume and the func-
tional residual capacity increase with aging. Air-
way collapse increases residual volume and closing 
capacity Even in normal persons, closing capacity 
exceeds functional residual capacity at age 45 years 
in the supine position and age 65 years in the sit-
ting position. When this happens, some airways 
close during part of normal tidal breathing, result-
ing in a mismatch of ventilation and perfusion. Th e 
additive eff ect of these emphysema-like changes 
decreases arterial oxygen tension by an average rate 
of 0.35 mm Hg per year; however, there is a wide 
range of arterial oxygen tensions in elderly preoper-
ative patients. Both anatomic and physiological dead 
space increase. Other pulmonary eff ects of aging are 
summarized in  Table 43–2 . 
 Decreased respiratory muscle function/mass, 
a less compliant chest wall, and intrinsic changes in 
lung function can increase the work of breathing and 
make it more diffi  cult for elderly patients to muster 
a respiratory reserve in settings of acute illness (eg, 
infection). Many patients also present with obstruc-
tive or restrictive lung diseases. In patients who have 
4
the onset of intravenous drugs, but speeds induc-
tion with inhalational agents. Like infants, elderly 
patients have less ability to respond to hypovolemia, 
hypotension, or hypoxia with an increase in heart 
rate. Ultimately, cardiovascular diseases, including 
heart failure, stroke, arrhythmias, and hypertension 
contribute to an increased risk of morbidity, mor-
tality, increased cost of care, and frailty in elderly 
patients. 
 Research is ongoing into the relationship 
between telomere biology and cardiovascular dis-
ease. Telomeres, which are located at the chromo-
some terminus, protect the DNA from degradation 
during cell division. With each cell division, there 
is progressive telomere loss. Cells with short telo-
meres undergo “replicative senescence” and apopto-
sis. Telomerase maintains telomere length, but has 
low activity in human cells. Indeed, telomere length 
varies among humans based upon inheritance and 
environmental factors. Telomerase activity is defi -
cient in various early aging syndromes. Telomere 
shortening may be either a cause or a consequence 
of cardiovascular disease . Whatever the exact mech-
anism of cardiovascular aging, patient management 
should at all times be in accordance with American 
Heart Association/American College of Cardiology 
guidelines. 
 FIGURE 431  A: In this Doppler study of diastolic 
inﬂ ow, the E wave is seen with a peak velocity of 
90.9 cm/sec. This Doppler study reﬂ ects the velocity 
of blood as it ﬁ lls the left ventricle early in diastole.  B: In 
tissue Doppler, the velocity of the movement of the lateral 
annulus of the mitral valve is measured. The e’ wave in this 
image is 6.95 cm/sec. This corresponds to the movement 
of the myocardium during diastole. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Wasnick J, Hillel Z, Kramer D, et al:  Cardiac Anesthesia 
& Transesophageal Echocardiography , McGraw-Hill, 2011.) 
B
A
 
CHAPTER 43 Geriatric Anesthesia
911
no intrinsic pulmonary disease, gas exchange is 
unaff ected by aging. 
 Measures to prevent perioperative hypoxia 
in elderly patients include a longer preoxygen-
ation period prior to induction, increased inspired 
oxygen concentrations during anesthesia, positive 
end-expiratory pressure, and pulmonary toilet. 
Aspiration pneumonia is a common and poten-
tially life-threatening complication in elderly 
patients, possibly as a consequence of a progressive 
decrease in protective laryngeal refl exes and immu-
nocompetence with age. Ventilatory impairment 
in the recovery room is more common in elderly 
than younger patients. Factors associated with an 
increased risk of postoperative pulmonary com-
plications include age older than 64 years, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, sleep apnea, mal-
nutrition, and abdominal or thoracic surgical 
incisions. 
 METABOLIC & 
ENDOCRINE FUNCTION 
 Basal and maximal oxygen consumption declines 
with age. Aft er reaching peak weight at about age 
60 years, most men and women begin losing weight; 
the average elderly man and woman weigh less 
than their younger counterparts. Heat production 
decreases, heat loss increases, and hypothalamic 
temperature-regulating centers may reset at a lower 
level. 
 Diabetes aff ects approximately 15% of patients 
older than age 70 years. Its impact on numerous 
organ systems can complicate perioperative man-
agement. Diabetic neuropathy and autonomic dys-
function are particular problems for the elderly. 
 Increasing insulin resistance leads to a progres-
sive decrease in the ability to avoid hyperglycemia 
with glucose loads. Institutions typically have their 
own protocols on how to manage increased blood 
glucose perioperatively, and these protocols refl ect 
the changing literature on “tight” control. Attempts 
to maintain blood glucose within a strictly nor-
mal range during surgery, anesthesia, and/or criti-
cal illness may lead to hypoglycemia and adverse 
outcomes. Anesthesia practitioners are advised to 
determine what the “acceptable” perioperative blood 
glucose level is in their institution and to be aware 
of changing performance benchmarks related to this 
measure. 
 Th e neuroendocrine response to stress seems to 
be largely preserved, or, at most, only slightly 
decreased in healthy elderly patients.  Aging is 
associated with a decreasing response to 
β-adrenergic agents. 
 RENAL FUNCTION 
 Renal blood fl ow and kidney mass (eg, glomerular 
number and tubular length) decrease with age. Renal 
function, as determined by glomerular fi ltration rate 
and creatinine clearance, is reduced ( Table 43–2 ). 
Th e serum creatinine level is unchanged because of 
a decrease in muscle mass and creatinine produc-
tion, whereas blood urea nitrogen gradually 
increases with aging.  Impairment of Na + han-
dling, concentrating ability, and diluting 
capacity predispose elderly patients to both dehy-
dration and fl uid overload. Th e response to antidi-
uretic hormone and aldosterone is reduced. Th e 
ability to reabsorb glucose is decreased. Th e combi-
nation of reduced renal blood fl ow and decreased 
nephron mass in elderly patients increases the risk of 
acute renal failure in the postoperative period, par-
ticularly when they are exposed to nephrotoxic 
drugs and techniques. 
 As renal function declines, so does the kidney’s 
ability to excrete drugs. Th e decreased capacity to 
handle water and electrolyte loads makes proper fl uid 
management more critical; elderly patients are more 
predisposed to developing hypokalemia and hyper-
kalemia. Th is is further complicated by the common 
use of diuretics in the elderly population. Th e search is 
ongoing for drugs that might protect the kidney peri-
operatively, as well as for specifi c genetic profi les of 
patients at greater risk of perioperative kidney injury. 
 GASTROINTESTINAL 
FUNCTION 
 Liver mass and hepatic blood fl ow decline 
with aging. Hepatic function declines in pro-
portion to the decrease in liver mass. Th us, the 
rate of biotransformation and albumin production 
5
6
7
912 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
response contribute to perioperative brain injury 
in some manner, independent of anesthesia. 
Indeed, patients presenting for surgery may pres-
ent with cognitive dysfunction. In one study, 20% 
of elderly patients presenting for elective total joint 
arthroplasty demonstrated preoperative cognitive 
impairment; furthermore, POCD was independent 
of type of anesthesia or surgery at 3 months post-
operatively. Postoperative delirium is common in 
elderly patients, especially those with reduced pre-
operative neurocognitive test scores and reduced 
functional status. Preoperative frailty is also 
associated with postoperative delirium. Frailty is 
common in preoperative elderly patients await-
ing surgery and predicts postoperative delirium. 
Delirium has a particularly frequent incidence fol-
lowing hip surgery. Factors associated with post-
operative delirium in the elderly and ways to avoid 
it are presented in  Tables 43–3 and  43–4 . 
 Elderly patients oft en take more time to 
recover completely from the central nervous sys-
tem eff ects of general anesthesia, especially if they 
were confused or disoriented preoperatively. Th is 
is important in geriatric outpatient surgery, where 
socioeconomic factors, such as the lack of a care-
taker at home, necessitate that patients may need to 
assume a higher level of self care. 
 In the absence of disease, any perioperative 
decrease in cognitive function is normally mod-
est. Short-term memory seems to be most aff ected. 
Continued physical and intellectual activity seems 
to have a positive eff ect on preservation of cognitive 
functions. 
 Th e etiology of POCD is likely multifactorial 
and includes drug eff ects, pain, underlying dysfunc-
tion, hypothermia, and metabolic disturbances. 
Elderly patients are particularly sensitive to centrally 
acting anticholinergic agents, such as scopolamine 
and atropine. Some patients suff er from prolonged 
or permanent POCD aft er surgery and anesthesia. 
Some studies suggest that POCD can be detected in 
10% to 15% of patients older than age 60 years up 
to 3 months following major surgery. In some set-
tings (eg, following cardiac and major orthopedic 
procedures), intraoperative arterial emboli may be 
contributory. Animal studies suggest that anesthe-
sia without surgery can impair learning for weeks, 
decreases. Plasma cholinesterase levels are reduced 
in elderly men. 
 NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 Brain mass decreases with age; neuronal loss is 
prominent in the cerebral cortex, particularly the 
frontal lobes. Cerebral blood fl ow also decreases 
about 10% to 20% in proportion to neuronal losses. 
It remains tightly coupled to metabolic rate, and 
autoregulation is intact. Neurons lose complexity of 
their dendritic tree and the number of synapses. Th e 
synthesis of neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, 
and neurotransmitter receptors are reduced. Sero-
tonergic, adrenergic, and gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) binding sites are also reduced. Astrocytes 
and microglial cells increase in number. 
 Aging is associated with an increasing threshold 
for nearly all sensory modalities, including touch, 
temperature sensation, proprioception, hearing, and 
vision.  Dosage requirements for local and gen-
eral (minimum alveolar concentration [MAC]) 
anesthetics are reduced. Administration of a given 
volume of epidural local anesthetic tends to result in 
more extensive spread in elderly patients. A longer 
duration of action should be expected from a given 
dose of spinal local anesthetic. 
 Currently, much work is being done to deter-
mine whether surgery and anesthesia harm the 
brain in some manner. Postoperative cognitive dys-
function (POCD) is diagnosed by neurobehavioral 
testing. Unlike delirium, which is a clinical diagno-
sis, cognitive dysfunction must be sought by using 
evaluative techniques. Up to 30% of elderly patients 
can demonstrate abnormal neurobehavioral testing 
within the fi rst week aft er an operation; however, 
such testing may identify dysfunction already pres-
ent in these individuals prior to any surgery or anes-
thesia exposure. 
 Ultimately, the question arises as to whether 
general anesthetic agents result in neurotoxicity 
in the aged brain. Some current investigations are 
attempting to determine whether anesthetic agents 
produce POCD through a mechanism similar to 
that underlying Alzheimer’s disease. 
 It is also possible that side eff ects of illness 
(eg, infl ammation) and the neuroendocrine stress 
8
 
CHAPTER 43 Geriatric Anesthesia
913
regional anesthesia. Degenerative cervical spine dis-
ease can limit neck extension, potentially making 
intubation diffi  cult. 
 Age-Related Pharmacological 
Changes 
 Aging produces both pharmacokinetic (the 
relationship between drug dose and plasma 
concentration) and pharmacodynamic (the rela-
tionship between plasma concentration and clinical 
eff ect) changes. Disease-related changes and wide 
variations among individuals in similar populations 
prevent generalizations. 
9
particularly in older animals. Elderly inpatients 
seem to have a signifi cantly higher risk of POCD 
than elderly outpatients. Anesthetic neurotoxic-
ity is also a potential risk for the developing brain. 
Progress in research in this area is documented on 
the Smart Tots TM website (see  http://www.smarttots.
org/ ). 
 MUSCULOSKELETAL 
 Muscle mass is reduced in elderly patients. Skin 
atrophies with age and is susceptible to trauma from 
removal of adhesive tape, electrocautery pads, and 
electrocardiographic electrodes. Veins are oft en 
frail and easily ruptured by intravenous infusions. 
Arthritic joints may interfere with positioning or 
 TABLE 433 Predisposing and precipitating factors for delirium after surgery. 
Predisposing Factors, Preoperative
Precipitating Factors
Intraoperative
Postoperative
 Demographics 
 Increasing age 
 Male gender 
 Comorbidities 
 Impaired cognition 
 Dementia 
 Mild cognitive impairment 
 Preoperative memory complaint 
 Atherosclerosis 
 Intracranial stenosis 
 Carotid stenosis 
 Peripheral vascular disease 
 Prior stroke/transient ischemic attack 
 Diabetes 
 Hypertension 
 Atrial fibrillation 
 Low albumin 
 Electrolyte abnormalities 
 Psychiatric disease 
 Anxiety 
 Depression 
 Benzodiazepine use 
 Function 
 Impaired functional status 
 Sensory impairment 
 Lifestyle factors 
 Alcohol use 
 Sleep deprivation 
 Smoking 
 Type of operation 
 Hip fracture 
 Cardiac surgery 
 Vascular surgery 
 Complexity of operation 
 Operation time 
 Shock/hypotension 
 Arrhythmia 
 Decreased cardiac output 
 Emergency surgery 
 Operative factors 
 Intraoperative temperature 
 Benzodiazepine administration 
 Propofol administration 
 Blood transfusion 
 Anesthesia factors 
 Type of anesthesia 
 Duration of anesthesia 
 Cognitively active medications 
 Early complications of operation 
 Low hematocrit 
 Cardiogenic shock 
 Hypoxemia 
 Prolonged intubation 
 Sedation management 
 Pain 
 Later complications of operation 
 Low albumin 
 Abnormal electrolytes 
 Latrogenic complications 
 Pain 
 Infection 
 Liver failure 
 Renal failure 
 Sleep-wake disturbance 
 Alcohol withdrawal 
Reproduced, with permission, from Rudoph J, Marcantonio E: Postoperative delirium: acute change with long term implications. Anesth Analg 
2011;112: 1202.
914 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Th e principal pharmacodynamic change asso-
ciated with aging is a reduced anesthetic require-
ment, represented by a reduced MAC. Careful 
titration of anesthetic agents helps to avoid adverse 
side eff ects and unexpected, prolonged duration; 
short-acting agents, such as propofol, desfl urane, 
remifentanil, and succinylcholine, may be particu-
larly useful in elderly patients. Drugs that are not 
signifi cantly dependent on hepatic or renal function 
or blood fl ow, such as atracurium or cisatracurium, 
are useful. 
 INHALATIONAL 
ANESTHETICS 
 Th e MAC for inhalational agents is reduced 
by 4% per decade of age over 40 years. Onset of 
action is faster if cardiac output is depressed, 
whereas it is delayed if there is a signifi cant ven-
tilation/perfusion abnormality. Recovery from 
anesthesia with a volatile anesthetic may be pro-
longed because of an increased volume of dis-
tribution (increased body fat) and decreased 
pulmonary gas exchange. Decreased hepatic func-
tion is of less importance, even for halothane. 
Agents that are rapidly eliminated (eg, desfl urane) 
are good choices for speeding emergence in the 
elderly patient. 
 NONVOLATILE ANESTHETIC 
AGENTS 
 In general, elderly patients display a lower 
dose requirement for propofol, etomidate, 
barbiturates, opioids, and benzodiazepines. Th e 
typical octogenarian will require a smaller induction 
dose of propofol than that required by a 20-year-old 
patient. 
 Although propofol may be close to an ideal 
induction agent in elderly patients because of its 
rapid elimination, it is more likely to cause apnea 
and hypotension than in younger patients. Both 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic fac-
tors are responsible for this enhanced sensitivity. 
Elderly patients require nearly 50% lower blood 
10
 A progressive decrease in muscle mass and 
increase in body fat (particularly in older women) 
results in decreased total body water. Th e reduced 
volume of distribution for water-soluble drugs can 
lead to greater plasma concentrations; conversely, 
an increased volume of distribution for lipid-soluble 
drugs could theoretically reduce their plasma con-
centration. Any change in volume of distribution 
suffi  cient to signifi cantly change concentrations 
will infl uence the elimination time. Because renal 
and hepatic functions decline with age, reductions 
in clearance prolong the duration of action of many 
drugs. 
 Distribution and elimination are also aff ected 
by altered plasma protein binding. Albumin, which 
binds acidic drugs (eg, barbiturates, benzodiaze-
pines, opioid agonists), typically decreases with age. 
α 1 -Acid glycoprotein, which binds basic drugs (eg, 
local anesthetics), is increased. 
 TABLE 434 Prevention of delirium after 
surgery. 
Module
Postoperative Intervention
Cognitive 
stimulation
 Orientation (clock, calendar, 
orientation board) 
 Avoid cognitively active medications 
Improve sensory 
input
 Glasses 
 Hearing aids/amplifiers 
Mobilization
 Early mobilization and rehabilitation 
Avoidance of 
psychoactive 
medication
 Elimination of unnecessary 
medications 
 Pain management protocol 
Fluid and 
nutrition
 Fluid management 
 Electrolyte monitoring and repletion 
 Adequate nutrition protocol 
Avoidance of 
hospital 
complications
 Bowel protocol 
 Early removal of urinary catheters 
 Adequate central nervous system O2 
delivery, including supplemental 
oxygen and transfusion for very low 
hematocrit 
 Postoperative complication monitoring 
protocol 
Reproduced, with permission, from Rudoph J, Marcantonio E: Postop-
erative delirium: acute change with long term implications. Anesth 
Analg 2011;112: 1202.
 
CHAPTER 43 Geriatric Anesthesia 
915 
 CASE DISCUSSION
The Elderly Patient with a Fractured Hip 
 An 86-year-old nursing home patient is sched-
uled for open reduction and internal ﬁ xation of a 
subtrochanteric fracture of the femur . 
 How should this patient be evaluated for the risk 
of perioperative morbidity? 
 Anesthetic risk correlates much better with the 
presence of coexisting disease than chronological 
age. Therefore, preanesthetic evaluation should 
concentrate on the identiﬁ cation of age-related 
diseases ( Table 43–2 ) and an estimation of physio-
logical reserve. There is a tremendous physiological 
diﬀ erence between a patient who walks three blocks 
to a grocery store on a regular basis and one who is 
bedridden, even though both may be the same age. 
Obviously, any condition that may be amenable to 
preoperative therapy (eg, bronchodilator admin-
istration) must be identiﬁ ed and addressed. At the 
same time, lengthy delays may compromise surgi-
cal repair and increase overall morbidity . 
 What are some of the considerations in selection 
of premedication for this patient? 
 In general, elderly patients require lower doses 
of premedication. Nonetheless, hip fractures are 
painful, particularly during movement to the oper-
ating room. Unless contraindicated by severe con-
comitant disease, an opioid premedication may 
be valuable. Anticholinergic medication is rarely 
needed, as aging is accompanied by atrophy of 
the salivary glands. These patients may be at risk 
for aspiration, as opioid premedication and pain 
from the injury will decrease gastric emptying. 
Therefore, pretreatment with an H 2 antagonist or 
proton pump inhibitor should be considered. 
 What factors might inﬂ uence the choice between 
regional and general anesthesia? 
 Advancing age is not a contraindication for 
either regional or general anesthesia. Each tech-
nique, however, has its advantages and disadvan-
tages in the elderly population. For hip surgery, 
levels of propofol for anesthesia than do younger 
patients. Moreover, both the rapidly equilibrating 
peripheral compartment and systemic clearance 
for propofol are signifi cantly reduced in elderly 
patients. Th e initial volume of distribution for 
etomidate signifi cantly decreases with aging: lower 
doses are required to achieve the same electroen-
cephalographic endpoint in elderly patients (com-
pared with young patients). 
 Enhanced sensitivity to fentanyl, alfentanil, 
and sufentanil is primarily pharmacodynamic. 
Pharmacokinetics for these opioids are not signifi -
cantly aff ected by age. Dose requirements for the 
same EEG endpoint using fentanyl and alfentanil 
are 50% lower in elderly patients. In contrast, the 
volume of the central compartment and clearance 
are reduced for remifentanil; thus, both phar-
macodynamic and pharmacokinetic factors are 
important. 
 Use of sedative and antinausea agents with anti-
cholinergic and antidopaminergic properties may 
produce adverse eff ects in patients with Parkinson’s 
disease. 
 Aging increases the volume of distribution for 
all benzodiazepines, which eff ectively prolongs their 
elimination half-lives. Enhanced pharmacodynamic 
sensitivity to benzodiazepines is also observed. 
Midazolam requirements are generally 50% less in 
elderly patients, and its elimination half-life is pro-
longed by about 50%. 
 MUSCLE RELAXANTS 
 Th e response to succinylcholine and other neuro-
muscular blockers is unaltered by aging. Decreased 
cardiac output and slow muscle blood fl ow, however, 
may cause up to a 2-fold prolongation in the onset of 
neuromuscular blockade in elderly patients. Recov-
ery from nondepolarizing muscle relaxants that 
depend on renal excretion (eg, pancuronium) may 
be delayed due to decreased drug clearance. Like-
wise, decreased hepatic excretion from a loss of liver 
mass prolongs the elimination half-life and duration 
of action of rocuronium and vecuronium. Th e phar-
macological profi le of atracurium is not signifi cantly 
aff ected by age. 
916 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
involves the intercostal musculature, ventilation 
and the cough reﬂ ex are well maintained . 
 Technical problems associated with regional 
anesthesia in the elderly include altered landmarks 
as a result of degeneration of the vertebral column 
and the diﬃ  culty of obtaining adequate patient 
positioning secondary to pain related to the frac-
ture. To avoid having the patient lie on the fracture, 
a hypobaric or isobaric solution can be injected 
intrathecally. Postpuncture headache is less of a 
problem in the elderly population . 
 If the patient refuses regional anesthesia, is 
general anesthesia acceptable? 
 General anesthesia is an acceptable alternative 
to regional block. One advantage is that the patient 
can be induced in bed and moved to the operat-
ing room table after intubation, avoiding the pain 
of positioning. A disadvantage is that the patient 
is unable to provide feedback regarding pressure 
points on the unpadded orthopedic table . 
 What speciﬁ c factors should be considered 
during induction and maintenance of general 
anesthesia with this patient? 
 It is important to remember that because a 
subtrochanteric fracture can be associated with 
more than 1 L of occult blood loss, induction with 
propofol may lead to an exaggerated decrease in 
arterial blood pressure. Initial hypotension may be 
replaced by hypertension and tachycardia during 
laryngoscopy and intubation. This rollercoaster vol-
atility in blood pressure increases the risk of myo-
cardial ischemia and can be avoided by preceding 
airway instrumentation with lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg), 
esmolol (0.3 mg/kg), or alfentanil (5–15mcg/kg). 
Elderly patients often have poor vascular compli-
ance and wide pulse pressures, leading to dramatic 
swings in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
during anesthesia . 
 Intraoperative paralysis with a nondepolar-
izing muscle relaxant improves surgical condi-
tions and allows maintenance of a lighter plane of 
anesthesia. Monitoring for anesthetic awareness is 
suggested if the patient’s hemodynamics dictate 
reliance on muscle relaxants to prevent movement 
intraoperatively . 
regional anesthesia can be achieved with a sub-
arachnoid or epidural block extending to the T8 
sensory level. Both of these blocks require patient 
cooperation and the ability to lie still for the dura-
tion of the surgery. A paramedian approach may 
be helpful when optimal positioning is not pos-
sible Unless regional anesthesia is accompanied 
by heavy sedation, postoperative confusion and 
disorientation are less troublesome than after gen-
eral anesthesia. Cardiovascular changes are usually 
limited to a decrease in arterial blood pressure as 
sympathetic block is established. Although this 
decrease can be minimized by prophylactic ﬂ uid 
loading, a patient with borderline heart function 
may develop congestive heart failure when the 
block dissipates and sympathetic tone returns. 
Reduced afterload can result in profound hypo-
tension and cardiac arrest in patients with aortic 
stenosis, a common valvular lesion in the elderly 
population. Patients with coronary artery disease 
may experience an increase in myocardial oxy-
gen demand as a result of reﬂ ex tachycardia or 
a decrease in supply caused by lower coronary 
artery perfusion. Invasive arterial pressure moni-
toring is useful when taking the elderly patient to 
surgery. Monitors of hemodynamic function using 
pulse contour analysis that estimate stroke volume 
 variation in addition to transesophageal echo-
cardiography can all be employed to guide ﬂ uid 
therapy. The beneﬁ ts of transesophageal echocar-
diography must be considered in the context of 
the risks of esophageal rupture and mediastinitis 
in the elderly . 
 Are there any speciﬁ c advantages or 
disadvantages to a regional technique in elderly 
patients having hip surgery? 
 A major advantage in regional  anesthesia—
particularly for hip surgery—is a lower incidence 
of postoperative thromboembolism. This is pre-
sumably due to peripheral vasodilation and 
maintenance of venous blood ﬂ ow in the lower 
extremities. In addition, local anesthetics inhibit 
platelet aggregation and stabilize endothelial cells. 
Many anesthesiologists believe that regional anes-
thesia maintains respiratory function better than 
general anesthesia. Unless the anesthetic level 
 
CHAPTER 43 Geriatric Anesthesia 
917 
 Leung J, Tsai T, Sands L: Preoperative frailty in older 
surgical patients is associated with early postoperative 
delirium. Anesth Analg 2011;112:1199. 
 Levine W, Mehta V, Landesberg G: Anesthesia for 
the elderly: selected topics. Curr Opin Anaesthiol 
2006;19:320. 
 Lin D, Feng C, Cao M, Zuo Z: Volatile anesthetics may 
not induce signifi cant toxicity to human neuron like 
cells. Anesth Analg 2011;112:1194. 
 Rudoph J, Marcantonio E: Postoperative delirium: acute 
change with long term implications. Anesth Analg 
2011;112:1202. 
 Samani N, van der Harst P: Biological aging and 
cardiovascular disease. Heart 2008;94:537. 
 Silvay G, Castillo J, Chikwe J, et al: Cardiac anesthesia 
and surgery in geriatric patients. Semin Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth 2008;12:18. 
 van Harten AE, Scheeren TW, Absalom AR: 
A review of postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
and neuroinfl ammation associated with cardiac 
surgery and anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 2012;67:280. 
 White PF, White LM, Monk T: Review article: 
perioperative care for the older outpatient 
undergoing ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 
2012;114:1190. 
 Zaugg M, Lucchinetti E: Respiratory function in the 
elderly. Anesthesiol Clin North America 2000;18:47. 
 Zeleznik J: Normative aging of the respiratory system. 
Clin Geriatr Med 2003;19:1. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Bettelli G: Preoperative evaluation in geriatric surgery: 
comorbidity, functional status and pharmacological 
history. Minerva Anestesiol 2011;71:1. 
 Cheung C, Ponnusamy A, Anderton J: Management of 
acute renal failure in the elderly patient: a clinician’s 
guide. Drugs Aging 2008;25:455. 
 Crosby G, Culley D, Patel P: At the sharp end of spines. 
Anesthiology 2010;112:521. 
 Evered L, Scott D, Silbert B, Maruff  P: Postoperative 
cognitive dysfunction is independent of type 
of surgery and anesthetic. Anesth Analg 
2011;112:1179. 
 Evered L, Silbert B, Scott D, et al: Preexisting cognitive 
impairment and mild cognitive impairment in 
subjects presenting for total hip joint replacement. 
Anesthiology 2011;114: 1297. 
 Fodale V, Santamaria L, Schifi lliti D, Mandal P: 
Anaesthetics and postoperative cognitive dysfunction: 
a pathological mechanism mimicking Alzheimer’s 
disease. Anaesthesia 2010;65:388. 
 Jankowski C, Trenerry M, Cook D, et al: Cognitive 
and functional predictors and sequelae of 
postoperative delirium in elderly patients 
undergoing elective joint arthroplasty. Anesth Analg 
2011;112:1186-9. 
 Jin F, Chung F: Minimizing perioperative adverse events 
in the elderly. Br J Anaesth 2001;87:608. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 919
 Ambulatory, Nonoperating 
Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based 
Anesthesia 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4 4
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Out of the operating room anesthesia 
requires the anesthesia provider to work in 
remote locations in a hospital, where ease 
of access to the patient and anesthesia 
equipment is compromised; furthermore, the 
staﬀ  at these locations may be unfamiliar with 
the requirements for safe anesthetic delivery. 
 In their guidelines and statements, the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
reminds anesthesia staﬀ  that it is important 
that both the physical and operational 
infrastructure is in place at any location to 
ensure the safe conduct of anesthesia. 
 The underlying reason for ambulatory 
anesthesia and surgery, is that it is less 
expensive and more convenient for the 
patient than inpatient admission. 
1
2
3
 Regional and local anesthetic techniques are 
becoming increasingly popular in managing 
ambulatory orthopedic surgery. 
 In general, ambulatory surgeries should be 
of a complexity and duration such that one 
could reasonably assume that the patient 
will make an expeditious recovery. 
 Factors considered in selecting patients for 
ambulatory procedures include: systemic 
illnesses and their current management, 
airway management problems, sleep apnea, 
morbid obesity, previous adverse anesthesia 
outcomes (eg, malignant hyperthermia), 
allergies, and the patient’s social network 
(eg, availability of someone to be responsive 
to the patient for 24 h). 
4
5
6
 Outpatient/ambulatory anesthesia is the subspe-
cialty of anesthesiology that deals with the preop-
erative, intraoperative, and postoperative anesthetic 
care of patients undergoing elective, same-day sur-
gical procedures. Patients undergoing ambulatory 
surgery rarely require admission to a hospital and 
are fi t enough to be discharged from the surgical 
facility aft er the procedure. 
 Nonoperating room anesthesia (or out of the 
operating room anesthesia) refers to both inpatients 
and ambulatory surgery patients who undergo anes-
thesia in settings outside of a traditional operating 
room. Th ese patients can vary greatly, ranging from 
claustrophobic individuals in need of anesthesia for 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) procedures to 
critically ill septic patients undergoing endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography in the gastro-
intestinal suite.  Out of the operating room 
anesthesia requires the anesthesia provider to 
work in remote locations in a hospital, where ease of 
access to the patient and anesthesia equipment is 
compromised; furthermore, the staff  at these loca-
tions may be unfamiliar with the requirements for 
safe anesthetic delivery. 
 Offi  ce-based anesthesia refers to the delivery of 
anesthesia in a practitioner’s offi  ce that has a proce-
dural suite incorporated into its design. Offi  ce-based 
anesthesia is frequently administered to patients 
1
920 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
expensive and more convenient for the patient than 
inpatient admission. Th e transition from open cho-
lecystectomy to a laparoscopic approach represents 
the type of development that permits a shortened 
postoperative course and ambulatory patient man-
agement. Consequently, a common procedure that 
once required hospital admission is now performed 
as outpatient surgery. 
 Th e use of short-acting anesthetic agents (eg, 
propofol, desfl urane, and rocuronium) has likewise 
contributed to making ambulatory surgery easier; 
however, such cases were performed successfully 
using thiopental, isofl urane, and succinylcholine 
when the newer agents were not available. Although 
inhalational agents (eg, sevofl urane and desfl urane) 
lead to prompt emergence, they also contribute to 
postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). 
Propofol, which may have antiemetic eff ects as a 
part of total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA), can 
potentially reduce PONV; however, TIVA may 
require more time for patients to meet discharge cri-
teria.  Regional and local anesthetic techniques 
are becoming increasingly popular in manag-
ing ambulatory orthopedic surgery. Th e use of ultra-
sound and nerve stimulation has improved regional 
block success rates. Th e use of regional techniques 
decreases postoperative opioid requirements, poten-
tially reducing the likelihood of PONV. For example, 
paravertebral blocks are increasingly used to man-
age offi  ce-based breast augmentation surgery. 
Improved airway management using devices, such 
as the laryngeal mask airway (LMA) and video 
laryngoscopy, have likewise contributed to improved 
patient care. Consequently, anesthesia personnel 
working as solo providers in an offi  ce-based setting 
are better able to avoid airway catastrophes. 
 CANDIDATES FOR 
AMBULATORY AND OFFICE
BASED ANESTHESIA 
 With an aging and increasingly obese population, 
patients with signifi cant comorbidities present for 
ambulatory surgery. Although age  per se is not a fac-
tor in determining candidacy for ambulatory proce-
dures, each patient must be considered in the context 
4
undergoing cosmetic surgery, and anesthesia for 
dental procedures is also routinely performed in an 
offi  ce-based setting. 
 Although treatment may be similar for inpa-
tients, ambulatory surgery center patients, out of the 
operating room patients, and offi  ce-based anesthesia 
patients, there are nonetheless various guidelines 
and statements from the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) that pertain to these diff er-
ent locations. All of these recommendations should 
be reviewed at the ASA website (www.asahq.org/
For-Healthcare-Professionals/Standards-Guidelines-
and-Statements.aspx), as they are subject to change 
and modifi cation.  In their guidelines and state-
ments, the ASA reminds anesthesia staff  that it 
is important that both the physical and operational 
infrastructure is in place at any location to ensure the 
safe conduct of anesthesia. In addition to the ASA 
guidelines, state regulatory guidelines, which include 
specifi c requirements for safety, governance, and 
emergency protocols for both offi  ce-based and free-
standing ambulatory surgery centers, have also been 
established. Accreditation agencies, such as the 
Joint Commission, Accreditation Association for 
Ambulatory Healthcare, and American Association 
for the Accreditation of Ambulatory Surgical 
Facilities, engage in various inspections and reviews 
to ensure that facilities meet acceptable standards for 
the procedural services provided. Anesthesia staff 
should confi rm that both the infrastructure and 
operational policies are consistent with acceptable 
anesthesia practice standards before providing anes-
thesia in such settings. 
 ADVANCES IN AMBULATORY 
ANESTHESIA AND SURGERY 
 Most patients are no longer admitted prior to the 
day of elective surgery. Th e trend for same-day 
admittance has been facilitated by advancements in 
surgical technique and technology (eg, laparoscopy), 
resulting in less invasive surgery, advancements in 
anesthesia care (eg, shorter acting medications) 
and improved postoperative pain and nausea man-
agement.  Th e underlying reason for ambula-
tory  anesthesia and surgery is that it is less 
2
3
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia
921
 Similarly, patients with unstable comorbid con-
ditions, such as decompensated congestive heart 
failure or uncontrolled hypertension, may benefi t 
more from having their procedure performed in a 
hospital than a free-standing facility. Indeed, many 
patients undergo ambulatory procedures in a hos-
pital, as opposed to a free-standing surgery center 
or offi  ce. Such patients have the benefi t of both the 
availability of a hospital’s resources and the conve-
nience of being an ambulatory patient. Should their 
condition warrant additional care, hospital admit-
tance is possible; however, such fl exibility comes 
with the costs associated with hospital care. 
 Th e anesthesiologist must know which preexist-
ing medical conditions predict a specifi c intraopera-
tive and/or postoperative adverse event (AE) for the 
patient in question. Likewise, procedures suitable for 
ambulatory surgery should have a minimal risk of 
perioperative hemorrhage, airway compromise, and 
no particular requirement for specialized postopera-
tive care. Based on risk identifi cation, the anesthe-
siologist should be able to mitigate unforeseen AEs 
and provide optimal care for patients in this type of 
setting. Although current evidence-based medicine 
can provide recommendations for some high-risk 
ambulatory issues, evidence is lacking for most such 
situations. 
 SPECIFIC PATIENT 
CONDITIONS AND 
AMBULATORY SURGERY 
 Obesity and Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
 Obesity is associated with many concomitant dis-
ease states, such as hypertension, diabetes, hyper-
lidipemia, and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Th e 
physiologic derangements that accompany these 
conditions include changes in oxygen demand, car-
bon dioxide production, alveolar ventilation, and 
cardiac output. Patients with obesity and OSA are at 
increased risk of postoperative respiratory compli-
cations, such as prolonged airway obstruction and 
apnea. Scores for predicting the probability of these 
complications can aid in the preoperative assessment 
and referral to a hospital setting ( Tables 44–1 and 
44–2 ). Although a sleep study is the standard way to 
of his or her comorbidities, the type of surgery to be 
performed, and the expected response to anesthesia. 
 In general, ambulatory surgeries should be of a 
complexity and duration such that one could 
reasonably assume that the patient will make an 
expeditious recovery. ASA physical status and a 
thorough history and physical exam are crucial in 
the screening of patients selected for ambulatory or 
offi  ce-based surgery. ASA 4 and 5 patients normally 
would not be candidates for ambulatory surgery, 
whereas ASA 1 and 2 patients would be prime can-
didates for such surgery. ASA 3 patients with diabe-
tes, hypertension, and stable coronary artery disease 
would not be precluded from an ambulatory proce-
dure provided that their diseases are well controlled. 
Ultimately, the surgeon and anesthesia provider 
must identify patients for whom an ambulatory or 
offi  ce-based setting is likely to provide benefi ts 
(eg, convenience, reduced costs and charges) that 
outweigh risks (eg, the lack of immediate availability 
of all hospital services, such as a cardiac catheteriza-
tion laboratory, emergency cardiovascular stents, 
assistance with airway rescue, rapid consultation). 
 Factors considered in selecting patients for 
ambulatory procedures include: systemic ill-
nesses and their current management, airway man-
agement problems, sleep apnea, morbid obesity, 
previous adverse anesthesia outcomes (eg, malignant 
hyperthermia), allergies, and the patient’s social net-
work (eg, availability of someone to be responsive to 
the patient for 24 h). 
 Patients with known or likely diffi  cult airways 
should probably not be candidates for offi  ce-based 
procedures; however, they may be appropriately 
cared for in a well equipped and fully staff ed ambu-
latory surgery center. Important considerations for 
such patients include the availability of diffi  cult 
airway equipment, such as an intubating LMA or 
videolaryngoscope, the availability of additional 
experienced anesthesia providers, and surgeons/
anesthesiologists capable of performing emergency 
tracheostomy/cricothyroidotomy. If there are con-
cerns regarding the ability to manage the airway in 
an ambulatory surgery setting, or if a surgical air-
way is thought to be a possibility, the patient may be 
better served in a hospital setting where immediate 
consultation and assistance is available. 
5
6
922 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
to the usual discharge criteria, the ASA also recom-
mends the following in patients with OSA: 
•  Return of room air oxygen saturation to 
baseline level 
•  No hypoxemic episodes or periods of airway 
obstruction when left  alone 
diagnose sleep apnea, many patients with OSA have 
never been identifi ed as having OSA. Consequently, 
an anesthesiologist may be the fi rst physician to 
detect the presence or risk of sleep apnea. Th e ASA 
has provided suggestions on the types of procedures 
and anesthetics that can safely be used in ambula-
tory patients with OSA ( Table 44–3 ). In addition 
 TABLE 441 Identiﬁ cation and assessment of obstructive sleep apnea: example. 
A.  Clinical signs and symptoms suggesting the possibility of OSA 
1.  Predisposing physical characteristics 
a.  BMI 35 kg/m 2 [95th percentile for age and gender]1 
b.  Neck circumference 17 inches (men) or 16 inches (women) 
c.  Craniofacial abnormalities affecting the airway 
d.  Anatomical nasal obstruction 
e.  Tonsils nearly touching or touching In the midline 
2.  History of apparent airway obstruction during sleep (two or more of the following are present; if patient lives alone or 
sleep is not observed by another person, then only one of the following needs to be present) 
a.  Snoring (loud enough to be heard through closed door) 
b.  Frequent snoring 
c.  Observed pauses in breathing during sleep 
d.  Awakens from sleep with choking sensation 
e.  Frequent arousals from sleep 
f.  [Intermittent vocalization during sleep]1 
g.  [Parental report of restless sleep, difficulty breathing, or struggling respiratory efforts during sleep]1 
3.  Somnolence (one or more of the following is present) 
a.  Frequent somnolence or fatigue despite adequate “sleep” 
b.  Falls asleep easily in a nonstimulating environment (e.g., watching TV, reading, riding in or driving a car) 
despite adequate “sleep” 
c.  [Parent or teacher comments that child appears sleepy during the day, is easily distracted, is overly aggressive, or has 
difficulty concentrating]1 
d.  [Child often difficult to arouse at usual awakening time]1 
 If a patient has signs or symptoms in two or more of the above categories, there is a significant probability that he or she has 
OSA. The severity of OSA may be determined by sleep study (see below). If a sleep study is not available, such patients 
should be treated as though they have moderate sleep apnea unless one or more of the signs or symptoms above is severely 
abnormal ( e.g. , markedly increased BMI or neck circumference, respiratory pauses that are frightening to the observer, 
patient regularly falls asleep within minutes after being left unstimulated), in which case they should be treated as though 
they have severe sleep apnea. 
B.  If a sleep study has been done, the results should be used to determine the perioperative anesthetic management of a 
patient. However, because sleep laboratories differ in their criteria for detecting episodes of apnea and hypopnea, the Task 
Force believes that the sleep laboratory’s assessment (none, mild, moderate, or severe) should take precedence over the 
actual AHI (the number of episodes of sleep-disordered breathing per hour). If the overall severity is not indicated, it may be 
determined by using the table below: 
Severity of OSA
Adult AHI
Pediatric AHI
None
Mild OSA
Moderate OSA
Severe OSA
0–5
6–20
21–40
>40
0
1–5
6–10
>10
AHI, apnea-hypopnea index; BMI, body mass index; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; TV, television.
1Items in brackets refer to pediatric patients.
Reproduced, with permission, from Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof JL, et al: Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients 
with obstructive sleep apnea: a report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2006;104:1081.
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
923 
•  Monitoring for 3 hours longer prior to 
discharge than patients without OSA 
•  Monitoring for 7 hours following an episode 
of airway obstruction or hypoxemia while 
breathing room air in an unstimulating 
environment 
 According to the ASA Task Force on Obesity 
and OSA, these OSA patients can be managed safely 
as outpatients; however, they have an increased risk 
of postoperative complications requiring increased 
monitoring, availability of radiologic/laboratory ser-
vices, and availability of continuous positive airway 
pressure and mechanical ventilation, thus making an 
offi  ce-based setting potentially inadequate for man-
aging complications that may arise. Nonetheless, 
under certain conditions, anesthesia and surgery 
 TABLE 443 Consultant opinions regarding 
procedures that may be performed safely on 
an outpatient basis for patients at increased 
perioperative risk from obstructive sleep apnea. 
Type of Surgery/Anesthesia
Consultant 
Opinion
Superficial surgery/local or regional 
anesthesia
Agree
Superficial surgery/general anesthesia
Equivocal
Airway surgery (adult, e.g., UPPP)
Disagree
Tonsillectomy in children less than 
3 years old
Disagree
Tonsillectomy in children greater than 
3 years old
Equivocal
Minor orthopedic surgery/local or regional 
anesthesia
Agree
Minor orthopedic surgery/general anesthesia Equivocal
Gynecologic laparoscopy
Equivocal
Laparoscopic surgery, upper abdomen
Disagree
Lithotripsy
Agree
OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; UPPP, uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.
Reproduced, with permission, from Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof 
JL, et al: Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a report by the American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2006;104:1081.
 TABLE 442 Obstructive sleep apnea 
scoring system: example. 
Points
A.  Severity of sleep apnea based on sleep study 
(or clinical indicators if sleep study not 
available). Point score _______ (0–3)1-2
Severity of OSA (Table 44–1)
None
0
Mild
1
Moderate
2
Severe
3
B.  Invasiveness of surgery and anesthesia. Point 
score _______ (0–3)
Type of surgery and anesthesia
Superficial surgery under local or peripheral 
nerve block anesthesia without sedation
0
Superficial surgery with moderate sedation 
or general anesthesia
1
Peripheral surgery with spinal or epidural 
anesthesia (with no more than moderate 
sedation)
1
Peripheral surgery with general anesthesia
2
Airway surgery with moderate sedation
2
Major surgery, general anesthesia
3
Airway surgery, general anesthesia
3
C. Requirement for postoperative opioids. Point 
score ________ (0–3)
Opioid requirement
None
0
Low-dose oral opioids
1
High-dose oral opioids, parenteral or 
neuraxial opioids
3
D.  Estimation of perioperative risk. Overall score = 
the score for A plus the greater of the score for 
either B or C. Point score _______ (0–6)3
A scoring system similar to this table may be used to estimate whether 
a patient is at increased perioperative risk of complications from 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). This example, which has not been 
clinically validated, is meant only as a guide, and clinical judgment 
should be used to assess the risk of an individual patient.
1One point may be subtracted if a patient has been on continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) or noninvasive positive-pressure 
ventilation (NIPPV) before surgery and will be using his or her 
appliance consistently during the postoperative period.
2One point should be added if a patient with mild or moderate OSA 
also has a resting arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2) greater than 
50 mm Hg.
3Patients with score of 4 may be at increased perioperative risk from 
OSA; patients with a score or 5 or 6 may be at signiﬁ cantly increased 
perioperative risk from OSA.
Reproduced, with permission, from Gross JB, Bachenberg KL, Benumof 
JL, et al: Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a report by the American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management of 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2006;104:1081.
924 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
if bipolar cautery is used at a distance of greater than 
15 cm from the device, immediate interrogation of 
the device is not necessary prior to discharge from 
a monitored setting. Likewise, if an ICD is present, 
and there is anticipated electromagnetic interference 
the device’s antitachycardia features should be inhib-
ited perioperatively (see  Figures 44–1 and  44–2 ). 
 Glucose Control 
 In a consensus statement on perioperative glucose 
control, the Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia 
found insuffi  cient evidence to make strong recom-
mendations about glucose management in ambu-
latory patients, and thus management suggestions 
parallel those of the inpatient population; however, 
the panel recommends a target intraoperative blood 
glucose concentration of <180 mg/dL. 
 Malignant Hyperthermia 
 Patients with a history of malignant hyperthermia 
can be safely given nontriggering anesthetics and 
discharged as ambulatory patients. Prophylactic 
dantrolene should not be administered. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 Intraoperative management in the ambulatory patient 
undergoing surgery is aimed at providing rapid emer-
gence, good analgesia, and minimal PONV while 
creating acceptable operating conditions. Oft en these 
can be performed in an ambulatory surgery center 
or hospital outpatient facility. 
 Cardiac Conditions 
 Increasingly, patients present to ambulatory sur-
gery with a variety of cardiac conditions treated 
both pharmacologically and mechanically (eg, car-
diac resynchronization therapy, implantable cardio-
verter-defi brillators [ICDs], stents). It is therefore 
likely that anesthesia staff  working in ambulatory 
settings will encounter increasing numbers of such 
patients, who, despite a cardiac history, have stable 
cardiac conditions. Patients previously treated with 
stents are likely to be on antiplatelet regimens. 
As always, these agents should not be discontin-
ued unless a discussion has occurred between the 
patient, cardiologist, and surgeon regarding both 
the necessity of surgery and the discontinuation of 
antiplatelet therapy. Likewise, β-blockers should be 
continued perioperatively. Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor block-
ers may contribute to transient hypotension with 
anesthesia induction, but their continuation or dis-
continuation perioperatively seems to have minimal 
eff ects, as patients so treated likely will need to have 
intraoperative hypotension corrected in either case. 
Th e ASA guidelines recommend that patients pre-
senting with a pacemaker or ICD should not leave 
a monitored setting until the device is interrogated, 
if electrocautery was employed; however, this ASA 
recommendation is controversial, as some argue that 
 FIGURE 441  Preoperative 
considerations in a patient with an 
implanted cardioverter deﬁ brillator. EMI, 
electromagnetic interference; ICD, implanted 
cardioverter deﬁ brillator. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Joshi GP: Perioperative management 
of outpatients with implantable cardioverter 
deﬁ brillators. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:701.) 
Proceed with surgery
Is EMI likely?
Is the surgical procedure 
<15 cm from generator?
Reprogram ICD
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Is the surgical procedure 
>15 cm from generator?
Consider magnet use
Is the patient 
pacemaker dependent?
Reprogram ICD
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
925 
should be delivered, if any, and tenting of the drapes 
around the patient’s head should be prevented. 
 POST ANESTHESIA 
RECOVERY AND DISCHARGE 
 Managing a patient’s emergence, postoperative 
pain, and PONV is critical to expediting discharge. 
A plan to handle complications, such as postopera-
tive pain and PONV, should be in place preopera-
tively to standardize and streamline management as 
much as possible. 
 Th e entire anesthetic experience of the ambula-
tory surgery patient should be focused on minimiz-
ing complications, especially postoperative pain and 
PONV. Multimodal approaches to both complica-
tions are advised; see Chapter 17 for a discussion of 
PONV management. Use of a combination of agents 
(eg, ondansetron, dexamethasone, and droperidol) 
has shown greater effi  cacy than monotherapy (eg, 
ondansetron alone) in patients at high risk of PONV. 
Likewise, analgesia regimens that minimize opioid 
use reduce PONV. 
 Pain management is centered on the combined 
use of regional techniques, opioids, and NSAIDSs 
(multimodal analgesia). Gabapentinoids (gabapen-
tin, pregabalin) may have benefi cial eff ects as part 
of a multimodal pain regimen. Likewise, oral, rectal, 
or intravenous acetaminophen or NSAIDs can be 
useful in the ambulatory setting. Cyclooxygenase-2 
goals compete with one another. Although inhala-
tional anesthesia with sevofl urane may speed emer-
gence, compared with total intravenous anesthesia 
(TIVA), the likelihood of PONV may be greater, if 
an additional prophylactic drug is not administered. 
Numerous studies conducted by regional anesthe-
siologists have shown how regional anesthesia can 
speed discharge time, compared with general anes-
thetics, in the ambulatory  population—in part, by 
potentially reducing the incidence of PONV. Nitrous 
oxide increases the likelihood of PONV, but this 
eff ect can be overcome by adding a prophylactic 
agent. Likewise, multimodal perioperative analgesia 
can be approached using a variety of drugs, including 
local anesthetics, acetaminophen, and nonsteroidal 
anti-infl ammatory agents (NSAIDs) to reduce the 
use of opioids, which contribute to PONV risk. 
 Th romboembolism remains a risk aft er ambu-
latory and offi  ce-based surgery, as with inpatient 
surgery. Pneumatic compression devices and phar-
macologic thromboprophylaxis should be used in 
patients at increased risk. During monitored anes-
thesia care, supplemental oxygen can contribute 
to operating room fi res by creating an oxygen-rich 
environment that facilitates ignition by cautery 
devices. During head and neck surgery, anesthesia 
providers must be especially vigilant not to create an 
environment where fi re becomes more likely. When 
oxygen is administered via a nasal cannula or face 
mask, the minimal amount of supplemental oxygen 
 FIGURE 442  Postoperative 
considerations in a patient with an 
implanted cardioverter deﬁ brillator. 
EMI, electromagnetic interference; ICD, 
implanted cardioverter deﬁ brillator. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Joshi GP: 
Perioperative management of outpatients with 
implantable cardioverter deﬁ brillators. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;22:701.) 
Meets criteria
Discharge
No EMI, No magnet
Was the ICD reprogrammed 
preoperatively?
Must interrograte 
and reprogram
No
No
Yes
Surgical procedure <15 cm 
from generator and/or 
unipolar diathermy used
Interrogate device 
before discharge
Surgical procedure >15 cm 
from generator and bipolar 
diathermy used
EMI generated
Consider 
discharge
926 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
selective inhibitors have been used as part of mul-
timodal pain management approaches, but their 
potential for prothrombotic eff ects has restricted 
their use. 
 DISCHARGE CRITERIA 
 Scoring systems have been devised to facilitate timely 
and safe PACU discharge and assess home readiness 
aft er ambulatory surgery. Th e Aldrete scoring sys-
tem, which includes activity, respiration, circulation, 
consciousness, and oxygen saturation, helps guide 
recovery from the PACU in the ambulatory surgery 
unit. Scoring systems and guidelines that standard-
ize patient discharge from the ambulatory surgery 
center to home are also available (see  Tables 44–4 , 
 44–5 ,  44–6 , and  44–7 ). 
 Criteria for discharge generally require that the 
patient: 
•  Is alert and oriented to time and place 
•  Has stable vital signs 
•  Has pain controlled by oral analgesics or 
peripheral nerve block 
•  Has nausea or emesis controlled 
•  Is able to walk without dizziness 
•  Has no unexpected bleeding from the 
operative site 
•  Is able to take oral fl uids and void 
•  Has discharge instructions and prescriptions 
from the surgeon and anesthesiologist 
•  Accepts readiness for discharge 
•  Has a responsible adult escort present 
 TABLE 444 Stages of recovery. 
Stage of Recovery
Clinical Deﬁ nition
Early recovery
Awakening and recovery 
of vital reflexes
Intermediate recovery
Immediate clinical recovery
Home readiness
Late recovery
Full recovery
Psychological recovery
Data from Steward DJ, Volgyesi G: Stabilometry: a new tool for 
measuring recovery following general anaesthesia. Can Anaesth Soc J 
1978;25:4.
 TABLE 445 The modiﬁ ed Aldrete scoring 
system for determining when patients are ready 
for discharge from the postanesthesia care unit. 
Activity: able to move voluntarily or on command
4 extremities
2
2 extremities
1
0 extremities
0
Respiration
Able to deep breathe and cough freely
2
Dyspnea, shallow or limited breathing
1
Apneic
0
Circulation
BP ± 20 mm of preanesthetic level
2
BP ± 20–50 mm of preanesthesia level
1
BP ± 50 mm of preanesthesia level
0
Consciousness
Fully awake
2
Arousable on calling
1
Not responding
0
O 2 saturation
Able to maintain O2 saturation >92% on room air
2
Needs O 2 inhalation to maintain O 2 saturation >90%
1
O 2 saturation <90% even with O 2 supplementation
0
A score ≥9 was required for discharge.
BP, blood pressure.
Reproduced, with permission, from Aldrete AL: The post anesthesia 
recovery score revisited (letter). Clin Anesth 1995;7:89.
 TABLE 446 Guidelines for safe discharge 
after ambulatory surgery. 
 Vital signs must have been stable for at least 1 h 
 The patient must be 
 Oriented to person, place, and time 
 Able to retain orally administered fluids 
 Able to void 
 Able to dress 
 Able to walk without assistance 
 The patient must not have 
 More than minimal nausea and vomiting 
 Excessive pain 
 Bleeding 
 The patient must be discharged by both the person who 
administered anaesthesia and the person who 
performed surgery, or by their designates. Written 
instructions for the postoperative period at home, 
including a contact place and person, must be reinforced. 
 The patient must have a responsible, “vested” adult escort 
them home and stay with them at home. 
Reproduced, with permission, from Korttila K: Recovery from 
outpatient anaesthesia, factors aﬀ ecting outcome. Anaesthesia 1995;50 
(suppl)22-28.
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
927 
 UNANTICIPATED HOSPITAL 
ADMISSION FOLLOWING 
AMBULATORY SURGERY 
 Various complications can occur that necessitate 
emergent transfer to a nearby hospital. Some surgi-
cal complications cannot be repaired in the ambu-
latory operating suite. Inadequately controlled pain 
and postoperative nausea and vomiting are the two 
most frequent causes of unplanned hospital admis-
sion from ASCs, with other causes less frequent. 
Accreditation agencies mandate that offi  ce based 
operating rooms have emergency equipment, drugs, 
and protocols for patient transfers. In addition to 
advanced cardiac life support medications, dan-
trolene and intravenous lipid emulsion should be 
available to treat malignant hyperthermia and local 
anesthetic-induced 
cardiotoxicity. 
Additionally, 
surgeons operating in an offi  ce-based practice must 
have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital or 
arrangements with an accepting physician to pro-
vide for patient transfer, if necessary in addition to 
a hospital transfer protocol in place. Th e American 
Association for Accreditation of Ambulatory 
Surgery Facilities reviewed 1,141,418 outpatient 
procedures from 2001 to 2006 in the facilities it 
accredits and noted 23 deaths. Pulmonary embo-
lism following abdominoplasty was the leading 
cause of death in an offi  ce-based surgery facility 
( Figures 44–3 and  44–4 ). 
 NONOPERATING 
ROOM ANESTHESIA 
 Off -site anesthesia (nonoperating room anesthe-
sia) encompasses all sedation/anesthesia provided 
by anesthesiology services outside of the operat-
ing room environment. Over the past few decades, 
requests for these services in remote locations have 
been steadily increasing, and in many large hospitals 
today more anesthetics are routinely administered 
for procedures off -site than in the operating room 
suite. According to some estimates, nonoperating 
room anesthesia accounts for 12.4% of all anes-
thetic care in the United States. As a result, some 
clinical facilities have determined that is it safer and 
more cost-eff ective to assign anesthesia team(s) for 
 TABLE 447 Postanesthesia discharge scoring 
system (PADS) for determining home-readiness. 
Vital signs
Vital signs must be stable and consistent with age 
and preoperative baseline
BP and pulse within 20% of preoperative 
baseline
2
BP and pulse 20%–40% of preoperative baseline
1
BP and pulse >40% of preoperative baseline
0
Activity level
Patient must be able to ambulate at preoperative 
level
Steady gait, no dizziness, or meets preoperative 
level
2
Requires assistance
1
Unable to ambulate
0
Nausea and vomiting
The patient should have minimal nausea and 
vomiting before discharge
Minimal: successfully treated with PO 
medication
2
Moderate: successfully treated with IM medication
1
Severe: continues after repeated treatment
0
Pain
The patient should have minimal or no pain before 
discharge
The level of pain that the patient has should be 
acceptable to the patient
Pain should be controllable by oral analgesics
The location, type, and intensity of pain should be 
consistent with anticipated postoperative 
discomfort
Acceptability
Yes
2
No
1
Surgical bleeding
Postoperative bleeding should be consistent with 
expected blood loss for the procedure
Minimal: does not require dressing change
2
Moderate: up to two dressing changes required
1
Severe: more than three dressing changes required
0
Maximal score = 10; patients scoring ≥9 are ﬁ t for discharge.
Reproduced, with permission, from Marshall SI, Chung F: 
Assessment of “home readiness”: discharge criteria and 
postdischarge complications. Curr Opin Anesthiol 1997;10:445.
 Increasingly, patients are not being required 
to drink or void before discharge from ASCs. Such 
patients require plans and instructions for follow-up 
care to provide for possible rehydration and bladder 
catheterization, if required. 
928 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
operating room patients are frequently among the 
sickest of inpatients. Anesthesia staff  are oft en called 
to work in the gastrointestinal suite, cardiac cath-
eterization laboratory, electrophysiology laboratory, 
radiology suite, radiation oncology suite, and, occa-
sionally, the critical care unit. Oft en these locations 
were constructed without anticipation that anesthe-
sia would be provided there. Consequently, anesthe-
sia work space is routinely constrained, and access 
to the patient is limited. Moreover, the procedure 
physicians and ancillary staff  in these areas oft en 
fail to understand what is required to safely deliver 
anesthesia (hence the frequent request to “give them 
a squirt” of propofol) and do not know how to assist 
scheduled blocks of times to provide care for such 
procedures, and some institutions are constructing 
procedural suites where bronchoscopy, gastrointes-
tinal endoscopy, cardiac, and interventional radiol-
ogy procedures can be performed in a centralized 
area for increased safety and effi  ciency. It is impor-
tant to remember that the same basic standards for 
anesthesia care need to be met, regardless of the 
location. Furthermore, the challenges of unfamiliar 
environments that are far removed from the surgical 
suite, including anesthesia- naïve personnel, require 
advance planning for the off -site anesthesiologist. 
 Unlike patients undergoing offi  ce-based or 
ambulatory surgery center procedures, out of the 
 FIGURE 443  Bar chart showing the 
23 deaths by procedure. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Keyes GR, Singer R, Iverson RE, et al: 
Mortality in outpatient surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 
2008;122:245.) 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Abdominoplasty
Facelift and related procedures
Liposuction
Breast augmentation or revision
Breast reduction
Nasal surgery
2001 – 2006
0
 FIGURE 444  Bar chart showing the 
cause of death. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Keyes GR, Singer R, Iverson RE, et al: Mortality in 
outpatient surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 2008;122:245.) 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2001 – 2006
Pulmonary embolism
Postoperative medication overdose
Myocardial infarction
Anesthetic death
Cardiac arrhythmia
Postoperative asthma attack
Postoperative sleep apnea
Unrelated respiratory failure
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
929 
the anesthesia provider when diffi  culty arises. As 
noted in the ASA guidelines, the expectations for 
out of the operating room anesthesia are the same as 
in any practice location ( Table 44–8 ). 
 Basic principles for nonoperating room anes-
thesia can be broadly classifi ed into three cat-
egories: patient factors, environmental issues, and 
procedure-related aspects. Patient factors include 
comorbidity, airway assessment, fasting status, and 
monitoring. Environmental issues include anesthe-
sia equipment, emergency equipment, and magnetic 
and radiation hazards. Procedure-related aspects 
include duration, level of discomfort, patient posi-
tion, and surgical support. 
 Th e ASA Closed Claims Database has dem-
onstrated that claims related to out of the operat-
ing room anesthesia care have a greater severity of 
injury than closed claims related to operating room 
anesthesia care. Monitored anesthesia care was the 
primary technique in more than half of the claims 
reviewed. Many of these closed claims arose from 
injuries related to inadequate oxygenation/ventila-
tion during procedures in the gastrointestinal suite. 
Suggested requirements for the safe delivery of out 
of the operating room anesthesia are presented in 
 Tables 44–9 ,  44–10 ,  44–11 , and  44–12 . 
 TABLE 448 American Society of 
Anesthesiologists guidelines for nonoperating 
room anesthetizing locations. 
Reliable O 2 source 
with backup
Sufficient space for anesthesia 
personnel, equipment
Suction apparatus
Emergency cart, defibrillator, 
drugs, etc.
Waste gas scavenging
Reliable means for two-way 
communication
Adequate monitoring 
equipment
Applicable facility, safety 
codes met
Safe electrical outlets
Appropriate post-anesthesia 
management
Adequate illumination, 
battery backup
Data from American Society of Anesthesiologists guidelines for 
nonoperating room anesthetizing locations (2008). Committee of 
Origin: Standards and Practice Parameters (approved by the ASA House 
of Delegates on October 15, 2003 and amended on October 22, 2008.
 TABLE 449 Speciﬁ c conditions that warrant 
special care when providing anesthesia or 
sedation outside the operating room. 
Patient unable to cooperate, e.g. severe intellectual 
disability
Severe gastroesophageal reflux
Medical conditions predisposing patients to reflux, e.g. 
gastroparesis secondary to diabetes mellitus
Orthopnea
Severe increased intracranial pressure
Decreased level of consciousness/depression of protective 
airway reflexes
Known difficult intubation especially when procedure is 
outside the operating room
Dental, oral, craniofacial, neck or thoracic abnormalities 
that could compromise the airway
Presence of respiratory tract infection or unexplained fever
Obstructive sleep apnea
Morbid obesity
Procedures limiting access to the airway
Lengthy, complex or painful procedures
Uncomfortable position
Prone position
Acute trauma
Extremes of age
Reproduced, with permission, from Robbertze R, Posner KL, Domino 
KB: Closed claims review of anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:436.
 TABLE 4410 Personnel requirements for 
safe sedation and anesthesia outside the 
operating room. 
 Anesthesia staff 
 Trained in the clinical assessment of preanesthesia 
patients 
 Trained and experienced in airway management and 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
 Trained in the use of anesthetic and resuscitation drugs 
and equipment, and must ensure that the equipment 
is present and functional prior to induction 
 Dedicated to the continuous monitoring of the patient’s 
physiologic parameters 
 Continuously present and vigilant 
 Nonanesthesia staff 
 Appropriately trained to help deal with a 
cardiopulmonary emergency 
 Assistant for the anesthesiologist—this person must be 
familiar with anesthetic procedures and equipment 
 Assistant to help with positioning 
 Staff trained in postprocedure observation and 
resuscitation 
Reproduced, with permission, from Robbertze R, Posner KL, Domino 
KB: Closed claims review of anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:436.
930 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
 Increasingly, nonanesthesia providers in the 
gastrointestinal lab and the emergency department 
provide sedation with a variety of agents, including 
propofol and ketamine. In fact, some reports indi-
cate that nonanesthesia providers provide admin-
ister sedation and analgesia for almost 40% of the 
procedures performed in the United States. Th e 
ASA guidelines and the Joint Commission have 
described the continuum of depth of sedation, rang-
ing from minimal sedation to general anesthesia 
( Table 44–13 ). Recently, the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services has mandated that all sedation 
in a hospital be under the direction of a physician—
generally, the anesthesia service chief. Consequently, 
anesthesiologists must not only from time to time 
 TABLE 4412 Equipment/monitoring 
requirements for nonoperating-room 
anesthesia. 
 Appropriate (for deep sedation, general anesthesia and a 
cardiorespiratory emergency) 
 Immediately available 
 Regularly serviced (service date indicated on the equipment) 
 Same standard as in the operating room (minimum pulse 
oximetry, end-tidal capnography, blood pressure, 
electrocardiogram, and temperature) 
 Alarms activated (with appropriate settings) and sufficiently 
audible 
 Airway gas with the recognized safety devices (e.g. indexed 
gas connection system, reserve supply of oxygen, oxygen 
analyzer, oxygen supply failure alarm, multiple gas 
analyzer, a volatile anesthetic agent monitor, a breathing 
system disconnection alarm and a scavenging system) 
 Anesthesia work cart stocked to operating-room standard 
(including appropriate anesthetic and resuscitation drugs, 
airway management equipment, a self-inflating hand 
resuscitator bag and a range of intravenous equipment) 
 Suction 
 Ready access to a defibrillator and a fully stocked 
emergency cart 
Reproduced, with permission, from Robbertze R, Posner KL, Domino 
KB: Closed claims review of anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:436.
 TABLE 4413 Continuum of depth of sedation/analgesia/anesthesia. 
Level
Type
Responsiveness
Airway
Spontaneous 
Ventilation
Cardiovascular 
Function
1
Minimal
Normal to verbal stimulation
Unaffected
Unaffected
Unaffected
2
Moderate
Purposeful response to 
verbal or tactile stimulation
No intervention 
required
Adequate
Usually 
maintained
3
Deep
Purposeful after repeated 
or painful stimulus
Intervention may be 
required
May be inadequate
Usually 
maintained
4
General 
Anesthesia
Unarousable to 
painful stimulus
Intervention often 
required
Often inadequate
May be impaired
Data from American Society of Anesthesiologists.
 TABLE 4411 Location/space requirements 
for nonoperating room anesthesia. 
 Adequate size with good access to the patient 
Uncluttered floor space 
 An operating table, trolley or chair which can be readily 
tilted into Trendelenburg position 
 Adequate lighting including emergency lighting
Sufficient electrical outlets including clearly marked 
electrical outlets connected to an emergency back-up 
power source 
 Suitable clinical area for recovery of the patient which must 
include oxygen, suction, resuscitation drugs and 
equipment 
 Emergency back-up call system to summon assistance  from 
the main operating room 
Reproduced, with permission, from Robbertze R, Posner KL, Domino 
KB: Closed claims review of anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:436.
provide anesthesia in a nonoperating room setting, 
but must also develop policies and quality assurance 
review mechanisms for nonanesthesia providers 
to safely provide sedation. Such policies should be 
focused on assuring that the “sedationist” has the 
necessary skills to provide for patient rescue, should 
mild or moderate sedation become deep sedation or 
general anesthesia. 
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
931 
disposition postprocedure (whether discharge or 
admission), needs appropriate coordination by the 
anesthesiologist for postanesthesia care and/or safe 
transport from the remote unit. 
 Patients presenting to the gastrointestinal 
endoscopy suite include healthy individuals for rou-
tine diagnostic screenings, as well as patients with 
fulminant cholangitis and sepsis or coexisting dif-
fi cult airways. As always, the patient’s condition, 
as well as the specifi c diagnostic/ therapeutic pro-
cedure, determines both the anesthetic techniques 
(propofol deep sedation or general anesthesia vs. 
general anesthesia with LMA or endotracheal tube) 
and the monitoring required. 
 General anesthesia is usually required in 
patients undergoing endoscopic procedures for air-
way and pulmonary pathology; an added complex-
ity may include the presence of a shared airway, and, 
in many patients, marginal pulmonary status. 
 Patients undergoing cardiac catheterization 
are routinely sedated by cardiologists without 
 Risks associated with sedation/analgesia are 
highlighted in  Table 44–14 . Sedation providers 
should know how to reverse benzodiazepines and 
opioids and provide bag/mask airway support and 
to be facile in the use of airway adjuvants. A mecha-
nism to ensure the timely arrival of anesthesia per-
sonnel capable of airway rescue must likewise be 
incorporated into such policies. 
 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
IN OUT OF THE OPERATING 
ROOM LOCATIONS 
 Anesthesia services are requested at various loca-
tions throughout the hospital facility; some of these 
are delineated in  Table 44–15 . As noted through-
out this chapter, routine anesthetic standards apply 
wherever the patient is anesthetized. Out of the 
operating room patients oft en present with a wide 
range of illnesses, unlike the elective patients gen-
erally found in an ambulatory setting. Furthermore, 
 TABLE 4414 Complications associated with 
sedation and analgesia. 
 Airway 
 Airway obstruction 
 Aspiration 
 Regurgitation 
 Dental/soft tissue injury 
 Respiratory 
 Respiratory depression 
 Hypoxemia 
 Hypercarbia 
 Apnea 
 Cardiovascular 
 Hypotension 
 Cardiac arrhythmias 
 Neurologic 
 Deeper level of sedation 
 Unresponsiveness 
 Other 
 Undesirable patient movement 
 Drug interactions 
 Adverse reactions 
 Unanticipated admission 
Data from American Society of Anesthesiologists.
 TABLE 4415 Common locations 
for nonoperating room anesthesia. 
•  Radiology 
■  Neurointerventional Radiology 
■  Vascular Radiology 
■  MRI/CT 
■  PET Scan 
•  Endoscopy Suite 
■  Gastrointestinal Suite 
■  Bronchoscopy 
•  Intensive Care Unit 
■  Tracheostomy, Percutaneous gastrostomy 
■  Intracranial and other catheter placement 
■  Abdominal/pelvic explorations 
•  Invasive Cardiology Suite 
■  Cardiac Catheterization Lab 
■  Cardioversion 
■  Electrophysiology Suite 
•  Radiation Therapy 
•  Emergency Medicine Suite 
•  Psychiatry 
■  Electroconvulsive Therapy suite 
•  Urology - Lithotripsy 
•  Dental Surgery 
Data from American Society of Anesthesiologists.
932 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
catastrophes (eg, oxygen tanks fl ying into the scan-
ner). Second, all anesthetic equipment must be 
compatible with the magnet in use. Th ird, patients 
must be free of implants that could interact with the 
magnet, such as pacemakers, vascular clips, ICDs, 
and infusion pumps. As with all out of the operat-
ing room anesthesia, the exact choice of technique 
is dependent upon the patient’s comorbidities. Both 
deep sedation and general anesthesia approaches 
with intubation or supraglottic airways can be used, 
depending on practitioner preference and patient 
requirements. 
 Patients usually require general anesthesia and 
tight blood pressure control to facilitate coiling and 
embolization of cerebral aneurysms or arteriove-
nous malformations. Patients taken to the radiology 
suite for relief of portal hypertension via creation 
of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt 
(TIPS) are frequently hypovolemic, despite profound 
ascites, and at risk of esophageal variceal bleeding 
and aspiration. General anesthesia with intubation 
is preferred for management of the TIPS procedure. 
 Anesthesia for electroconvulsive therapy is 
oft en provided in a separate suite in the Psychiatry 
Unit or a monitored area in the hospital (eg, PACU). 
Patient comorbidity, drug interactions with various 
psychotropic medications, multiple anesthetic pro-
cedures, and eff ects of anesthetic agents on the qual-
ity of electroconvulsive therapy also need to be taken 
into account. 
 Anesthesia staff  are at times called to provide 
anesthesia in the intensive care unit (ICU) for bed-
side tracheostomy or emergent chest and abdominal 
exploration in patients considered too critically ill 
to tolerate transport to the operating room. In most 
of these cases, the anesthesia staff  generally employ 
ICU ventilator and monitors. Intravenous agents are 
typically used along with muscle relaxants. When 
performing anesthesia for bedside tracheostomy, it 
is important that the endotracheal tube not be with-
drawn from the trachea until end tidal CO 2 is mea-
sured from the newly placed tracheostomy tube. 
 Pediatric patients deserve special mention; 
the ( Table 44–16 ). Anesthesia considerations for 
nonoperating room anesthesia are summarized in 
 Table 44–17 . 
involvement of an anesthesiologist. Occasionally, a 
patient with signifi cant comorbidities, (eg, morbid 
obesity) requires the presence of a qualifi ed anes-
thesia provider. General anesthesia is oft en required 
for placement of aortic stents, which are increasingly 
being performed by cardiologists in the cardiac cath-
eterization laboratory. Anesthesia staff  should be 
prepared with arterial pressure monitoring and the 
necessary vascular access to facilitate resuscitation, 
should emergent open aneurysm repair be required. 
 Patients requiring electrophysiology procedures 
for catheter-mediated arrhythmia ablation oft en need 
general anesthesia. Such patients frequently have 
both systolic and diastolic heart failure, leading to 
potential hemodynamic diffi  culties perioperatively. 
Sudden hypotension can herald the development of 
pericardial tamponade secondary to catheter perfo-
ration of the heart. Other patients require sedation 
for the placement of ICDs. Once placed, the device 
will be tested by inducing ventricular fi brillation. 
During testing, deeper levels of sedation are required, 
as the defi brillation shock can be frightening and 
very uncomfortable. Likewise, anesthesia staff  are 
called upon to provide anesthesia for cardioversion 
of patients in atrial fi brillation. Th ese patients usually 
have associated cardiac diseases and require brief 
intravenous anesthetics to facilitate cardioversion. 
Oft entimes, a transesophageal echocardiogram must 
be performed prior to cardioversion to rule out clot 
in the left  atrial appendage. In such cases, anesthesia 
staff  may also provide sedation for this procedure. 
Determination as to whether a patient needs seda-
tion or general anesthesia with or without intubation 
is dependent upon routine patient assessment. 
 Children and some adults (ie, those that are 
claustrophobic, developmentally disabled, or have 
conditions that prevent them to be still or to lie 
fl at) require anesthesia or sedation for MRI and 
computed tomography (CT). Additionally, painful 
CT-guided biopsies may require anesthesia man-
agement. Anesthetic technique is dependent upon 
patient comorbidities. 
 MRI creates numerous problems for anesthe-
sia staff . First, all ferromagnetic materials must be 
excluded from the area of the magnet. Most institu-
tions have policies and training protocols to prevent 
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
933 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Acute Hypoxia after TIPS Procedure 
in the Radiology Suite 
 A 58-year-old Caucasian female with decom-
pensated cryptogenic cirrhosis and refractory 
ascites, currently on the liver transplant list, is 
scheduled for an urgent TIPS procedure. 
 What does a TIPS procedure entail? What are its 
indications and contraindications? 
 TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt) involves the passage of a catheter, usu-
ally inserted through the internal jugular vein 
and directed into the liver, which creates a low- 
resistance conduit between a portal vein and a 
hepatic vein by deployment of an intrahepatic 
expandable stent. Hemodynamically, this allows 
immediate decompression of portal hypertension 
by partial or complete diversion of portal ﬂ ow from 
hepatic sinusoids into the inferior vena cava and 
the systemic circulation. 
 Indications for the TIPS procedure include: 
variceal bleeding not controlled by endoscopic 
or medical therapy, intractable ascites, hepatic 
hydrothorax, Budd–Chiari syndrome, hepatore-
nal syndrome and hepatopulmonary syndrome, 
and bridge to liver transplantation. Some con-
traindications of TIPS are: primary prevention 
of variceal hemorrhage, congestive heart fail-
ure, severe pulmonary hypertension and tri-
cuspid regurgitation, severe hepatic failure, 
hepatocellular carcinoma, active intrahepatic or 
systemic infection, and severe coagulopathy or 
thrombocytopenia. 
 What are the anesthetic strategies for TIPS? 
What are some preoperative and intraoperative 
concerns in these patients? 
 TIPS can be performed under moderate 
sedation, monitored anesthesia care, or general 
anesthesia. Given the usual need for long immobi-
lization, potential risk of aspiration, and signiﬁ cant 
comorbidity, general anesthesia is often the rec-
ommended anesthetic plan.  
 TABLE 4416 Goals of sedation in pediatric 
patients for diagnostic and therapeutic 
procedures. 
Guard the patient’s safety and welfare
Minimize physical discomfort and pain
Control anxiety, minimize psychological trauma, 
and maximize potential for amnesia
Control behavior and/or movement to allow safe 
completion of procedure
Return patient to a state in which safe discharge from 
medical supervision is possible
Data from American Society of  Anesthesiologists.
 TABLE 4417 Basic considerations for 
nonoperating room anesthesia. 
 Patient 
•  ASA status, co-morbidity, emergent/elective 
•  Airway assessment 
•  Allergies – contrast 
•  Anesthesia plan – sedation/anesthesia 
•  Monitoring – 
■  Basic/Standard: oxygenation, ventilation, circulation, 
temperature 
■  Advanced: invasive hemodynamic, TEE, BIS 
 Environment 
•  Anesthesia equipment 
•  Anesthesia monitors 
•  Suction 
•  Resuscitation equipment 
•  Personnel 
•  Technical equipment 
•  Radiation hazard 
•  Magnetic fields 
•  Ambient temperature 
•  Warming blanket 
•  Portable transport monitors 
•  Oxygen cylinders 
 Procedure 
•  Diagnostic or therapeutic 
•  Duration 
•  Level of discomfort/pain 
•  Patient position 
•  Special requirements, e.g. monitoring 
•  Potential complications 
•  Surgical support 
Data from American Society of Anesthesiologists.
934 
SECTION III Anesthetic Management
approximately 32% to 45%. Complications can be 
broadly categorized as being associated with the 
anesthesia, patient comorbidity, and procedure. 
Patient- and anesthesia-related factors are simi-
lar to the ones described in the previous section. 
With regard to procedure-related factors, special 
note should be made of cardiopulmonary conse-
quences resulting from a sudden increase in pul-
monary artery pressures and systemic pressures, 
leading to pulmonary congestion. 
GUIDELINES
 Joshi G, Chung F, Vann M, et al: Society for Ambulatory 
Anesthesia consensus statement on perioperative 
blood glucose management in diabetic patients 
undergoing ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 
2010;111:1378. 
 Lipp A, Hernon J: Day surgery guidelines. Surgery 
2008;26:374. 
 Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task 
Force on Perioperative Management of Patients with 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Practice guidelines for the 
perioperative management of patients with obstructive 
sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2006;104:1081. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Chung S, Yuan H, Chung F: A systemic review of 
obstructive sleep apnea and its implications for 
anesthesiologists. Anesth Analg 2008;107:1543. 
 Desai M: Offi  ce based anesthesia: new frontiers, better 
outcomes, and emphasis on safety. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2008;21:699. 
 Elvir-Lazo O, White P: Th e role of multimodal analgesia 
in pain management aft er ambulatory surgery. Curr 
Opin Anesthesiol 2010;23:697. 
 Evron S, Tiberiu E: Organizational prerequisites for 
anesthesia outside of the operating room. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;22:514. 
 Joshi G: Perioperative management of outpatients with 
implantable cardioverter defi brillators. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;22:701. 
 Keyes G, Singer R, Iverson R, et al: Mortality in 
outpatient surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 2008;122:245. 
 Kurrek M, Twersky R: Offi  ce based anesthesia. Can J 
Anesth 2010;57:256. 
 Preoperative considerations include: risk of 
aspiration, gastrointestinal bleeding, decreased 
functional residual capacity from ascites, pleural 
eﬀ usions, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, and 
hepatic encephalopathy. Special intraoperative 
considerations should include careful hemody-
namic monitoring (usually via arterial catheter), 
frequent performance of blood gases for electro-
lyte abnormalities and coagulation parameters, 
and testing to determine blood glucose and urine 
output levels. Altered pharmacokinetics of anes-
thetic agents should also be kept in mind. 
 Following informed consent and plan for 
general anesthesia, the patient is induced with 
etomidate, fentanyl, and succinylcholine, using 
rapid sequence induction; atraumatic intubation is 
accomplished uneventfully. Prior to placement of 
the TIPS, the radiologist evacuates approximately 
8 L of ascitic ﬂ uid. 
 What are your concerns about this paracentesis? 
How would you balance these hemodynamic 
ﬂ uid shifts? 
 Large volume paracentesis is believed to be a 
relatively safe and eﬀ ective procedure; however, 
it can lead to paracentesis-induced circulatory 
dysfunction (PICD), a frequently occurring silent 
complication. PICD is characterized by a marked 
activation of the renin–angiotensin axis, as well as 
accentuation of an already established arteriolar 
vasodilatation that may be combated with salt-free 
albumin as the plasma expander of choice, espe-
cially if at least 8 L are evacuated. 
 The TIPS procedure lasts about 2 hours; the 
patient is reversed appropriately with neostigmine 
and glycopyrrolate. She emerges smoothly and is 
transferred to the PACU on oxygen via a face mask 
at 6 L/min. Within 15 min of admission to the PACU, 
the patient complains of mild chest pain and short-
ness of breath. Bilateral wheezing is noted, fol-
lowed by crackles at the bases. 
 What are some complications of TIPS 
procedure? How would you attempt to 
manage this patient? 
 Complications following TIPS are not insigniﬁ -
cant; 3-month mortality has been reported to be 
 
CHAPTER 44 Ambulatory, Nonoperating Room, & Oﬃ  ce-Based Anesthesia 
935 
 Schug S, Chong C: Pain management aft er ambulatory 
surgery. Curr Opin Anesthesiol 2009;22:738. 
 Smith I, Jackson I: Beta blockers, calcium channel 
blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors 
and angiotensin receptor blockers: should they be 
stopped or not before ambulatory anaesthesia? Curr 
Opin Anesthesiol 2010;23:687. 
 Souter KJ: Anesthesia provided at alternate sites. In: 
Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting RK, Cahalan MK, 
Stock MC (eds).  Clinical Anesthesia . Philadelphia: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2009; p 861. 
 Squizzato A, Venco A: Th romboprophylaxis in day 
surgery. Int J Surg 2008;8:S29. 
 White P, Tang J, Wender R, et al: Th e eff ects of oral 
ibuprofen and celecoxib in preventing pain, 
improving recovery outcomes and patient 
satisfaction aft er ambulatory surgery. Anesth 
Analg 2011;112:323. 
 Lalwani K: Demographics and trends in nonoperating 
room anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:430. 
 Marshall S, Chung F: Discharge criteria and complications 
aft er ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 1999;88:508. 
 Melloni C: Anesthesia and sedation outside the operating 
room: how to prevent risk and maintain good quality. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2007;20:513. 
 Metzner J, Domino K: Risks of anesthesia or sedation 
outside the operating room: the role of the anesthesia 
care provider. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2010;23:523. 
 Metzner J, Posner KL, Domino KB: Th e risk and safety of 
anesthesia at remote locations: the US closed claims 
analysis. Curr Opin Anesthesiol 2009;22:502. 
 Owen AR, Stanley AJ, Vijayananthan A, Moss JG: Th e 
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS). 
Clin Radiol 2009;64:664. 
 Robbertze R, Posner K, Domino K: Closed claims review 
of anesthesia for procedures outside of the operating 
room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:436. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 937
 Neuraxial anesthesia greatly expands 
the anesthesiologists’ armamentarium, 
providing alternatives to general anesthesia 
when appropriate. Neuraxial anesthesia may 
also be used simultaneously with general 
anesthesia or afterward for postoperative 
analgesia.  Neuraxial blocks can be 
performed as a single injection or with a 
catheter to allow intermittent boluses or 
continuous infusions . 
 Performing a lumbar (subarachnoid) spinal 
puncture below L1 in an adult (L3 in a child) 
usually avoids potential needle trauma to 
the cord . 
 The mechanisms of spinal and epidural 
anesthesia remain speculative. The principal 
site of action for neuraxial blockade is 
believed to be the nerve root . 
 Diﬀ erential blockade typically results 
in sympathetic blockade (judged by 
temperature sensitivity) that may be two 
segments or more cephalad than the 
sensory block (pain, light touch), which, 
in turn, is usually several segments more 
cephalad than the motor blockade . 
 Interruption of eﬀ erent autonomic 
transmission at the spinal nerve roots 
1
2
3
4
5
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
during neuraxial blocks produces 
sympathetic blockade . 
 Neuraxial blocks typically produce variable 
decreases in blood pressure that may be 
accompanied by a decrease in heart rate . 
 Deleterious cardiovascular eﬀ ects should 
be anticipated and steps undertaken to 
minimize the degree of hypotension. 
However, volume loading with 10–20 mL/kg 
of intravenous ﬂ uid in a healthy patient 
before initiation of the block has been shown 
repeatedly to fail to prevent hypotension 
(in the absence of preexisting hypovolemia) . 
 Excessive or symptomatic bradycardia 
should be treated with atropine, and 
hypotension should be treated with 
vasopressors . 
 Major contraindications to neuraxial 
anesthesia include patient refusal, bleeding 
diathesis, severe hypovolemia, elevated 
intracranial pressure, and infection at the 
site of injection. 
 For epidural anesthesia, a sudden loss of 
resistance (to injection of air or saline) is 
encountered as the needle passes through 
6
7
8
9
10
 Spinal, Epidural, 
& Caudal Blocks 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
45
S E C T I O N I V
Regional Anesthesia 
& Pain Management
—Continued next page
938 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
can be performed as a single injection or with a 
catheter to allow intermittent boluses or continu-
ous infusions. 
 Neuraxial techniques have proved to be safe 
when well managed; however, there is still a risk of 
complications. Adverse reactions and complications 
range from self-limited back soreness to debilitat-
ing permanent neurological defi cits and even death. 
Th e practitioner must therefore have a good under-
standing of the anatomy involved, be thoroughly 
familiar with the pharmacology and toxic dosages of 
the agents employed, diligently employ sterile tech-
niques, and anticipate and quickly treat physiologi-
cal derangements. 
 THE ROLE OF NEURAXIAL 
ANESTHESIA IN ANESTHETIC 
PRACTICE 
 Almost all operations at or below the neck have been 
performed under neuraxial anesthesia. Indeed, car-
diac and thoracic surgeries have been performed in 
this manner. However, because intrathoracic, upper 
abdominal, and laparoscopic operations can signifi -
cantly impair ventilation, general anesthesia with 
the ligamentum ﬂ avum and enters the 
epidural space. For spinal anesthesia, 
the needle is advanced through the 
epidural space and penetrates the dura–
subarachnoid membranes, as signaled by 
freely ﬂ owing cerebrospinal ﬂ uid . 
 Continuous epidural anesthesia is a 
neuraxial technique oﬀ ering a range of 
applications wider than the typical all-or-
nothing, single dose spinal anesthetic. An 
epidural block can be performed at the 
lumbar, thoracic, or cervical level . 
 Epidural techniques are widely used for 
surgical anesthesia, obstetric analgesia, 
11
12
postoperative pain control, and chronic pain 
management . 
 Epidural anesthesia is slower in onset 
(10–20 min) and may not be as dense as 
spinal anesthesia . 
 The quantity (volume and concentration) 
of local anesthetic needed for epidural 
anesthesia is larger than that needed for 
spinal anesthesia. Toxic side eﬀ ects are 
likely if a “full epidural dose” is injected 
intrathecally or intravascularly . 
 Caudal epidural anesthesia is a common 
regional technique in pediatric patients . 
13
14
15
 Spinal, caudal, and epidural blocks were fi rst used 
for surgical procedures at the turn of the twentieth 
century. Th ese central blocks were widely used 
worldwide until reports of permanent neurological 
injury appeared, most prominently in the United 
Kingdom. However, a large-scale epidemiological 
study conducted in the 1950s indicated that com-
plications were rare when these blocks were per-
formed skillfully, with attention to asepsis, and 
when newer, safer local anesthetics were used. 
Today, neuraxial blocks are widely used for labor 
analgesia, caesarian section, orthopedic proce-
dures, perioperative analgesia, and chronic pain 
management. However, they are still associated 
with various complications, and much literature 
has examined the incidence of complications fol-
lowing neuraxial blocks associated with diff erent 
disease states. Additionally, various organizations 
continue to issue “guidelines” related to the man-
agement of regional anesthesia. 
 Neuraxial anesthesia greatly expands the 
anesthesiologists’ 
armamentarium, 
pro-
viding alternatives to general anesthesia when 
appropriate. Neuraxial anesthesia may be used 
simultaneously with general anesthesia or aft er-
ward for postoperative analgesia. Neuraxial blocks 
1
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
939 
the course of the procedure, either for comfort or 
to facilitate cooperation. Is spinal anesthesia always 
safer in a patient with severe coronary artery dis-
ease or a decreased ejection fraction? Ideally, an 
anesthetic technique in such a patient should not 
produce either hypotension (which decreases myo-
cardial perfusion pressure) or hypertension and 
tachycardia (which increase myocardial oxygen 
consumption), and, also, should not require large 
fl uid infusions (which can precipitate congestive 
heart failure). Spinal anesthesia can produce both 
hypotension and bradycardia, which may be rapid 
in onset and are sometimes profound. Moreover, 
treatment that includes rapid administration of 
intravenous fl uid can cause fl uid overload (when 
the vasodilatation wears off ). Th e slower onset of 
hemodynamic responses to epidural anesthesia 
may give the anesthesiologist more time to correct 
these changes. General anesthesia, on the other 
hand, also poses potential problems for patients 
with cardiac compromise. Most general anesthetics 
are cardiac depressants, and many cause vasodila-
tation. Deep anesthesia can readily cause hypoten-
sion, whereas light anesthesia relative to the level 
of stimulation causes hypertension and tachycar-
dia. Insertion of a laryngeal mask airway causes 
less of a stress response than does endotracheal 
intubation, but deeper levels of general anesthesia 
are still required to blunt the response to surgical 
stimulation. 
 Th us, arguments can be made for and against 
neuraxial and regional anesthesia in this setting. 
Perhaps then it is not the technique, per se, that is 
critical as much as the careful execution with appro-
priate monitoring and management of whatever 
anesthetic technique is planned. 
 The Obstetric Patient 
 Neuraxial anesthesia has had a great impact in 
obstetrics. Currently, epidural anesthesia is widely 
used for analgesia in women in labor and during 
vaginal delivery. Cesarean section is most com-
monly performed under epidural or spinal anes-
thesia. Both blocks allow a mother to remain awake 
and experience the birth of her child. Large popula-
tion studies in Great Britain and the United States 
have shown that regional anesthesia for cesarean 
endotracheal intubation is usually necessary. So why 
perform a regional anesthetic for these cases, or for 
any other? 
 Some studies suggest that postoperative 
 morbidity—and 
possibly 
mortality—may 
be 
reduced when neuraxial blockade is used either 
alone or in combination with general anesthesia. 
Neuraxial blocks may reduce the incidence of venous 
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, cardiac com-
plications in high-risk patients, bleeding and trans-
fusion requirements, vascular graft  occlusion, and 
pneumonia and respiratory depression following 
upper abdominal or thoracic surgery in patients 
with chronic lung disease. Neuraxial blocks may 
also allow earlier return of gastrointestinal function 
following surgery. Proposed mechanisms (in addi-
tion to avoidance of larger doses of anesthetics and 
opioids) include amelioration of the hypercoagu-
lable state associated with surgery, sympathectomy-
mediated increases in tissue blood fl ow, improved 
oxygenation from decreased splinting, enhanced 
peristalsis, and suppression of the neuroendocrine 
stress response to surgery. In patients with coronary 
artery disease, a decreased stress response may result 
in less perioperative ischemia and reduced morbid-
ity and mortality. Reduction of parenteral opioid 
requirements may decrease the incidence of atelecta-
sis, hypoventilation, and aspiration pneumonia and 
reduce the duration of ileus. Postoperative epidural 
analgesia may also signifi cantly reduce both the time 
until extubation and the need for mechanical ven-
tilation aft er major abdominal or thoracic surgery. 
Regional anesthesia may also preserve immunity 
perioperatively, reducing the risk of cancer spread 
according to some studies. 
 The Sick Elderly Patient 
 Anesthesiologists are all too familiar with situa-
tions in which a consultant “clears” a sick elderly 
patient with signifi cant cardiac disease for surgery 
“under spinal anesthesia.” But, is a spinal anes-
thetic really safer than general anesthesia in such 
a patient? A spinal anesthetic with no intravenous 
sedation may reduce the likelihood of postopera-
tive delirium or cognitive dysfunction, which is 
sometimes seen in the elderly. Unfortunately, some, 
if not most, patients require some sedation during 
940 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Anatomy 
 THE VERTEBRAL COLUMN 
 Th e spine is composed of the vertebral bones and 
intervertebral disks ( Figure 45–1 ). Th ere are 7 cer-
vical (C), 12 thoracic (T), and 5 lumbar (L) vertebrae 
( Figure 45–2 ). Th e sacrum is a fusion of 5 sacral (S) 
section is associated with less maternal morbidity 
and  mortality than is general anesthesia. Th is may 
be largely due to a reduction in the incidence of 
 pulmonary aspiration and failed intubation when 
neuraxial anesthesia is employed. Fortunately, the 
increased availability of video laryngoscopes may 
also reduce the incidence of adverse outcomes 
related to airway diffi  culties associated with general 
anesthesia for cesarean section. 
A
B
C
Superior view
Lateral view
Dura
Spinal cord
Epidural space
Ligamentum flavum
Interspinous ligament
Arachnoid membrane
Intervertebral foramen
Intervertebral
foramen
Spinal canal
Superior articular
process
Superior articular
process
Pedicle
Pedicle
Body
Body
Transverse
process
Transverse
process
Spinous process
Intervertebral
disk
Anterior
longitudinal
ligament
Vertebrae
Lamina
Spinous
process
Inferior articular
process
Supraspinous ligament
Posterior longitudinal
ligament
Subarachnoid septum
within subarachnoid space
 FIGURE 451  A: Sagittal section through lumbar vertebrae.  B, C: Common features of vertebrae. 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
941 
vertebrae, and there are small rudimentary coccy-
geal vertebrae. Th e spine as a whole provides struc-
tural support for the body and protection for the 
spinal cord and nerves and allows a degree of mobil-
ity in several spatial planes. At each vertebral level, 
paired spinal nerves exit the central nervous system 
( Figure 45–2 ). 
 Vertebrae diff er in shape and size at the various 
levels. Th e fi rst cervical vertebra, the atlas, lacks a 
body and has unique articulations with the base of 
the skull and the second vertebra. Th e second verte-
bra, called the axis, consequently has atypical artic-
ulating surfaces. All 12 thoracic vertebrae articulate 
with their corresponding rib. Lumbar vertebrae have 
a large anterior cylindrical vertebral body. A hollow 
ring is defi ned anteriorly by the vertebral body, lat-
erally by the pedicles and transverse processes, and 
posteriorly by the lamina and spinous processes 
( Figure 45–1 B and C). Th e laminae extend between 
the transverse processes and the spinous processes, 
and the pedicle extends between the vertebral body 
and the transverse processes. When stacked verti-
cally, the hollow rings become the spinal canal in 
which the spinal cord and its coverings sit. Th e indi-
vidual vertebral bodies are connected by the inter-
vertebral disks. Th ere are four small synovial joints 
at each vertebra, two articulating with the vertebra 
above it and two with the vertebra below. Th ese are 
the facet joints, which are adjacent to the transverse 
processes ( Figure 45–1 C). Th e pedicles are notched 
superiorly and inferiorly, these notches forming 
the intervertebral foramina from which the spinal 
nerves exit. Sacral vertebrae normally fuse into one 
large bone, the sacrum, but each one retains discrete 
anterior and posterior intervertebral foramina. Th e 
laminae of S5 and all or part of S4 normally do not 
fuse, leaving a caudal opening to the spinal canal, 
the sacral hiatus ( Figure 45–3 ). 
 Th e spinal column normally forms a double 
C, being convex anteriorly in the cervical and lum-
bar regions ( Figure 45–2 ). Ligamentous elements 
provide structural support, and, together with 
supporting muscles, help to maintain the unique 
shape. Ventrally, the vertebral bodies and inter-
vertebral disks are connected and supported by 
the anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments 
( Figure 45–1 A). Dorsally, the ligamentum fl avum, 
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
1
1
2
2
12
11
10
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
3
3
4
4
5
5
Coccygeal
Cauda equina
 FIGURE 452  The vertebral column. (Adapted and 
reproduced, with permission, from Waxman SG:  Correlative 
Neuroanatomy , 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2000.) 
942 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 THE SPINAL CORD 
 Th e spinal canal contains the spinal cord with its 
coverings (the meninges), fatty tissue, and a venous 
plexus ( Figure 45–5 ). Th e meninges are composed 
of three layers: the pia mater, the arachnoid mater, 
interspinous ligament, and supraspinous ligament 
provide additional stability. Using the midline 
approach, a needle passes through these three dor-
sal ligaments and through an oval space between the 
bony lamina and spinous processes of adjacent ver-
tebra ( Figure 45–4 ). 
 FIGURE 453  Posterior and sagittal views 
of the sacrum and coccyx. 
Sacral hiatus
Cauda equina
Dura
Midline
approach
Dura
Epidural space
Epidural space
Ligamentum flavum
Ligamentum flavum
Tuohy needle
Supraspinous ligament
Intraspinous ligament
 FIGURE 454  Lumbar epidural anesthesia; midline approach. 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
943
distance before exiting the intervertebral foramina. 
Th ese lower spinal nerves form the  cauda equina
(“horse’s tail”;  Figure 45–2 ).  Th erefore, per-
forming a lumbar (subarachnoid) puncture 
below L1 in an adult (L3 in a child) usually avoids 
potential needle trauma to the cord; damage to the 
cauda equina is unlikely, as these nerve roots fl oat in 
the dural sac below L1 and tend to be pushed away 
(rather than pierced) by an advancing needle. 
 A dural sheath invests most nerve roots for 
a small distance, even aft er they exit the spinal 
canal ( Figure 45–5 ). Nerve blocks close to the 
2
and the dura mater; all are contiguous with their 
cranial counterparts ( Figure 45–6 ). Th e pia mater 
is closely adherent to the spinal cord, whereas the 
arachnoid mater is usually closely adherent to the 
thicker and denser dura mater. Cerebrospinal fl uid 
(CSF) is contained between the pia and arach-
noid maters in the subarachnoid space. Th e spinal 
subdural space is generally a poorly demarcated, 
potential space that exists between the dura and 
arachnoid membranes. Th e epidural space is a better 
defi ned potential space within the spinal canal that 
is bounded by the dura and the ligamentum fl avum 
(Figures 45–1 and 45–5). 
 Th e spinal cord normally extends from the fora-
men magnum to the level of L1 in adults 
( Figure 45–7 ). In children, the spinal cord ends at 
L3 and moves up with age. Th e anterior and poste-
rior nerve roots at each spinal level join one another 
and exit the intervertebral foramina, forming spinal 
nerves from C1 to S5 ( Figure 45–2 ). At the cervical 
level, the nerves arise above their respective verte-
brae, but starting at T1, exit below their vertebrae. 
As a result, there are eight cervical nerve roots, but 
only seven cervical vertebrae. Th e cervical and upper 
thoracic nerve roots emerge from the spinal cord 
and exit the vertebral foramina nearly at the same 
level ( Figure 45–2 ). But, because the spinal cord 
normally ends at L1, lower nerve roots course some 
Dura mater
Nerve roots
(and meninges)
Sensory
ganglion
Arachoid
Pedicle (cut)
Pia mater and
spinal cord
Dorsal root of
nerve (cut)
Denticulate
ligament
Ventral root
of nerve
Pia
 FIGURE 456  The spinal cord. 
 FIGURE 455  Exit of the spinal nerves. (Adapted 
and reproduced, with permission, from Waxman SG:  Correlative 
Neuroanatomy , 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2000.) 
Spinal nerve
within
epineurium
Spinal cord in
vertebral canal
Subarachnoid
septum
Dura
Roots
DORSAL
VENTRAL
Vertebral body
Dorsal root
ganglion
Subarachnoid
space
Epidural vein
Epidural
space
Pia
944 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
intervertebral foramen therefore carry a risk of 
subdural or subarachnoid injection. Th e dural sac 
and the subarachnoid and subdural spaces usually 
extend to S2 in adults and oft en to S3 in children. 
Because of this fact and the smaller body size, cau-
dal anesthesia carries a greater risk of subarachnoid 
injection in children than in adults. An extension 
of the pia mater, the fi lum terminale, penetrates the 
dura and attaches the terminal end of the spinal cord 
(conus medullaris) to the periosteum of the coccyx 
( Figure 45–7 ). 
 Th e blood supply to the spinal cord and nerve 
roots is derived from a single anterior spinal artery 
and paired posterior spinal arteries ( Figure 45–8 ). 
Th e anterior spinal artery is formed from the verte-
bral artery at the base of the skull and courses down 
along the anterior surface of the cord. Th e anterior 
spinal artery supplies the anterior two-thirds of 
the cord, whereas the two posterior spinal arteries 
supply the posterior one-third. Th e posterior spinal 
Adult cord
Dura-arachnoid
Extradural space
Sacral hiatus
C1
S2
L1
Infant
cord
Filum terminale
Subarachnoid
space
Child
cord
 FIGURE 457  Sagittal view through the lumbar 
vertebrae and sacrum. Note the end of the spinal cord 
rises with development from approximately L3 to L1. 
The dural sac normally ends at S2. 
A
B
Lumbar
radicular
artery
Anterior spinal artery
Anterior sulcal artery
Anterior spinal artery
Vertebral artery
Great ventral
radicular artery
(artery of Adamkiewicz)
Radicular artery
Subclavian artery
Corona
Lateral
column
Posterolateral
spinal artery
Dorsal column
 FIGURE 458  Arterial supply to the spinal cord. 
 A: Anterior view showing principal sources of blood 
supply.  B: Cross-sectional view through the spinal 
cord showing paired posterior spinal arteries and a 
single anterior spinal artery. (Adapted and reproduced, with 
permission, from Waxman SG:  Correlative Neuroanatomy , 24th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2000.) 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
945
blockade interrupts both somatic and visceral pain-
ful stimuli. Th e mechanism of action of local anes-
thetic agents is discussed in Chapter 16. Th e eff ect of 
local anesthetics on nerve fi bers varies according to 
the size and characteristics of the nerve fi ber, 
whether it is myelinated, the length of nerve that is 
bathed by the local anesthetic, and the concentra-
tion of the local anesthetic. Spinal nerve roots con-
tain varying mixtures of these fi ber types. Smaller 
and myelinated fi bers are generally more easily 
blocked than larger and unmyelinated ones. Th e size 
and character of the fi ber types, and the fact that the 
concentration of local anesthetic decreases with 
increasing distance from the level of injection, 
explains the phenomenon of diff erential blockade 
during neuraxial anesthesia.  Diff erential block-
ade typically results in sympathetic blockade 
(judged by temperature sensitivity) that may be two 
segments or more cephalad than the sensory block 
(pain, light touch), which, in turn, is usually several 
segments more cephalad than the motor blockade. 
 AUTONOMIC BLOCKADE 
 Interruption of eff erent autonomic transmis-
sion at the spinal nerve roots during neuraxial 
blocks produces sympathetic blockade. Sympathetic 
outfl ow from the spinal cord may be described as 
thoracolumbar, whereas parasympathetic outfl ow 
is craniosacral. Sympathetic preganglionic nerve 
fi bers (small, myelinated B fi bers) exit the spinal 
cord with the spinal nerves from T1–L2 and may 
course many levels up or down the sympathetic 
chain before synapsing with a postganglionic cell 
in a sympathetic ganglion. In contrast, parasympa-
thetic preganglionic fi bers exit the spinal cord with 
the cranial and sacral nerves. Neuraxial anesthesia 
does not block the vagus nerve (tenth cranial nerve). 
Th e physiological responses of neuraxial blockade 
therefore result from decreased sympathetic tone 
and/or unopposed parasympathetic tone. 
 Cardiovascular Manifestations 
 Neuraxial blocks produce variable decreases 
in blood pressure that may be accompanied 
by a decrease in heart rate. Th ese eff ects are gener-
ally proportional to the dermatomal level and extent 
4
5
6
arteries arise from the posterior inferior cerebellar 
arteries and course down along the dorsal surface of 
the cord medial to the dorsal nerve roots. Th e ante-
rior and posterior spinal arteries receive additional 
blood fl ow from the intercostal arteries in the tho-
rax and the lumbar arteries in the abdomen. One of 
these radicular arteries is typically large, the artery of 
Adamkiewicz, or arteria radicularis magna, arising 
from the aorta (Figures 45–8A). It is typically uni-
lateral and nearly always arises on the left  side, pro-
viding the major blood supply to the anterior, lower 
two-thirds of the spinal cord. Injury to this artery 
can result in the anterior spinal artery syndrome. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Th e mechanisms of spinal and epidural anes-
thesia remain speculative. Th e principal site of 
action for neuraxial blockade is believed to be the 
nerve root. Local anesthetic is injected into CSF 
(spinal anesthesia) or the epidural space (epidural 
and caudal anesthesia) and bathes the nerve root in 
the subarachnoid space or epidural space, respec-
tively. Direct injection of local anesthetic into CSF 
for spinal anesthesia allows a relatively small dose 
and volume of local anesthetic to achieve dense sen-
sory and motor blockade. In contrast, the same local 
anesthetic concentration is achieved within nerve 
roots only with much larger volumes and quanti-
ties of local anesthetic molecules during epidural 
and caudal anesthesia. Moreover, the injection site 
(level) for epidural anesthesia must generally be 
close to the nerve roots that must be anesthetized. 
Blockade of neural transmission (conduction) in 
the posterior nerve root fi bers interrupts somatic 
and visceral sensation, whereas blockade of ante-
rior nerve root fi bers prevents eff erent motor and 
autonomic outfl ow. Local anesthetics may also have 
actions on structures within the spinal cord during 
epidural and spinal anesthesia. 
 SOMATIC BLOCKADE 
 By interrupting the aff erent transmission of painful 
stimuli and abolishing the eff erent impulses respon-
sible for skeletal muscle tone, neuraxial blocks can 
provide excellent operating conditions. Sensory 
3
946 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
ephedrine has direct and indirect β-adrenergic 
eff ects that increase heart rate and contractility and 
indirect eff ects that also produce vasoconstriction. 
Much like ephedrine, small doses of epinephrine 
(2–5 mcg boluses) are particularly useful in treating 
spinal anesthesia induced hypotension. If profound 
hypotension and/or bradycardia persist, vasopres-
sor infusions may be required. 
 Pulmonary Manifestations 
 Alterations in pulmonary physiology are usually 
minimal with neuraxial blocks because the dia-
phragm is innervated by the phrenic nerve, with 
fi bers originating from C3–C5. Even with high tho-
racic levels, tidal volume is unchanged; there is only 
a small decrease in vital capacity, which results from 
a loss of the abdominal muscles’ contribution to 
forced expiration. 
 Patients with severe chronic lung disease may 
rely upon accessory muscles of respiration (inter-
costal and abdominal muscles) to actively inspire 
or exhale. High levels of neural blockade will impair 
these muscles. Similarly, eff ective coughing and 
clearing of secretions require these muscles for expi-
ration. For these reasons, neuraxial blocks should 
be used with caution in patients with limited respi-
ratory reserve. Th ese deleterious eff ects need to be 
weighed against the advantages of avoiding airway 
instrumentation and positive-pressure ventilation. 
For surgical procedures above the umbilicus, a pure 
regional technique may not be the best choice in 
patients with severe lung disease. On the other hand, 
these patients may benefi t from the eff ects of tho-
racic epidural analgesia (with dilute local anesthetics 
and opioids) in the postoperative period, particu-
larly following upper abdominal or thoracic surgery. 
Some evidence suggests that postoperative thoracic 
epidural analgesia in high-risk patients can improve 
pulmonary outcome by decreasing the incidence of 
pneumonia and respiratory failure, improving oxy-
genation, and decreasing the duration of mechanical 
ventilatory support. 
 Gastrointestinal Manifestations 
 Sympathetic outfl ow originates at the T5–L1 level. 
Neuraxial block-induced sympathectomy allows 
of sympathectomy. Vasomotor tone is primarily 
determined by sympathetic fi bers arising from T5–
L1, innervating arterial and venous smooth muscle. 
Blocking these nerves causes vasodilation of the 
venous capacitance vessels and pooling of blood in 
the viscera and lower extremities, thereby decreas-
ing the eff ective circulating blood volume and 
venous return to the heart. Arterial vasodilation 
may also decrease systemic vascular resistance. Th e 
eff ects of arterial vasodilation may be minimized by 
compensatory vasoconstriction above the level of 
the block, particularly when the extent of sensory 
anesthesia is limited to the lower thoracic derma-
tomes. A high sympathetic block not only prevents 
compensatory vasoconstriction, but may also block 
the sympathetic cardiac accelerator fi bers that arise 
at T1–T4. Profound hypotension may result from 
arterial dilation and venous pooling combined with 
bradycardia (and possibly also milder degrees of 
decreased contractility). Th ese eff ects are exagger-
ated if venous pooling is further augmented by a 
head-up position or the weight of a gravid uterus. 
Unopposed vagal tone may explain the sudden car-
diac arrest sometimes seen with spinal anesthesia. 
 Deleterious cardiovascular eff ects should be 
anticipated and steps undertaken to minimize 
the degree of hypotension. However, volume load-
ing with 10–20 mL/kg of intravenous fl uid in a 
healthy patient before initiation of the block has 
been shown repeatedly to fail to prevent hypoten-
sion (in the absence of preexisting hypovolemia). 
Left  uterine displacement in the third trimester of 
pregnancy helps to minimize physical obstruction 
to venous return. Despite these eff orts, hypotension 
may still occur and should be treated promptly. 
Autotransfusion may be accomplished by placing 
the patient in a head-down position. A bolus of 
intravenous fl uid (5–10 mL/kg) may be helpful in 
patients who have adequate cardiac and renal func-
tion to be able to “handle” the fl uid load aft er 
the block wears off .  Excessive or symptomatic 
bradycardia should be treated with atropine, and 
hypotension should be treated with vasopressors. 
Direct α-adrenergic agonists (such as phenyleph-
rine) primarily produce arteriolar constriction and 
may refl exively increase bradycardia, increasing 
systemic vascular resistance. Th e “mixed” agent 
7
8
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
947
 Clinical Considerations 
Common to Spinal 
& Epidural Blocks 
 Indications 
 Neuraxial blocks may be used alone or in conjunction 
with general anesthesia for most procedures below 
the neck. Indeed, in some centers outside of North 
America, minimally invasive coronary artery surgery 
has been performed with thoracic epidural anesthe-
sia alone. As a primary anesthetic, neuraxial blocks 
have proved most useful in lower abdominal, ingui-
nal, urogenital, rectal, and lower extremity surgery. 
Lumbar spinal surgery may also be performed under 
spinal anesthesia. Upper abdominal procedures (eg, 
gastrectomy) have been performed with spinal or 
epidural anesthesia, but because it can be diffi  cult 
to safely achieve a sensory level adequate for patient 
comfort, these techniques are not commonly used. 
 If a neuraxial anesthetic is being considered, 
the risks and benefi ts must be discussed with the 
patient, and informed consent should be obtained. 
Th e patient must be mentally prepared for neuraxial 
anesthesia, and neuraxial anesthesia must be appro-
priate for the type of surgery. Patients should under-
stand that they will have little or no lower extremity 
motor function until the block resolves. Proce-
dures that require maneuvers that might compro-
mise respiratory function (eg, pneumoperitoneum 
or pneumothorax) or are unusually prolonged are 
typically performed with general anesthesia, with or 
without neuraxial blockade. 
 Contraindications 
 Major contraindications to neuraxial anesthe-
sia include patient refusal, bleeding diathesis, 
severe hypovolemia, elevated intracranial pressure 
(particularly with an intracranial mass), and infec-
tion at the site of injection. Other relative contrain-
dications include severe aortic or mitral stenosis and 
severe left  ventricular outfl ow obstruction (hyper-
trophic obstructive cardiomyopathy); however, 
with close monitoring and control of the anesthetic 
level, neuraxial anesthesia can be performed safely 
in patients with valvular heart disease, particularly 
9
vagal tone dominance and results in a small, con-
tracted gut with active peristalsis. Th is can improve 
operative conditions during laparoscopy when used 
as an adjunct to general anesthesia. Postoperative 
epidural analgesia with local anesthetics and mini-
mal systemic opioids hastens the return of gastroin-
testinal function aft er open abdominal procedures. 
 Hepatic blood fl ow will decrease with reduc-
tions in mean arterial pressure from any anesthetic 
technique, including neuraxial anesthesia. 
 Urinary Tract Manifestations 
 Renal blood fl ow is maintained through autoregula-
tion, and there is little eff ect of neuraxial anesthesia 
on renal function. Neuraxial anesthesia at the lum-
bar and sacral levels blocks both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic control of bladder function. Loss of 
autonomic bladder control results in urinary reten-
tion until the block wears off . If no urinary catheter 
is placed perioperatively, it is prudent to use the 
regional anesthetic of shortest duration suffi  cient for 
the surgical procedure and to administer the mini-
mal safe volume of intravenous fl uid. Patients with 
urinary retention should be checked for bladder dis-
tention aft er neuraxial anesthesia. 
 Metabolic & Endocrine 
Manifestations 
 Surgical trauma produces a systemic neuroendo-
crine response via activation of somatic and vis-
ceral aff erent nerve fi bers, in addition to a localized 
infl ammatory response. Th is systemic response 
includes increased concentrations of adrenocortico-
tropic hormone, cortisol, epinephrine, norepineph-
rine, and vasopressin levels, as well as activation of 
the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. Clinical 
manifestations include intraoperative and postop-
erative hypertension, tachycardia, hyperglycemia, 
protein catabolism, suppressed immune responses, 
and altered renal function. Neuraxial blockade can 
partially suppress (during major invasive surgery) 
or totally block (during lower extremity surgery) 
the neuroendocrine stress response. To maximize 
this blunting of the neuroendocrine stress response, 
neuraxial block should precede incision and con-
tinue into the postoperative period. 
948 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
practitioners argue against neuraxial anesthesia in 
such patients. A preoperative neurological exami-
nation should thoroughly document any defi cits. 
In a retrospective study examining the records of 
567 patients with preexisting neuropathies, 2 of the 
patients developed new or worsening neuropathy 
following neuraxial anesthesia. Although this fi nd-
ing indicates a relatively low risk of further injury, 
study investigators suggest that an injured nerve is 
vulnerable to additional injury, increasing the likeli-
hood of poor neurological outcomes. 
 Regional anesthesia requires at least some 
degree of patient cooperation. Th is may be diffi  cult 
or impossible for patients with dementia, psycho-
sis, or emotional instability. Th e decision must be 
individualized. Unsedated young children may not 
be suitable for pure regional techniques; however, 
regional anesthesia is frequently used with general 
anesthesia in children. 
 Neuraxial Blockade in the Setting of 
Anticoagulants & Antiplatelet Agents 
 Whether a block should be performed in the set-
ting of anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents can 
be problematic. Th e American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) has issued 
several guidelines on this subject. Because guidelines 
are frequently revised and updated, practitioners are 
advised to seek the most recent edition. Although 
the incidence of epidural hematoma is reported to be 
quite low (1 in 150,000 epidurals), ASRA is concerned 
that the actual incidence may be somewhat higher. 
Moreover, the use of anticoagulant and antiplatelet 
medications continues to increase, placing an ever 
larger number of patients at potential risk of epidural 
hematomas. Because of the rarity of epidural hemato-
mas, most guidelines are based on expert opinion and 
case series reviews, as clinical trials are not feasible. 
 A. Oral Anticoagulants 
 If neuraxial anesthesia is to be used in patients 
receiving warfarin therapy, a normal prothrombin 
time and international normalized ratio should be 
documented prior to the block. Anesthesia staff 
should always consult with the patient’s primary 
physicians whenever considering the discontinua-
tion of antiplatelet or antithrombotic therapy. 
if extensive dermatomal spread of anesthesia is not 
required (eg, “saddle” block spinal anesthetics). 
 Relative and controversial contraindications 
are also shown in  Table 45–1 . Inspection and pal-
pation of the back can reveal surgical scars, scolio-
sis, skin lesions, and whether the spinous processes 
can be identifi ed. Although preoperative screening 
tests are not required in healthy patients undergo-
ing neuraxial blockade, appropriate testing should 
be performed if the clinical history suggests a bleed-
ing diathesis. Neuraxial anesthesia in the presence of 
sepsis or bacteremia could theoretically predispose 
patients to hematogenous spread of the infectious 
agents into the epidural or subarachnoid space, as 
has been shown for lumbar puncture in the presence 
of septicemia. 
 Patients with preexisting neurological defi cits 
or demyelinating diseases may report worsening 
symptoms following a block. It may be impossible 
to discern eff ects or complications of the block from 
preexisting defi cits or unrelated exacerbation of pre-
existing disease. For these reasons, some risk-averse 
 TABLE 451 Contraindications to neuraxial 
blockade. 
 Absolute 
Infection at the site of injection
Patient refusal
Coagulopathy or other bleeding diathesis
Severe hypovolemia
Increased intracranial pressure
Severe aortic stenosis
Severe mitral stenosis
 Relative 
Sepsis
Uncooperative patient
Preexisting neurological deficits
Demyelinating lesions
Stenotic valvular heart lesions
Left ventricular outflow obstruction (hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy)
Severe spinal deformity
 Controversial 
Prior back surgery at the site of injection
Complicated surgery
Prolonged operation
Major blood loss
Maneuvers that compromise respiration
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
949 
“low-molecular weight heparin” (LMWH) enoxapa-
rin (Lovenox) in the United States in 1993.  Many of 
these cases involved intraoperative or early post-
operative LMWH use, and several patients were 
receiving concomitant antiplatelet medication . If 
an unusually bloody needle or catheter placement 
occurs, LMWH should be delayed until 24 hr post-
operatively, because this trauma may increase the 
risk of spinal hematoma. If postoperative LMWH 
thromboprophylaxis will be utilized, epidural 
catheters should be removed 2 hr prior to the fi rst 
LMWH dose. If already present, the catheter should 
be removed at least 10 hr aft er a dose of LMWH, and 
subsequent dosing should not occur for another 2 hr. 
 E. Fibrinolytic or Thrombolytic Therapy 
 Neuraxial anesthesia should not be performed if a 
patient has received fi brinolytic or thrombolytic 
therapy. 
 Awake or Asleep? 
 Should lumbar neuraxial anesthesia, when used in 
conjunction with general anesthesia, be performed 
before or aft er induction of general anesthesia? Th is 
is controversial. Th e major arguments for having the 
patient asleep are that (1) most patients, if given a 
choice, would prefer to be asleep, and (2) the pos-
sibility of sudden patient movement causing injury 
is markedly diminished. Th e major argument for 
neuraxial blockade while the patient is still awake is 
that the patient can alert the clinician to paresthe-
sias and pain on injection, both of which have been 
associated with postoperative neurological defi cits. 
Although many clinicians are comfortable perform-
ing lumbar epidural or spinal puncture in anes-
thetized or deeply sedated adults, there is greater 
consensus that thoracic and cervical punctures 
should, except under unusual circumstances, only 
be performed in awake patients. Pediatric neuraxial 
blocks, particularly caudal and epidural blocks, are 
usually performed under general anesthesia. 
 Technical Considerations 
 Neuraxial blocks should be performed only in a facil-
ity in which all the equipment and drugs needed for 
intubation, resuscitation, and general anesthesia are 
immediately available. Regional anesthesia is greatly 
facilitated by adequate patient premedication. 
 B. Antiplatelet Drugs 
 By themselves, aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiin-
fl ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) drugs do not increase 
the risk of spinal hematoma from neuraxial anesthesia 
procedures or epidural catheter removal. Th is assumes 
a normal patient with a normal coagulation profi le who 
is not receiving other medications that might aff ect 
clotting mechanisms. In contrast, more potent agents 
should be stopped, and neuraxial blockade should 
generally be administered only aft er their eff ects have 
worn off . Th e waiting period depends on the specifi c 
agent: for ticlopidine (Ticlid), it is 14 days; clopido-
grel (Plavix), 7 days; abciximab (Rheopro), 48 hr; and 
eptifi batide (Integrilin), 8 hr. In patients with a recently 
placed cardiac stent, discontinuation of antiplatelet 
therapy can result in stent thrombosis and acute ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction. Risks versus 
benefi ts of a neuraxial technique should be discussed 
with the patient and the patient’s primary doctors. 
 C. Standard (Unfractionated) Heparin 
 “Minidose” subcutaneous heparin prophylaxis is 
not a contraindication to neuraxial anesthesia or 
epidural catheter removal. In patients who are to 
receive systemic heparin intraoperatively, blocks 
may be performed 1 hr or more before heparin 
administration. A bloody epidural or spinal does 
not necessarily require cancellation of surgery, but 
discussion of the risks with the surgeon and careful 
postoperative monitoring is needed. Removal of an 
epidural catheter should occur 1 hr prior to, or 4 hr 
following, subsequent heparin dosing. 
 Neuraxial anesthesia should be avoided in 
patients on therapeutic doses of heparin and with 
increased partial thromboplastin time. If the patient 
is started on heparin aft er the placement of an epi-
dural catheter, the catheter should be removed only 
aft er discontinuation or interruption of heparin infu-
sion and evaluation of the coagulation status. Th e risk 
of spinal hematoma (with or without neuraxial punc-
ture) is unclear in the setting of full anticoagulation 
for cardiac surgery. Prompt diagnosis and evacuation 
of symptomatic epidural hematomas increase the 
likelihood that neuronal function will be preserved. 
 D. Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin (LMWH) 
 Many cases of spinal hematoma associated with 
neuraxial anesthesia followed the introduction of the 
950 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
Nonpharmacologic patient preparation is also very 
helpful. Th e patient should be told what to expect so 
as to minimize anxiety. Th is is particularly important 
in situations in which premedication is not used, as 
is typically the case in obstetric anesthesia. Supple-
mental oxygen via a face mask or nasal cannula may 
be required to avoid hypoxemia when sedation is 
used. Minimum monitoring requirements include 
blood pressure and pulse oximetry for labor anal-
gesia. Monitoring for blocks rendered in surgical 
anesthesia is the same as that in general anesthesia. 
Epidural steroid injections for management of pain 
(when little or no local anesthetic is injected) do not 
require continuous monitoring. 
 Surface Anatomy 
 Spinous processes are generally palpable and help 
to defi ne the midline. Ultrasound can be used when 
landmarks are not palpable ( Figure 45–9 ). Th e spi-
nous processes of the cervical and lumbar spine are 
nearly horizontal, whereas those in the thoracic 
spine slant in a caudal direction and can overlap 
signifi cantly ( Figure 45–2 ). Th erefore, when per-
forming a lumbar or cervical epidural block (with 
maximum spinal fl exion), the needle is directed with 
only a slight cephalad angle, whereas for a thoracic 
block, the needle must be angled signifi cantly more 
cephalad to enter the thoracic epidural space. In the 
Cephalad
Cephalad
Lamina
Lamina
Lig flavum
Post. Dura Mater
Ant. Dura Mater
Post. Long. Lig.
Epidural space
B
A
 FIGURE 459  A: Transducer position to image 
paramedian epidural space at the lumbar spine, 
longitudinal view. B: Corresponding ultrasound image. 
Post. Long. Lig., Posterior Longitudinal Ligament; Lig. 
Flavum, Ligamentum Flavum; Ant. Dura Mater, Anterior 
Dura Mater; Post. Dura Mater, Posterior Dura Mater. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Hadzic, A:  Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
and Anatomy for Ultrasound-Guided Regional Anesthesia , 2nd edition. 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.) 
cervical area, the fi rst palpable spinous process is 
that of C2, but the most prominent one is that of C7 
(vertebra prominens). With the arms at the side, the 
spinous process of T7 is usually at the same level as 
the inferior angle of the scapulae ( Figure 45–10 ). A 
line drawn between the highest points of both iliac 
crests (Tuffi  er’s line) usually crosses either the body 
of L4 or the L4–L5 interspace. Counting spinous 
processes up or down from these reference points 
identifi es other spinal levels. A line connecting the 
posterior superior iliac spine crosses the S2 posterior 
foramina. In slender persons, the sacrum is easily 
palpable, and the sacral hiatus is felt as a depression 
just above or between the gluteal cleft s and above the 
coccyx, defi ning the point of entry for caudal blocks. 
 Patient Positioning 
 A. Sitting Position 
 Th e anatomic midline is oft en easier to appreciate 
when the patient is sitting than when the patient is in 
the lateral decubitus position ( Figure 45–11 ). Th is 
is particularly true with very obese patients. Patients 
sit with their elbows resting on their thighs or a bed-
side table, or they can hug a pillow. Flexion of the 
spine (arching the back “like a mad cat” maximizes 
the “target” area between adjacent spinous pro-
cesses and brings the spine closer to the skin surface 
( Figure 45–12 ). 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
951 
 B. Lateral Decubitus 
 Many clinicians prefer the lateral position for neuraxial 
blocks ( Figure 45–13 ). Patients lie on their side with 
their knees fl exed and pulled high against the abdo-
men or chest, assuming a “fetal position.” An assistant 
can help the patient assume and hold this position. 
 C. Buie’s (Jackknife) Position 
 Th is position may be used for anorectal procedures 
utilizing an isobaric or hypobaric anesthetic solution 
(see below). Th e advantage is that the block is done 
in the same position as the operative procedure, so 
that the patient does not have to be moved following 
the block. Th e disadvantage is that CSF will not freely 
fl ow through the needle, so that correct subarach-
noid needle tip placement will need to be confi rmed 
by CSF aspiration. A prone position is typically used 
when fl uoroscopic guidance is required. 
 Anatomic Approach 
 A. Midline Approach 
 Th e spine is palpated, and the patient’s body position 
is examined to ensure that the plane of the back is 
perpendicular to that of the fl oor. Th is ensures that 
a needle passed parallel to the fl oor will stay midline 
as it courses deeper ( Figure 45–4 ). Th e depression 
Iliac crest
 FIGURE 4511  Sitting position for neuraxial blockade. 
Note an assistant helps in obtaining maximal spinal ﬂ exion. 
 FIGURE 4510  Surface landmarks for 
identifying spinal levels. 
Most prominent
cervical process
C7
T7
L4
S2
Inferior tip
of scapula
Superior aspect of iliac
crest (Tuffier’s line)
Posterior superior
iliac spine
952 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 FIGURE 4512  The eﬀ ect of ﬂ exion 
on adjacent vertebrae.  A: Posterior view. 
 B: Lateral view. Note the target area 
(interlaminar foramen) for neuraxial 
blocks increases in size with ﬂ exion. 
A
B
Extension
Flexion
Extension
Flexion
 FIGURE 4513  Lateral 
decubitus position for neuraxial 
blockade. Note again the assistant 
helping to provide maximal spine 
ﬂ exion. 
Scapula
tip
Cord end
(adult)
Sacral
hiatus
L1
L4
S2
Posterior
superior
iliac spines
Superior
iliac crest
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
953
hitting the upper spinous process, or that it is lateral 
to the midline and hitting a lamina. In either case, 
the needle must be redirected. As the needle pene-
trates the ligamentum fl avum, an obvious increase in 
resistance is encountered. At this point, the proce-
dures for spinal and epidural anesthesia diff er. 
 For epidural anesthesia, a sudden loss of resis-
tance (to injection of air or saline) is encoun-
tered as the needle passes through the ligamentum 
fl avum and enters the epidural space. For spinal 
anesthesia, the needle is advanced through the epi-
dural space and penetrates the dura–subarachnoid 
membranes, as signaled by freely fl owing CSF. 
 B. Paramedian Approach 
 Th e paramedian technique may be selected if epi-
dural or subarachnoid block is diffi  cult, particu-
larly in patients who cannot be positioned easily 
(eg, severe arthritis, kyphoscoliosis, or prior spine 
surgery) ( Figure 45–14 ). Many clinicians routinely 
use the paramedian approach for thoracic epidural 
10
between the spinous processes of the vertebra above 
and below the level to be used is palpated; this will 
be the needle entry site. A sterile fi eld is established 
with chlorhexidine or a similar solution. A fenes-
trated sterile drape is applied. Aft er the preparation 
solution has dried, a skin wheal is raised at the level 
of the chosen interspace with local anesthetic using 
a small (25-gauge) needle. A longer needle can be 
used for deeper local anesthetic infi ltration. 
 Next, the procedure needle is introduced in the 
midline. Remembering that the spinous processes 
course caudad from their origin at the spine, the 
needle will be directed slightly cephalad. Th e subcu-
taneous tissues off er little resistance to the needle. As 
the needle courses deeper, it will enter the supraspi-
nous and interspinous ligaments, felt as an increase 
in tissue resistance. Th e needle also feels more fi rmly 
implanted in the back. If bone is contacted superfi -
cially, a midline needle is likely hitting the lower spi-
nous process. Contact with bone at a deeper level 
usually indicates that the needle is in the midline and 
Ligamentum
flavum
Paraspinous
muscle mass
Rib
Lung
Midline
Epidural
space
Dura
 FIGURE 4514  Paramedian approach. 
954 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
be redirected only slightly craniad, more toward the 
midline ( Figure 45–15 ). 
 C. Assessing Level of Blockade 
 With knowledge of the sensory dermatomes (see 
appendix), the extent of sensory block can be 
assessed by a blunted needle. 
 D. Ultrasound-Guided Neuraxial Blockade 
 Although it has not, as of yet, transformed the prac-
tice of neuraxial blockade in the same manner as it 
has for other procedures, ultrasound guidance can 
facilitate neuraxial blockade in patients with poorly 
palpable landmarks. As with other uses of ultra-
sound, specifi c training is required for practitioners 
to identify correctly the landmarks and interspaces 
necessary for neuraxial blockade. 
puncture. Aft er skin preparation and sterile drap-
ing (as previously described), the skin wheal for a 
paramedian approach is raised 2 cm lateral to the 
inferior aspect of the superior spinous process of 
the desired level. Because this approach is lateral 
to most of the interspinous ligaments and pen-
etrates the paraspinous muscles, the needle may 
encounter little resistance initially and may not 
seem to be in fi rm tissue. Th e needle is directed and 
advanced at a 10–25° angle toward the midline. If 
bone is encountered at a shallow depth with the 
paramedian approach, the needle is likely in con-
tact with the medial part of the lower lamina and 
should be redirected mostly upward and perhaps 
slightly more laterally. On the other hand, if bone is 
encountered deeply, the needle is usually in contact 
with the lateral part of the lower lamina and should 
 FIGURE 4515  Paramedian approach. 
A needle that encounters bone at a shallow 
depth ( a ) is usually hitting the medial 
lamina, whereas one that encounters bone 
deeply ( b ) is farther lateral from the midline. 
 A: Posterior view.  B: Parasagittal view. 
B
A
Ligamentum flavum
a
a
Lateral
Medial
Lamina
b
b
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
955 
side injection. Th e Sprotte is a side-injection needle 
with a long opening. It has the advantage of more 
vigorous CSF fl ow compared with similar gauge 
needles. However, this can lead to a failed block if 
the distal part of the opening is subarachnoid (with 
free fl ow CSF), the proximal part is not past the dura, 
and the full dose of medication is not delivered. In 
general, the smaller the gauge needle, the lower the 
incidence of headache. 
 Spinal Catheters 
 Very small subarachnoid catheters are currently no 
longer approved by the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration. Th e withdrawal of these catheters was 
prompted by their association with cauda equina 
syndrome (CES). Larger catheters designed for epi-
dural use are associated with relatively high com-
plication rates when placed subarachnoid; however, 
they are frequently used for continuous spinal anes-
thesia following accidental dural puncture during 
performance of epidural anesthesia. 
 Speciﬁ c Technique for 
Spinal Anesthesia 
 Th e midline, or paramedian, approaches, with the 
patient positioned in the lateral decubitus, sitting, 
or prone positions, can be used for spinal anesthe-
sia. As previously discussed, the needle is advanced 
from skin through the deeper structures until two 
“pops” are felt. Th e fi rst is penetration of the liga-
mentum fl avum, and the second is penetration of 
the dura–arachnoid membrane. Successful dural 
puncture is confi rmed by withdrawing the stylet to 
verify free fl ow of CSF. With small-gauge needles 
(<25 g), aspiration may be necessary to detect CSF. 
If free fl ow occurs initially, but CSF cannot be aspi-
rated aft er attaching the syringe, the needle likely 
will have moved. Persistent paresthesias or pain with 
injection of drugs should alert the clinician to with-
draw and redirect the needle. 
 Factors Inﬂ uencing Level 
of Spinal Block 
 Table 45–2 lists factors that have been shown to 
aff ect the level of neural blockade following spinal 
anesthesia. Th e most important determinants are 
baricity of the local anesthetic solution, position of 
 Spinal Anesthesia 
 Initially aft er injection, spinal anesthetic solutions 
inhibit conduction in nerve roots as they course 
through the subarachnoid space. Over time, the 
local anesthetic permeates the spinal cord and likely 
interacts with other targets located therein. Th e 
spinal subarachnoid space extends from the fora-
men magnum to the S2 in adults and S3 in children. 
Injection of local anesthetic below L1 in adults and 
L3 (below the termination of the conus medullaris) 
in children helps to avoid direct trauma to the spi-
nal cord. Spinal anesthesia is sometimes referred to 
a subarachnoid block, and it occurs as a result of an 
intrathecal injection. 
 Spinal Needles 
 Spinal needles are commercially available in an 
array of sizes lengths, and bevel and tip designs 
( Figure 45–16 ). All should have a tightly fi tting 
removable stylet that completely occludes the lumen 
to avoid tracking epithelial cells into the subarach-
noid space. Broadly, they can be divided into either 
sharp (cutting)-tipped or blunt-tipped needles. Th e 
Quincke needle is a cutting needle with end injec-
tion. Th e introduction of blunt tip (pencil-point) 
needles has markedly decreased the incidence of 
postdural puncture headache. Th e Whitacre and 
other pencil-point needles have rounded points and 
A. Quincke
B. Whitacre
C. Sprotte
 FIGURE 4516  Spinal needles. 
956 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
hypobaric solution is less dense (lighter) than CSF. 
Th e local anesthetic solutions can be made hyper-
baric by the addition of glucose or hypobaric by the 
addition of sterile water or fentanyl. Th us, with the 
patient in a head-down position, a hyperbaric solu-
tion spreads cephalad, and a hypobaric anesthetic 
solution moves caudad. A head-up position causes 
a hyperbaric solution to settle caudad and a hypo-
baric solution to ascend cephalad. Similarly, when 
a patient remains in a lateral position, a hyperbaric 
spinal solution will have a greater eff ect on the 
dependent (down) side, whereas a hypobaric solu-
tion will achieve a higher level on the nondependent 
(up) side. An isobaric solution tends to remain at the 
level of injection. Anesthetic agents are mixed with 
CSF (at least 1:1) to make their solutions isobaric. 
Other factors aff ecting the level of neural blockade 
include the level of injection and the patient’s height 
and vertebral column anatomy. Th e direction of the 
needle bevel or injection port may also play a role; 
higher levels of anesthesia are achieved if the injec-
tion is directed cephalad than if the point of injec-
tion is oriented laterally or caudad. 
 Hyperbaric solutions tend to move to the most 
dependent area of the spine (normally T4–T8 in 
the supine position). With normal spinal anatomy, 
the apex of the thoracolumbar curvature is T4 
( Figure 45–17 ). In the supine position, this should 
limit a hyperbaric solution to produce a level of 
anesthesia at or below T4. Abnormal curvatures of 
the spine, such as scoliosis and kyphoscoliosis, have 
multiple eff ects on spinal anesthesia. Placing the 
block becomes more diffi  cult because of the rotation 
and angulation of the vertebral bodies and spinous 
processes. Finding the midline and the interlaminar 
space may be diffi  cult. Th e paramedian approach 
to lumbar puncture may be preferable in patients 
with severe scoliosis and kyphoscoliosis. In the Tay-
lor approach, a variant of the standard paramedian 
approach described previously, the needle enters 
1 cm medial and 1 cm inferior to the posterior supe-
rior iliac spine and is directed cephalad and toward 
the midline. Reviewing radiographs of the spine 
before attempting the block may be useful. Spinal 
curvature aff ects the ultimate level by changing the 
contour of the subarachnoid space. Previous spinal 
surgery can similarly result in technical diffi  culties 
 TABLE 452 Factors aﬀ ecting the 
dermatomal spread of spinal anesthesia. 
 Most important factors 
Baricity of anesthetic solution
Position of the patient
During injection
Immediately after injection
Drug dosage
Site of injection
 Other factors 
Age
Cerebrospinal fluid
Curvature of the spine
Drug volume
Intraabdominal pressure
Needle direction
Patient height
Pregnancy
 TABLE 453 Speciﬁ c gravities of some spinal 
anesthetic agents. 
Agent
Speciﬁ c Gravity
Bupivacaine
0.5% in 8.25% dextrose
1.0227–1.0278
0.5% plain
0.9990–1.0058
Lidocaine
2% plain
1.0004–1.0066
5% in 7.5% dextrose
1.0262–1.0333
Procaine
10% plain
1.0104
2.5% in water
0.9983
Tetracaine
0.5% in water
0.9977–0.9997
0.5% in D 5 W
1.0133–1.0203
the patient during and immediately aft er injection, 
and drug dosage. In general, the larger the dosage or 
more cephalad the site of injection, the more ceph-
alad the level of anesthesia that will be obtained. 
Moreover, migration of the local anesthetic cepha-
lad in CSF depends on its density relative to CSF 
(baricity). CSF has a specifi c gravity of 1.003–1.008 
at 37°C.  Table 45–3 lists the specifi c gravity of 
anesthetic solutions. A hyperbaric solution of local 
anesthetic is denser (heavier) than CSF, whereas a 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
957 
than expected level, particularly with a hypobaric 
technique or rapid injection. Tradition states that 
transient increases in CSF pressure from coughing or 
straining increase the spread of local anesthetic in the 
CSF, but data supporting this are lacking. 
 Spinal Anesthetic Agents 
 Many local anesthetics have been used for spi-
nal anesthesia in the past, but only a few are cur-
rently in use ( Table 45–4 ). Only preservative-free 
local anesthetic solutions are used. Addition of 
vasoconstrictors (α-adrenergic agonists, epineph-
rine (0.1–0.2 mg)) and opioids enhance the quality 
and/or prolong the duration of spinal anesthesia. 
Vasoconstrictors seem to delay the uptake of local 
anesthetics from CSF and may have weak spinal 
analgesic properties. Opioids and clonidine can like-
wise be added to spinal anesthetics to improve both 
the quality and duration of the subarachnoid block. 
 Hyperbaric bupivacaine and tetracaine are two 
of the most commonly used agents for spinal anes-
thesia. Both are relatively slow in onset (5–10 min) 
and have a prolonged duration (90–120 min). 
Although both agents produce similar sensory lev-
els, spinal tetracaine more consistently produces 
motor blockade than does the equivalent dose of 
bupivacaine. Addition of epinephrine to spinal 
in placing a block. Correctly identifying the inter-
spinous and interlaminar spaces may be diffi  cult at 
the levels of previous laminectomy or spinal fusion. 
Th e paramedian approach may be easier, or a level 
above the surgical site can be chosen. Th e block may 
be incomplete, or the level may be diff erent than 
anticipated, due to postsurgical anatomic changes. 
 Lumbar CSF volume inversely correlates 
with the dermatomal spread of spinal anesthesia. 
Increased intraabdominal pressure or conditions 
that cause engorgement of the epidural veins, thus 
decreasing CSF volume, are associated with greater 
dermatomal spread for a given volume of injectate. 
Th is would include conditions such as pregnancy, 
ascites, and large abdominal tumors. In these clini-
cal situations, higher levels of anesthesia are achieved 
with a given dose of local anesthetic than would oth-
erwise be expected. For spinal anesthesia on a term 
parturient, some clinicians reduce the dosage of anes-
thetic by one-third compared with a nonpregnant 
patient, particularly when the block will be initiated 
with the patient in the lateral position. Age-related 
decreases in CSF volume are likely responsible for 
the higher anesthetic levels achieved in the elderly 
for a given dosage of spinal anesthetic. Severe kypho-
sis or kyphoscoliosis can also be associated with a 
decreased volume of CSF and oft en results in a higher 
 FIGURE 4517  The position of 
the spinal canal in the supine position 
( A ) and lateral decubitus position ( B ). 
Note the lowest point is usually between 
T5 and T7, where a hyperbaric solution 
tends to settle once the patient is placed 
supine. 
A
B
Lumbar
4
3
2
7 6 5
Thoracic
958 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
supine position immediately aft er injection, the 
agent will move more cephalad to the dependent 
region defi ned by the thoracolumbar curve. Hyper-
baric anesthetics injected intrathecally with the 
patient in a lateral decubitus position are useful for 
unilateral lower extremity procedures. Th e patient 
is placed laterally, with the extremity to be operated 
on in a dependent position. If the patient is kept in 
this position for about 5 min following injection, the 
block will tend to be denser and achieve a higher 
level on the operative dependent side. 
 If regional anesthesia is chosen for surgical pro-
cedures involving hip or lower extremity fracture, 
hypobaric or isobaric spinal anesthesia can be use-
ful because the patient need not lie on the fractured 
extremity. 
 Epidural Anesthesia 
 Continuous epidural anesthesia is a neuraxial 
technique off ering a range of applications 
wider than the typical all-or-nothing, single dose 
spinal anesthetic. An epidural block can be per-
formed at the lumbar, thoracic, or cervical level. 
Sacral epidural anesthesia is referred to as a caudal 
block and is described at the end of this chap-
ter.  Epidural techniques are widely used for 
surgical anesthesia, obstetric analgesia, postopera-
tive pain control, and chronic pain management. 
Epidurals can be used as a single shot technique or 
with a catheter that allows intermittent boluses and/
or continuous infusion. Th e motor block can range 
11
12
bupivacaine prolongs its duration only modestly. 
In contrast, epinephrine can prolong the duration 
of tetracaine by more than 50%. Phenylephrine also 
prolongs tetracaine anesthesia, but has no eff ect 
on bupivacaine spinal blocks. Ropivacaine has also 
been used for spinal anesthesia, but experience with 
it is more limited. Lidocaine and procaine have a rel-
atively rapid onset (3–5 min) and short duration of 
action (60–90 min). Th eir duration is only modestly 
prolonged by vasoconstrictors. Although lidocaine 
spinal anesthesia has been used worldwide, some 
experts no longer use this agent because of the phe-
nomenon of transient neurological symptoms and 
cauda equina syndrome (CES).  Repeat lidocaine 
doses following an initial “failed” block should be 
avoided . Indeed, studies have shown that maldistri-
bution of local anesthetic can lead to a failed spinal 
in spite of an adequate CSF concentration of local 
anesthetic. One alternative agent, 2-chloroprocaine, 
has been used in some centers with great success. 
Unfortunately, older formulations of this agent have 
produced cauda equine syndrome when acciden-
tally injected intrathecally (in large doses) during 
attempted epidural anesthesia. 
 In North America, hyperbaric spinal anesthesia 
is more commonly used than hypobaric or isobaric 
techniques. Th e level of anesthesia is then dependent 
on the patient’s position during and immediately fol-
lowing the injection. In the sitting position, “saddle 
block” can be achieved by keeping the patient sit-
ting for 3–5 min following injection, so that only the 
lower lumbar nerves and sacral nerves are blocked. 
If the patient is moved from a sitting position to a 
 TABLE 454 Dosages and actions of commonly used spinal anesthetic agents. 
 Drug 
 Preparation 
 Doses (mg) 
 Duration (min) 
 Perineum, 
Lower Limbs 
 Lower 
Abdomen 
 Upper 
Abdomen 
 Plain 
 Epinephrine 
Procaine
10% solution
75
125
200
45
60
Bupivacaine
0.75% in 8.25% dextrose
4–10
12–14
12–18
90–120
100–150
Tetracaine
1% solution in 10% glucose
4–8
10–12
10–16
90–120
120–240
Lidocaine 1 
5% in 7.5% glucose
25–50
50–75
75–100
60–75
60–90
 1 No longer widely used for outpatients, particularly those undergoing surgery in the lithotomy position.
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
959
at the lumbar level. Th oracic epidural blocks can be 
accomplished with either a midline or paramedian 
approach. Rarely used for primary anesthesia, the 
thoracic epidural technique is most commonly used 
for intraoperative and postoperative analgesia. Single 
shot or catheter techniques are used for the manage-
ment of chronic pain. Infusions via an epidural cath-
eter are useful for providing prolonged durations of 
analgesia and may obviate or shorten postoperative 
ventilation in patients with underlying lung disease 
and following chest surgery. 
 Cervical blocks are usually performed with the 
patient sitting, with the neck fl exed, using the mid-
line approach. Clinically, they are used primarily for 
the management of pain. 
 Epidural Needles 
 Th e standard epidural needle is typically 17–18 gauge, 
3 or 3.5 inches long, and has a blunt bevel with a 
gentle curve of 15–30° at the tip. Th e Tuohy needle 
is most commonly used ( Figure 45–19 ). Th e blunt, 
curved tip theoretically helps to push away the 
dura aft er passing through the ligamentum fl avum 
instead of penetrating it. Straight needles without a 
curved tip (Crawford needles) may have a greater 
incidence of dural puncture, but facilitate passage of 
an epidural catheter. Needle modifi cations include 
winged tips and introducer devices set into the hub 
designed for guiding catheter placement. 
 Epidural Catheters 
 Placing a catheter into the epidural space allows 
for continuous infusion or intermittent bolus tech-
niques. In addition to extending the duration of the 
block, it may allow a lower total dose of anesthetic 
to be used. 
 Epidural catheters are useful for intraoperative 
epidural anesthesia and/or postoperative analgesia. 
Typically, a 19- or 20-gauge catheter is introduced 
through a 17- or 18-gauge epidural needle. When 
using a curved tipped needle, the bevel opening is 
directed either cephalad or caudad, and the cath-
eter is advanced 2–6 cm into the epidural space. Th e 
shorter the distance the catheter is advanced, the 
more likely it is to become dislodged. Conversely, 
the further the catheter is advanced, the greater the 
chance of a unilateral block, due to the catheter tip 
from none to complete. All of these variables are 
controlled by the choice of drug, concentration, dos-
age, and level of injection. 
 Th e epidural space surrounds the dura mater 
posteriorly, laterally, and anteriorly. Nerve roots 
travel in this space as they exit laterally through the 
foramen and course outward to become peripheral 
nerves. Other contents of the lumbar epidural space 
include fatty connective tissue, lymphatics, and a 
rich venous (Batson’s) plexus. Fluoroscopic studies 
have suggested the presence of septa or connective 
tissue bands within the epidural space, possibly 
explaining the occasional one-sided epidural block. 
 Epidural anesthesia is slower in onset (10–20 
min) and may not be as dense as spinal anes-
thesia. Th is can be manifested as a more pronounced 
diff erential block or a segmental block, a feature that 
can be useful clinically. For example, by using rela-
tively dilute concentrations of a local anesthetic 
combined with an opioid, an epidural provides anal-
gesia without motor block. Th is is commonly 
employed for labor and postoperative analgesia. 
Moreover, a segmental block is possible because the 
anesthetic can be confi ned close to the level at which 
it was injected. A segmental block is characterized 
by a well-defi ned band of anesthesia at certain nerve 
roots; leaving nerve roots above  and below 
unblocked. Th is can be seen with a thoracic epidural 
that provides upper abdominal anesthesia while 
sparing cervical and lumbar nerve roots. 
 Epidural anesthesia and analgesia is most 
oft en performed in the lumbar region. Th e mid-
line ( Figure 45–4 ) or paramedian approach 
( Figure 45–14 ) can be used. Lumbar epidural anes-
thesia can be used for any procedure below the 
diaphragm. Because the spinal cord typically ter-
minates at the L1 level, there is an extra measure of 
safety in performing the block in the lower lumbar 
interspaces, particularly if an accidental dural punc-
ture occurs (see “Complications”). 
 Th oracic epidural blocks are technically more 
diffi  cult to accomplish than are lumbar blocks because 
of greater angulation and the overlapping of the spi-
nous processes at the vertebral level ( Figure 45–18 ). 
Moreover, the potential risk of spinal cord injury 
with accidental dural puncture, although exceedingly 
small with good technique, may be greater than that 
13
960 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Speciﬁ c Techniques 
for Epidural Anesthesia 
 Using the midline or paramedian approaches 
detailed previously, the epidural needle is passed 
through the skin and the ligamentum fl avum. Th e 
needle must stop short of piercing the dura. Two 
techniques make it possible to determine when the 
tip of the needle has entered the potential (epidural) 
space: the “loss of resistance” and “hanging drop” 
techniques. 
 Th e loss of resistance technique is preferred by 
most clinicians. Th e needle is advanced through the 
subcutaneous tissues with the stylet in place until 
the interspinous ligament is entered, as noted by an 
either exiting the epidural space via an intervertebral 
foramen or coursing into the anterolateral recesses 
of the epidural space. Aft er advancing the catheter 
the desired depth, the needle is removed, leaving 
the catheter in place. Th e catheter can be taped or 
otherwise secured along the back. Catheters that will 
remain in place for prolonged times (eg, >1 wk) may 
be tunneled under the skin. Catheters have either a 
single port at the distal end or multiple side ports 
close to a closed tip. Some have a stylet for easier 
insertion. Spiral wire-reinforced catheters are very 
resistant to kinking. Th e spiral or spring tip is asso-
ciated with fewer, less intense paresthesias and may 
be associated with a lower incidence of inadvertent 
intravascular insertion. 
 FIGURE 4518  Angulation of the epidural 
needle at the cervical ( A ), thoracic ( B ), and lumbar 
( C ) levels. Note that an acute angulation (30–50°) 
is required for a thoracic epidural block, whereas 
only a slight cephalad orientation is usually 
required for cervical and lumbar epidural blocks. 
Cauda equina
(A) Cervical
epidural needle
(B)  Thoracic
epidural needle
(C) Lumbar
epidural needle
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
12
11 
10 
9 
8 
8 
7 
7 
6 
6 
5 
5 
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
Coccygeal
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
961
confi rmation (rather than as the primary test) that 
the needle has entered the epidural space. Successful 
“epiduralists” will generally have sensed the “give” in 
their hands as the epidural needle tip passes through 
the ligamentum fl avum. 
 Activating an Epidural 
 Th e quantity (volume and concentration) of 
local anesthetic needed for epidural anesthe-
sia is larger than that needed for spinal anesthesia. 
Toxic side eff ects are likely if a “full epidural dose” is 
injected intrathecally or intravascularly. Safeguards 
against toxic epidural side eff ects include test and 
incremental dosing. Th ese safeguards apply whether 
the injection is through the needle or an epidural 
catheter. 
A test dose is designed to detect both sub-
arachnoid and intravascular injection . Th e classic 
test dose combines local anesthetic and epinephrine, 
typically 3 mL of 1.5% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epi-
nephrine (0.005 mg/mL). Th e 45 mg of lidocaine, if 
injected intrathecally, will produce spinal anesthesia 
that should be rapidly apparent. Some clinicians have 
suggested the use of lower doses of local anesthetic, 
as an unintended injection of 45 mg of intrathecal 
lidocaine can be diffi  cult to manage in areas such 
as labor rooms. Th e 15 mcg dose of epinephrine, if 
injected intravascularly, should produce a noticeable 
increase in heart rate (20% or more), with or with-
out hypertension. Unfortunately, epinephrine as a 
marker of intravenous injection is not ideal. False 
positives (a uterine contraction causing pain or an 
increase in heart rate coincident to test dosing) and 
false negatives (bradycardia and exaggerated hyper-
tension in response to epinephrine in patients tak-
ing β-blockers) can occur. Simply aspirating prior to 
injection is insuffi  cient to avoid inadvertent intrave-
nous injection; most experienced practitioners have 
encountered false-negative aspirations through both 
a needle and a catheter. 
 Incremental dosing is a very eff ective method of 
avoiding serious complications. If aspiration is nega-
tive, a fraction of the total intended local anesthetic 
dose is injected, typically 5 mL. Th is dose should be 
large enough for mild symptoms of intravascular 
injection to occur, but small enough to avoid seizure 
or cardiovascular compromise. Th is is particularly 
14
increase in tissue resistance. Th e stylet or introducer 
is removed, and a glass syringe fi lled with approxi-
mately 2 mL of saline or air is attached to the hub 
of the needle. If the tip of the needle is within the 
ligament, gentle attempts at injection are met with 
resistance, and injection is not possible. Th e needle 
is then slowly advanced, millimeter by millimeter, 
with either continuous or rapidly repeating attempts 
at injection. As the tip of the needle just enters the 
epidural space, there is a sudden loss of resistance, 
and injection is easy. 
 Once the interspinous ligament has been 
entered and the stylet has been removed, the hang-
ing drop technique requires that the hub of the 
needle be fi lled with solution so that a drop hangs 
from its outside opening. Th e needle is then slowly 
advanced deeper. As long as the tip of the needle 
remains within the ligamentous structures, the drop 
remains “hanging.” However, as the tip of the needle 
enters the epidural space, it creates negative pres-
sure, and the drop of fl uid is sucked into the needle. 
If the needle becomes plugged, the drop will not be 
drawn into the hub of the needle, and inadvertent 
dural puncture may occur. Some clinicians prefer 
to use this technique for the paramedian approach 
and cervical epidurals. Successful “epiduralists” rely 
on either the loss of resistance or hanging drop as 
Weiss winged needle
Blunt tip
Standard Tuohy needle
Crawford needle (thin walled)
 FIGURE 4519  Epidural needles. 
962 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Additives to the local anesthetic, particularly 
opioids, tend to have a greater eff ect on the quality 
of epidural anesthesia than on the duration of the 
block. Epinephrine in concentrations of 5 mcg/mL 
prolongs the eff ect of epidural lidocaine, mepiva-
caine, and chloroprocaine more than that of bupi-
vacaine, levobupivacaine, etidocaine, or ropivacaine. 
In addition to prolonging the duration and improv-
ing the quality of block, epinephrine delays vascular 
absorption and reduces peak systemic blood levels 
of all epidurally administered local anesthetics. 
 Epidural Anesthetic Agents 
 Th e epidural agent is chosen based on the desired 
clinical eff ect, whether it is to be used as a pri-
mary anesthetic, supplementation of general anes-
thesia, or analgesia. Th e anticipated duration of 
the procedure may call for a short- or long-acting 
single shot anesthetic or the insertion of a catheter 
( Table 45–5 ). Commonly used short- to interme-
diate-acting agents for surgical anesthesia include 
chloroprocaine, lidocaine, and mepivacaine. Longer 
acting agents include bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, 
and ropivacaine. Only preservative-free local anes-
thetic solutions or those specifi cally labeled for epi-
dural or caudal use are employed. 
 Following the initial 1–2 mL per segment 
bolus (in fractionated doses), repeat doses deliv-
ered through an epidural catheter are either done 
on a fi xed time interval, based on the practitioner’s 
experience with the agent, or when the block dem-
onstrates some degree of regression. Once some 
regression in sensory level has occurred, one-third 
to one-half of the initial activation dose can gener-
ally safely be reinjected in incremental doses. 
 It should be noted that chloroprocaine, an ester 
with rapid onset, short duration, and extremely low 
toxicity, may interfere with the analgesic eff ects of 
epidural opioids. Previous chloroprocaine formu-
lations with preservatives, specifi cally bisulfi te and 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), produced 
cauda equine syndrome when accidentally injected 
in a large volume intrathecally. Bisulfi te preparations 
of chloroprocaine were believed to be associated with 
neurotoxicity, whereas EDTA formulations were 
associated with severe back pain (presumably due 
to localized hypocalcemia). Current preparations 
important for labor epidurals that are to be used for 
cesarean section. If the initial labor epidural bolus 
was delivered through the needle, and the catheter 
was then inserted, it may be erroneously assumed 
that the catheter is well positioned because the 
patient is still comfortable from the initial bolus. 
If the catheter was inserted into a blood vessel, or 
aft er initial successful placement, has since migrated 
intravascularly, systemic toxicity will likely result 
if the full anesthetic dose is injected. Catheters can 
migrate intrathecally or intravascularly from an 
initially correct epidural position at any time aft er 
placement. Some cases of “catheter migration” may 
represent delayed recognition of an improperly 
positioned catheter. 
 If a clinician uses an initial test dose, is diligent 
about aspirating prior to each injection, and always 
uses incremental dosing, major systemic toxic side 
eff ects and/or total spinal anesthesia from accidental 
intrathecal injections will be rare. Rescue lipid emul-
sion (20% Intralipid 1.5 mL/kg) should be available 
whenever epidural blocks are performed, in the 
event of local anesthetic toxicity. 
 Factors Aﬀ ecting Level of Block 
 Factors aff ecting the level of epidural anesthesia 
may not be as predictable as with spinal anesthesia. 
In adults, 1–2 mL of local anesthetic per segment 
to be blocked is a generally accepted guideline. For 
example, to achieve a T4 sensory level from an L4–
L5 injection would require about 12–24 mL. For 
segmental or analgesic blocks, less volume is needed. 
 Th e dose required to achieve the same level of 
anesthesia decreases with age. Th is is probably a 
result of age-related decreases in the size or compli-
ance of the epidural space. Although there is little 
correlation between body weight and epidural dos-
age requirements, patient height aff ects the extent 
of cephalad spread. Th us, shorter patients may 
require only 1 mL of local anesthetic per segment 
to be blocked, whereas taller patients generally 
require 2 mL per segment. Although less dramatic 
than with spinal anesthesia, spread of epidural local 
anesthetics tends to be partially aff ected by gravity. 
Th e lateral decubitus, Trendelenburg, and reverse 
Trendelenburg positions can be used to help achieve 
blockade in the desired dermatomes. 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
963 
of the local anesthetic. Addition of sodium bicarbon-
ate (1 mEq/10 mL of local anesthetic) immediately 
before injection may therefore accelerate the onset of 
the neural blockade. Th is approach is most useful for 
lidocaine, mepivacaine, and chloroprocaine. Sodium 
bicarbonate is typically not added to bupivacaine, 
which precipitates above a pH of 6.8. 
 Failed Epidural Blocks 
 Unlike spinal anesthesia, in which the endpoint is 
usually very clear (free fl owing CSF) and the tech-
nique is associated with a very high success rate, epi-
dural anesthesia is dependent on detection of a more 
subjective loss of resistance (or hanging drop). Also, 
the more variable anatomy of the epidural space and 
less predictable spread of local anesthetic make epi-
dural anesthesia inherently less predictable than spi-
nal anesthesia. 
 Misplaced injections of local anesthetic can 
occur in a number of situations. In some patients, 
the spinal ligaments are soft , and either good resis-
tance is never appreciated or a false loss of resistance 
is encountered. Similarly, entry into the paraspinous 
muscles during an off -center midline approach may 
cause a false loss of resistance. Other causes of failed 
epidural anesthesia (such as intrathecal, subdural, 
and intravenous injection) are discussed in the sec-
tion of this chapter on complications. 
of chloroprocaine are preservative-free and without 
these complications. Some experts believe that local 
anesthetics, when injected in very large doses intra-
thecally may have been at least partly responsible for 
neurotoxicity. 
 Surgical anesthesia is obtained with a 0.5% 
bupivacaine formulation. Th e 0.75% formulation of 
bupivacaine is no longer used in obstetrics, as its use 
in cesarean section has been associated with reports 
of cardiac arrest aft er accidental intravenous injec-
tion. Very dilute concentrations of bupivacaine (eg, 
0.0625%) are commonly combined with fentanyl 
and used for analgesia for labor and postoperative 
pain. Compared with bupivacaine, ropivacaine may 
produce less motor block at similar concentrations 
while maintaining a good sensory block. 
 Local Anesthetic pH Adjustment 
 Local anesthetic solutions have an acidic pH for 
chemical stability and bacteriostasis. Local anesthetic 
solutions that are formulated with epinephrine by the 
manufacturer are more acidic than the “plain” solu-
tions that do not contain epinephrine. Because they 
are weak bases, they exist primarily in the ionic form 
in commercial preparations. Th e onset of neural block 
requires permeation of lipid barriers by the uncharged 
form of the local anesthetic. Increasing the pH of the 
solutions increases the fraction of the uncharged form 
 TABLE 455 Agents for epidural anesthesia. 
 Agent 
 Concentration 
 Onset 
 Sensory Block 
 Motor Block 
Chloroprocaine
2%
Fast
Analgesic
Mild to moderate
3%
Fast
Dense
Dense
Lidocaine
≤1%
Intermediate
Analgesic
Minimal
1.5%
Intermediate
Dense
Mild to moderate
2%
Intermediate
Dense
Dense
Mepivacaine
1%
Intermediate
Analgesic
Minimal
2–3%
Intermediate
Dense
Dense
Bupivacaine
≤0.25%
Slow
Analgesic
Minimal
0.5%
Slow
Dense
Mild to moderate
0.75%
Slow
Dense
Moderate to dense
Ropivacaine
0.2%
Slow
Analgesic
Minimal
0.5%
Slow
Dense
Mild to moderate
0.75–1.0%
Slow
Dense
Moderate to dense
964 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Caudal Anesthesia 
 Caudal epidural anesthesia is a common 
regional technique in pediatric patients. It may 
also be used for anorectal surgery in adults. Th e caudal 
space is the sacral portion of the epidural space. Cau-
dal anesthesia involves needle and/or catheter penetra-
tion of the sacrococcygeal ligament covering the sacral 
hiatus that is created by the unfused S4 and S5 lami-
nae. Th e hiatus may be felt as a groove or notch above 
the coccyx and between two bony prominences, the 
sacral cornua ( Figure 45–3 ). Its anatomy is more eas-
ily appreciated in infants and children ( Figure 45–20 ). 
Th e posterior superior iliac spines and the sacral hia-
tus defi ne an equilateral triangle ( Figure 45–13 ). Cal-
cifi cation of the sacrococcygeal ligament may make 
caudal anesthesia diffi  cult or impossible in older 
adults. Within the sacral canal, the dural sac extends 
to the fi rst sacral vertebra in adults and to about the 
third sacral vertebra in infants, making inadvertent 
intrathecal injection more common in infants. 
 In children, caudal anesthesia is typically com-
bined with general anesthesia for intraoperative 
supplementation and postoperative analgesia. It 
is commonly used for procedures below the dia-
phragm, including urogenital, rectal, inguinal, and 
lower extremity surgery. Pediatric caudal blocks 
are most commonly performed aft er the induc-
tion of general anesthesia. Th e patient is placed in 
the lateral or prone position with one or both hips 
fl exed, and the sacral hiatus is palpated. Aft er sterile 
skin preparation, a needle or intravenous catheter 
15
 Even if an adequate concentration and volume 
of an anesthetic were delivered into the epidural 
space, and suffi  cient time was allowed for the block 
to take eff ect, some epidural blocks are not success-
ful. A unilateral block can occur if the medication is 
delivered through a catheter that has either exited 
the epidural space or coursed laterally. Th e chance 
of this occurring increases as longer lengths of cath-
eter are threaded into the epidural space. When uni-
lateral block occurs, the problem may be overcome 
by withdrawing the catheter 1–2 cm and reinject-
ing it with the patient turned with the unblocked 
side down. Segmental sparing, which may be due 
to septations within the epidural space, may also 
be corrected by injecting additional local anesthetic 
with the unblocked segment down. Th e large size of 
the L5, S1, and S2 nerve roots may delay adequate 
penetration of local anesthetic and is thought to be 
responsible for sacral sparing. Th e latter is particu-
larly a problem for surgery on the lower leg; in such 
cases, elevating the head of the bed and reinjecting 
the catheter with additional anesthetic solution can 
sometimes achieve a more intense block of these 
large nerve roots. Patients may complain of visceral 
pain, despite a seemingly good epidural block. In 
some cases (eg, traction on the inguinal ligament 
and spermatic cord), a high thoracic sensory level 
may alleviate the pain; in other cases (traction on 
the peritoneum), intravenous supplementation with 
opioids or other agents may be necessary. Visceral 
aff erent fi bers that travel with the vagus nerve may 
be responsible. 
 FIGURE 4520  Positioning an 
anesthetized child for caudal block 
and palpation for the sacral hiatus. An 
assistant gently helps ﬂ ex the spine. 
Sacral
cornu
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
965 
not recommended for outpatients because of the 
risk of delayed respiratory depression. Addition 
of epinephrine will tend to increase the degree of 
motor block. Clonidine is oft en added or substituted 
for local anesthetic. Th e analgesic eff ects of the block 
extend for hours into the postoperative period. Pedi-
atric outpatients can safely be discharged home, 
even with mild residual motor block and without 
urinating, as most children will urinate within 8 hr. 
 Repeated injections can be accomplished via 
repeating the needle injection or via a catheter left  
in place and covered with an occlusive dressing aft er 
being connected to extension tubing. Higher der-
matomal levels of epidural anesthesia/analgesia can 
be accomplished with epidural catheters threaded 
cephalad into the lumbar or even thoracic epidural 
space from the caudal approach in infants and chil-
dren. Fluoroscopy can assist in catheter positioning. 
Smaller catheters are technically diffi  cult to pass due 
to kinking. Catheters advanced into the thoracic 
(18–23 gauge) is advanced at a 45° angle cephalad 
until a pop is felt as the needle pierces the sacrococ-
cygeal ligament. Th e angle of the needle is then fl at-
tened and advanced ( Figure 45–21 ). Aspiration for 
blood and CSF is performed, and, if negative, injec-
tion can proceed. Some clinicians recommend test 
dosing as with other epidural techniques, although 
many simply rely on incremental dosing with fre-
quent aspiration. Tachycardia (if epinephrine is 
used) and/or increasing size of the T waves on elec-
trocardiography may indicate intravascular injec-
tion. Clinical data have shown that the complication 
rate for pediatric caudal blocks is low. Complications 
include total spinal and intravenous injection, caus-
ing seizure or cardiac arrest. Intraosseous injection 
has also been reported to cause systemic toxicity. 
 A dosage of 0.5–1.0 mL/kg of 0.125–0.25% 
bupivacaine (or ropivacaine), with or without epi-
nephrine, can be used. Opioids may also be added 
(eg, 50–70 mcg/kg of morphine), although they are 
Dural sac
Sacral canal
Sacral hiatus
Sacrococcygeal
ligament
 FIGURE 4521  Caudal block. Note the sacrococcygeal 
ligament is penetrated with the needle almost at 90° and then 
must be angled down and advanced to enter the sacral hiatus. 
966 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 epidural space have been used to achieve T2–T4 
blocks for ex-premature infants undergoing inguinal 
hernia repair. Th is is achieved using chloroprocaine 
(1 mL/kg) as an initial bolus and incremental doses 
of 0.3 mL/kg until the desired level is achieved. 
 In adults undergoing anorectal procedures, 
caudal anesthesia can provide dense sacral sensory 
blockade with limited cephalad spread. Further-
more, the injection can be given with the patient 
in the prone jackknife position, which is used for 
surgery ( Figure 45–22 ). A dose of 15–20 mL of 
1.5–2.0% lidocaine, with or without epinephrine, is 
usually eff ective. Fentanyl 50–100 mcg may also be 
added. Th is technique should be avoided in patients 
with pilonidal cysts because the needle may pass 
through the cyst track and can potentially introduce 
bacteria into the caudal epidural space. Although no 
longer commonly used for obstetric analgesia, a cau-
dal block can be useful for the second stage of labor, 
in situations in which the epidural is not reaching 
the sacral nerves, or when repeated attempts at epi-
dural blockade have been unsuccessful. 
 Complications 
of Neuraxial Blocks 
 Th e complications of epidural, spinal, or caudal 
anesthetics range from the bothersome to the crip-
pling and life-threatening ( Table 45–6 ). Broadly, the 
complications can be thought of as those resulting 
 TABLE 456 Complications of neuraxial 
anesthesia. 
 Adverse or exaggerated physiological responses 
Urinary retention
High block
Total spinal anesthesia
Cardiac arrest
Anterior spinal artery syndrome
Horner’s syndrome
 Complications related to needle/catheter placement 
Backache
Dural puncture/leak
Postdural puncture headache
Diplopia
Tinnitus
Neural injury
Nerve root damage
Spinal cord damage
Cauda equina syndrome
Bleeding
Intraspinal/epidural hematoma
Misplacement
No effect/inadequate anesthesia
Subdural block
Inadvertent subarachnoid block 1 
Inadvertent intravascular injection
Catheter shearing/retention
Inflammation
Arachnoiditis
Infection
Meningitis
Epidural abscess
 Drug toxicity 
Systemic local anesthetic toxicity
Transient neurological symptoms
Cauda equina syndrome
 1 For epidural block only.
 FIGURE 4522  The prone jackknife 
position often used for anorectal surgery 
can also be used for caudal anesthesia 
in adults. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Lambert DH, Covino BG: Hyperbaric, hypobaric, 
and isobaric spinal anesthesia. Res Staﬀ  Phys 
1987;10:84.) 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
967 
extremities. Nausea oft en precedes hypotension. 
Once exaggerated spread of anesthesia is recog-
nized, patients should be reassured, oxygen supple-
mentation may be required, and bradycardia and 
hypotension should be treated. 
 Spinal anesthesia ascending into the cervical 
levels causes severe hypotension, bradycardia, and 
respiratory insuffi  ciency . Unconsciousness, apnea, 
and hypotension resulting from high levels of spi-
nal anesthesia are referred to as a “high spinal,” or 
when the block extends to cranial nerves, as a “total 
spinal.” Th ese conditions can also occur follow-
ing attempted epidural/caudal anesthesia if there is 
accidental intrathecal injection (see below). Apnea 
is more oft en the result of severe sustained hypoten-
sion and medullary hypoperfusion than a response 
to phrenic nerve paralysis from anesthesia of C3–C5 
roots. Anterior spinal artery syndrome has been 
reported following neuraxial anesthesia, presumably 
due to prolonged severe hypotension together with 
an increase in intraspinal pressure. 
 Treatment of an excessively high neuraxial 
block involves maintaining an adequate airway and 
ventilation and supporting the circulation. When 
respiratory insuffi  ciency becomes evident, in addi-
tion to supplemental oxygen, assisted ventilation, 
intubation, and mechanical ventilation may be 
necessary. Hypotension can be treated with rapid 
administration of intravenous fl uids, a head-down 
position, and intravenous vasopressors. Bradycar-
dia can be treated early with atropine. Ephedrine or 
epinephrine can also increase heart rate and arterial 
blood pressure. If respiratory and hemodynamic 
control can be readily achieved and maintained aft er 
high or total spinal anesthesia, surgery may proceed. 
 B. Cardiac Arrest During Spinal Anesthesia 
 Examination of data from the ASA Closed Claim 
Project identifi ed several cases of cardiac arrest dur-
ing spinal anesthesia. Because many of the reported 
from excessive eff ects of an appropriately injected 
drug, placement of the needle (or catheter), and sys-
temic drug toxicity. 
 A very large survey of regional anesthesia from 
France provides an indication of the relatively low 
incidence of serious complications from spinal and 
epidural anesthesia ( Table 45–7 ). Th e American 
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Closed Claims 
Project helps to identify the most common causes of 
liability claims involving regional anesthesia in the 
operating room setting. In a 20-year period (1980–
1999), regional anesthesia accounted for 18% of all 
liability claims. In the majority of these claims, the 
injuries were judged as temporary or nondisabling 
(64%). Serious injuries in the remaining claims 
included death (13%), permanent nerve injury 
(10%), permanent brain damage (8%), and other 
permanent injuries (4%). Th e majority of regional 
anesthesia claims involved either lumbar epidural 
anesthesia (42%) or spinal anesthesia (34%) and 
tended to occur mostly in obstetric patients. Th e 
latter may at least partly refl ect the relatively higher 
use of neuraxial anesthesia compared with other 
regional techniques and its relatively very high uti-
lization in obstetric patients. Of note is that caudal 
anesthesia was utilized in only 2% of claims. 
 Complications Associated with 
Excessive Responses to Appropriately 
Placed Drug 
 A. High Neural Blockade 
 Exaggerated dermatomal spread of neural block-
ade can occur readily with either spinal or epidural 
anesthesia. Administration of an excessive dose, 
failure to reduce standard doses in selected patients 
(eg, the elderly, pregnant, obese, or very short), or 
unusual sensitivity or spread of local anesthetic 
may be responsible. Patients may complain of dys-
pnea and have numbness or weakness in the upper 
 TABLE 457 Incidence of serious complications from spinal and epidural anesthesia. 1 
 Technique 
 Cardiac Arrest 
 Death 
 Seizure 
 Cauda Equina Syndrome 
 Paraplegia 
 Radiculopathy 
Spinal ( n = 40,640)
26
6
0
5
0
19
Epidural ( n = 30,413)
3
0
4
0
1
5
 1 Data from Auroy Y, et al: Serious complications related to regional anesthesia, results of a prospective survey in France. Anesthesiology 1997;87:479.
968 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
produce very high serum levels. Extremely high 
levels of local anesthetics aff ect the central ner-
vous system (seizure and unconsciousness) and the 
cardiovascular system (hypotension, arrhythmias, 
and depressed contractility). Because the dosage of 
medication for spinal anesthesia is relatively small, 
this complication is seen aft er epidural and caudal 
(but not spinal) blocks. Local anesthetic may be 
injected directly into a vessel through a needle or 
later through a catheter that has entered a blood 
vessel (vein). Th e incidence of intravascular injec-
tion can be minimized by carefully aspirating the 
needle (or catheter) before every injection, using a 
test dose, always injecting local anesthetic in incre-
mental doses, and close observation for early signs 
of intravascular injection (tinnitus, lingual sensa-
tions). Treatment is resuscitative, and lipid rescue 
should be employed. 
 Th e local anesthetics vary in their propensity 
to produce severe cardiac toxicity. Th e rank order 
of local anesthetic potency at producing seizures 
and cardiac toxicity is the same as the rank order 
for potency at nerve blocks. Chloroprocaine has 
relatively low potency and also is metabolized very 
rapidly; lidocaine and mepivacaine are intermediate 
in potency and toxicity; and levobupivacaine, ropi-
vacaine, bupivacaine, and tetracaine are most potent 
and toxic. 
 C. Total Spinal Anesthesia 
 Total spinal anesthesia can occur following 
attempted epidural/caudal anesthesia if there is 
accidental intrathecal injection. Onset is usually 
rapid, because the amount of anesthetic required 
for epidural and caudal anesthesia is 5–10 times that 
required for spinal anesthesia. Careful aspiration, 
use of a test dose, and incremental injection tech-
niques during epidural and caudal anesthesia can 
help avoid this complication. 
 D. Subdural Injection 
 As with accidental intravascular injection, and 
because of the larger amount of local anesthetic 
administered, accidental subdural injection of local 
anesthetic during attempted epidural anesthesia is 
much more serious than during attempted spinal 
anesthesia. A subdural injection of epidural doses 
cases predated the routine use of pulse oximetry, 
many physicians believed oversedation and unrecog-
nized hypoventilation and hypoxia were the causes. 
However, large prospective studies continue to report 
a relatively high incidence (perhaps as high as 1:1500) 
of cardiac arrest in patients having received a spinal 
anesthetic, Many of the cardiac arrests were preceded 
by bradycardia, and many occurred in young healthy 
patients. Examination of this problem identifi ed vagal 
responses and decreased preload as key factors and 
suggests that patients with high baseline vagal tone are 
at risk. To prevent this from occurring, hypovolemia 
should be corrected. Prompt drug treatment of hypo-
tension and bradycardia are recommended. Many 
clinicians will not allow the heart rate to fall below 
50 beats per minute during spinal anesthetic blockade. 
 C. Urinary Retention 
 Local anesthetic block of S2–S4 root fi bers decreases 
urinary bladder tone and inhibits the voiding refl ex. 
Epidural opioids can also interfere with normal 
voiding. Th ese eff ects are most pronounced in male 
patients. Urinary bladder catheterization should be 
used for all but the shortest acting blocks. If a cath-
eter is not present postoperatively, close observation 
for voiding is necessary. Persistent bladder dysfunc-
tion can also be a manifestation of serious neural 
injury, as discussed below. 
 Complications Associated with 
Needle or Catheter Insertion 
 A. Inadequate Anesthesia or Analgesia 
 As with other regional anesthesia techniques, 
neuraxial blocks are associated with a small, but 
measureable, failure rate that is usually inversely 
proportional to the clinician’s experience. Failure 
may still occur, even when CSF is obtained during 
spinal anesthesia. Movement of the needle during 
injection, incomplete entry of the needle opening 
into the subarachnoid space, subdural injection, or 
loss of potency of the local anesthetic solution may 
be responsible. Causes for failed epidural blocks 
were discussed above (see “Failed Epidural Blocks”). 
 B. Intravascular Injection 
 Accidental intravascular injection of the local 
anesthetic for epidural and caudal anesthesia can 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
969 
be the result of just the tip of the needle scratching 
through the dura. Typically, PDPH is bilateral, fron-
tal or retroorbital, or occipital and extends into the 
neck. It may be throbbing or constant and associ-
ated with photophobia and nausea. Th e hallmark of 
PDPH is its association with body position. Th e pain 
is aggravated by sitting or standing and relieved or 
decreased by lying down fl at. Th e onset of headache 
is usually 12–72 hr following the procedure; how-
ever, it may be seen almost immediately. Untreated, 
the pain may last weeks, and in rare instances, has 
required surgical repair. 
 PDPH is believed to result from leakage of CSF 
from a dural defect and intracranial hypotension. 
Loss of CSF at a rate faster than it can be produced 
causes traction on structures supporting the brain, 
particularly the meninges, dura, and tentorium. 
Increased traction on blood vessels and cranial 
nerves may also contribute to the pain. Traction on 
the cranial nerves may occasionally cause diplopia 
(usually the sixth cranial nerve) and tinnitus. Th e 
incidence of PDPH is strongly related to needle 
size, needle type, and patient population. Th e larger 
the needle, the greater the likelihood of PDPH. 
Cutting-point needles are associated with a higher 
incidence of PDPH than pencil-point needles of the 
same gauge. Factors that increase the risk of PDPH 
include young age, female sex, and pregnancy. Th e 
greatest risk, then, would be expected following an 
accidental wet tap with a large epidural needle in a 
young woman (perhaps as high as 20% to 50%). Th e 
lowest incidence would be expected in an elderly 
male using a 27-gauge pencil-point needle (<1%). 
Studies of obstetric patients undergoing spinal 
anesthesia for cesarean section with small-gauge 
pencil-point needles have shown rates as low as 3% 
or 4%. 
 Conservative treatment involves recumbent 
positioning, analgesics, intravenous or oral fl uid 
administration, and caff eine. Keeping the patient 
supine will decrease the hydrostatic pressure driv-
ing fl uid out of the dural hole and minimize the 
headache. Analgesic medication may range from 
acetaminophen to NSAIDs and opioids. Hydration 
and caff eine work to stimulate production of CSF. 
Caff eine further helps by vasoconstricting intracra-
nial vessels. Stool soft eners and soft  diet are used to 
of local anesthetic produces a clinical presenta-
tion similar to that of high spinal anesthesia, with 
the exception that the onset may be delayed for 
15–30 min and the block may be “patchy”. Th e spi-
nal subdural space is a potential space between the 
dura and the arachnoid containing a small amount 
of serous fl uid. Unlike the epidural space, the sub-
dural space extends intracranially, so that anesthetic 
injected into the spinal subdural space can ascend 
to higher levels than epidural medications. As with 
high spinal anesthesia, treatment is supportive and 
may require intubation, mechanical ventilation, and 
cardiovascular support. Th e eff ects generally last 
from one to several hours. 
 E. Backache 
 As a needle passes through skin, subcutaneous tis-
sues, muscle, and ligaments it causes varying degrees 
of tissue trauma. Bruising and a localized infl amma-
tory response with or without refl ex muscle spasm 
may be responsible for postoperative backache. One 
should remember that up to 25% to 30% of patients 
receiving general anesthesia also complain of back-
ache postoperatively, and a signifi cant percentage 
of the general population has chronic back pain. 
Postoperative back soreness or ache is usually mild 
and self-limited, although it may last for a number 
of weeks. If treatment is sought, acetaminophen, 
NSAIDs, and warm or cold compresses should suf-
fi ce. Although backache is usually benign, it may 
be an important clinical sign of much more seri-
ous complications, such as epidural hematoma and 
abscess (see below). 
 F. Postdural Puncture Headache 
 Any breach of the dura may result in a postdural 
puncture headache (PDPH). Th is may follow a 
diagnostic lumbar puncture, a myelogram, a spinal 
anesthetic, or an epidural “wet tap” in which the 
epidural needle passed through the epidural space 
and entered the subarachnoid space. Similarly, an 
epidural catheter might puncture the dura at any 
time and result in PDPH. An epidural wet tap is 
usually immediately recognized as CSF pouring 
from the epidural needle or aspirated from an epi-
dural catheter. However, PDPH can follow a seem-
ingly uncomplicated epidural anesthetic and may 
970 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
nerve dysfunction, including paralysis of the biceps 
femoris muscles; anesthesia in the posterior thigh, 
saddle area, or great toes; and loss of bowel or blad-
der function. Not all neurological defi cits occur-
ring aft er a regional anesthetic are the result of the 
block. Surveys of complications have reported many 
instances of postoperative neurological defi cits that 
were attributed to regional anesthesia when, in fact, 
only general anesthesia was used. Postpartum defi -
cits, including lateral femoral cutaneous neuropathy, 
foot drop, and paraplegia, were recognized before 
the modern era of anesthesia and still occur in the 
absence of anesthetics. Less clear are the postanes-
thetic cases complicated by concurrent conditions 
such as atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, interver-
tebral disk disease, and spinal disorders. 
 H. Spinal or Epidural Hematoma 
 Needle or catheter trauma to epidural veins oft en 
causes minor bleeding in the spinal canal, although 
this usually has no consequences. A clinically sig-
nifi cant spinal hematoma can occur following spinal 
or epidural anesthesia, particularly in the presence 
of abnormal coagulation or a bleeding disorder. Th e 
incidence of such hematomas has been estimated to 
be about 1:150,000 for epidural blocks and 1:220,000 
for spinal anesthetics. Th e vast majority of reported 
cases have occurred in patients with abnormal coag-
ulation either secondary to disease or pharmaco-
logical therapies. Many hematomas have occurred 
immediately aft er removal of an epidural catheter. 
Th us, insertion and removal of an epidural catheter 
are risk factors. 
 Th e pathological insult to the spinal cord and 
nerves is due to the hematoma’s mass eff ect, com-
pressing neural tissue and causing direct pressure 
injury and ischemia. Th e diagnosis and treatment 
must be accomplished promptly, if permanent neu-
rological sequelae are to be avoided. Th e onset of 
symptoms is typically more sudden than with epi-
dural abscess.  Symptoms include sharp back and 
leg pain with a motor weakness and/or sphincter 
dysfunction . When hematoma is suspected, neuro-
logical imaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] 
or computed tomography [CT]) and neurosurgical 
consultation must be obtained immediately. In many 
cases, good neurological recovery has occurred in 
minimize Valsalva straining. Headache may persist 
for days, despite conservative therapy. 
 An epidural blood patch is an eff ective treat-
ment for PDPH. It involves injecting 15–20 mL of 
autologous blood into the epidural space at, or one 
interspace below, the level of the dural puncture. It is 
believed to stop further leakage of CSF by either mass 
eff ect or coagulation. Th e eff ect is usually immediate 
but may take some hours as CSF production slowly 
builds intracranial pressure. Approximately 90% of 
patients will respond to a single blood patch, and 
90% of initial nonresponders will obtain relief from 
a second injection. We do not recommend prophy-
lactic blood patching through an epidural catheter 
that was placed aft er a wet tap. Not all patients will 
develop PDPH, and the tip of the catheter may be 
many levels away from the dural defect. Most prac-
titioners either off er the epidural blood patch when 
PDPH becomes apparent or allow conservative ther-
apy a trial of 12–24 hr. 
 When evaluating patients with presumed 
PDPH, other sources of headache, including men-
ingeal infection and subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
should be considered in the diff erential diagnosis. 
 G. Neurological Injury 
 Perhaps no complication is more perplexing or 
distressing than persistent neurological defi cits fol-
lowing an apparently routine neuraxial block. An 
epidural hematoma or abscess must be ruled out. 
Either nerve roots or spinal cord may be injured. 
Th e latter may be avoided if the neuraxial blockade 
is performed below the termination of the conus 
(L1 in adults and L3 in children). Postoperative 
peripheral neuropathies can be due to direct physi-
cal trauma to nerve roots. Although most resolve 
spontaneously, some are permanent. Some of these 
defi cits have been associated with paresthesia from 
the needle or catheter or complaints of pain during 
injection. Some studies have suggested that multiple 
attempts during a technically diffi  cult block are also 
a risk factor. Any sustained paresthesia should alert 
the clinician to redirect the needle. Injections should 
be immediately stopped and the needle withdrawn, 
if they are associated with pain. Direct injection 
into the spinal cord can cause paraplegia. Damage 
to the conus medullaris may cause isolated sacral 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
971 
Th e reported incidence varies widely, from 1:6500 
to 1:500,000 epidurals. EA can occur in patients 
who did not receive regional anesthesia; risk factors 
in such cases include back trauma, injecting drug 
use, and neurosurgical procedures. Most reported 
anesthesia-related cases involve epidural cath-
eters. In one reported series, there was a mean of 
5 days from catheter insertion to the development 
of symptoms, although presentation can be delayed 
for weeks. 
 Th ere are four classic clinical stages of EA, 
although progression and time course can vary. 
Initially, symptoms include back or vertebral pain 
that is intensifi ed by percussion over the spine. 
Second, nerve root or radicular pain develops. Th e 
third stage is marked by motor and/or sensory 
defi cits or sphincter dysfunction. Paraplegia or 
paralysis marks the fourth stage. Ideally, the diag-
nosis is made in the early stages. Prognosis has con-
sistently been shown to correlate to the degree of 
neurological dysfunction at the time the diagnosis 
is made. Back pain and fever aft er epidural anes-
thesia should alert the clinician to consider EA. 
Radicular pain or neurological defi cit heightens the 
urgency to investigate. Once EA is suspected, the 
catheter should be removed (if still present) and 
the tip cultured. Th e injection site is examined for 
evidence of infection; if pus is expressed, it is sent 
for culture. Blood cultures should be obtained. If 
suspicion is high and cultures have been obtained, 
anti- Staphylococcus coverage can be instituted, 
as the most common organisms causing EA are 
 Staphylococcus aureus and  Staphylococcus epidermi-
dis . MRI or CT scanning should be performed to 
confi rm or rule out the diagnosis. Early neurosurgi-
cal and infectious disease consultation is advisable. 
In addition to antibiotics, treatment of EA usually 
involves decompression (laminectomy), although 
percutaneous drainage with fl uoroscopic or CT 
guidance has been reported. Th ere are a few reports 
of patients with no neurological signs being treated 
with antibiotics alone. 
 Suggested strategies for guarding against the 
occurrence of EA include (1) minimizing catheter 
manipulations and maintaining a closed system 
when possible; (2) using a micropore (0.22-µm) bac-
terial fi lter; and (3) removing an epidural catheter 
patients who have undergone surgical decompres-
sion within 8–12 hr. 
 Neuraxial anesthesia should be avoided in 
patients with coagulopathy, signifi cant thrombo-
cytopenia, platelet dysfunction, or those who have 
received fi brinolytic/thrombolytic therapy. Practice 
guidelines should be reviewed when considering 
neuraxial anesthesia in such patients, and the risk 
versus benefi t of these techniques should be weighed 
and delineated in the informed consent process. 
 I. Meningitis and Arachnoiditis 
 Infection of the subarachnoid space can follow 
neuraxial blocks as the result of contamination of 
the equipment or injected solutions, or as a result 
of organisms tracked in from the skin. Indwelling 
catheters may become colonized with organisms 
that then track deep, causing infection. Fortunately, 
these are rare occurrences. 
 Arachnoiditis, another reported rare complica-
tion of neuraxial anesthesia, may be infectious or non-
infectious. Clinically, it is marked by pain and other 
neurological symptoms, and, on radiographic imag-
ing, is seen as a clumping of the nerve roots. Cases of 
arachnoiditis have been traced to detergent in a spinal 
procaine preparation. Lumbar arachnoiditis has been 
reported from subarachnoid steroid injection, but 
is more commonly seen following spinal surgery or 
trauma. Prior to of the wide availability of single-use 
disposable spinal anesthesia trays, caustic solutions 
used to clean reusable spinal needles caused chemi-
cal meningitis and severe neurological dysfunction. 
Strict sterile technique should be employed, and face 
masks should be worn by all individuals in the room 
where neuraxial blocks are to be placed. Careful 
attention is particularly warranted in the labor room 
where family members are oft en curious to see what 
is being done to mitigate the parturient’s pain. Such 
individuals should be advised to avoid contaminating 
the tray, if hospital policy permits their presence dur-
ing epidural placement. If permitted, family members 
should also wear a mask to prevent contamination of 
the epidural tray with oral fl ora. 
 J. Epidural Abscess 
 Spinal epidural abscess (EA) is a rare but potentially 
devastating complication of neuraxial anesthesia. 
972 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
by bowel and bladder dysfunction together with evi-
dence of multiple nerve root injury. Th ere is lower 
motor neuron type injury with paresis of the legs. 
Sensory defi cits may be patchy, typically occurring 
in a peripheral nerve pattern. Pain may be similar to 
that of nerve root compromise. Animal studies sug-
gest that pooling or “maldistribution” of hyperbaric 
solutions of lidocaine can damage the nerve roots of 
the cauda equina. However, there are reports of CES 
occurring aft er uneventful single shot lidocaine spi-
nals. CES has also been reported following epidural 
anesthesia. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Neuraxial Anesthesia for Lithotripsy 
 A 56-year-old male presents for cystoscopy and 
stent placement for a large kidney stone. The 
patient has a long history of spinal problems and 
has undergone fusion of the cervical spine (C3–
C6) and laminectomy with fusion of the lower 
lumbar spine (L3–L5). On examination, he has no 
neck ﬂ exion or extension and has a Mallampati 
class IV airway. 
 What types of anesthesia are appropriate 
for this patient? 
 Cystoscopy and stent placement usually 
re quire general or neuraxial anesthesia. Selection of 
the type of anesthesia, as always, should be based 
on patient preference after informed consent. This 
patient presents potential diﬃ  culties for both gen-
eral and regional anesthesia. The limited excursion 
of the cervical spine, together with the anatomy of 
a class IV airway, makes diﬃ  culty in intubation and 
possibly ventilation almost certain. Induction of 
general anesthesia would be safest after the airway 
is secured with an awake ﬁ beroptic intubation . 
 Regional anesthesia also presents a problem 
in that the patient has had previous back surgery 
in the lumbar area, where neuraxial anesthesia is 
most commonly performed. Some clinicians con-
sider prior back surgery to be a relative contrain-
dication to neuraxial anesthesia. Postoperative 
distortion of the anatomy makes the block techni-
cally challenging and may increase the likelihood 
or at least changing the catheter, fi lter, and solution 
aft er a defi ned time interval (eg, some clinicians 
replace or remove all epidurals aft er 4 days). 
 K. Sheering of an Epidural Catheter 
 Th ere is a risk of neuraxial catheters sheering and 
breaking off  inside of tissues if they are withdrawn 
through the needle. If a catheter must be with-
drawn while the needle remains in situ, both must 
be carefully withdrawn  together . If a catheter breaks 
off  within the epidural space, many experts suggest 
leaving it and observing the patient. If, however, the 
breakage occurs in superfi cial tissues, the catheter 
should be surgically removed. 
 Complications Associated 
with Drug Toxicity 
 A. Systemic Toxicity 
 Absorption of excessive amounts of local anesthet-
ics can produce toxic blood levels (see “Intravascu-
lar Injection”). Excessive absorption from epidural 
or caudal blocks is rare when appropriate doses of 
local anesthetic are used. 
 B. Transient Neurological Symptoms 
 First described in 1993,  transient neurological 
symptoms (TNS), also referred to as transient radic-
ular irritation, are characterized by back pain radi-
ating to the legs without sensory or motor defi cits, 
occurring aft er the resolution of spinal anesthesia 
and resolving spontaneously within several days. It 
is most commonly associated with hyperbaric lido-
caine (incidence up to 11.9%), but has also been 
reported with tetracaine (1.6%), bupivacaine (1.3%), 
mepivacaine, prilocaine, procaine, and subarach-
noid ropivacaine. Th ere are also case reports of TNS 
following epidural anesthesia. Th e incidence of this 
syndrome is greatest among outpatients, particularly 
males undergoing surgery in the lithotomy position, 
and least among inpatients undergoing surgery in 
positions other than lithotomy. Th e pathogenesis of 
TNS is believed to represent concentration-depen-
dent neurotoxicity of local anesthetics. 
 C. Lidocaine Neurotoxicity 
 CES was associated with the use of continuous spinal 
catheters (prior to their withdrawal) and 5% lido-
caine (see “Spinal Catheters”). CES is characterized 
 
CHAPTER 45 Spinal, Epidural, & Caudal Blocks  
973 
possibility that some local anesthetic might pass 
through the dural puncture into the subarachnoid 
space. This could result in a higher than expected 
level of sensory and motor blockade. Careful incre-
mental injection of local anesthetic may help avoid 
this problem . 
 Conversely, a large dural puncture can theo-
retically diminish the eﬀ ect of subsequent spinal 
anesthesia at an adjacent level. Because only a 
small amount is used, leakage of local anesthetic 
with CSF through dural puncture can theoretically 
limit the cephalad spread of the solution . 
 GUIDELINES 
 Hawkins J, Arens J, Bucklin B, et al: Practice guidelines 
for obstetric anesthesia. Anesth 2007;106:843. 
 Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, et al: Regional 
anesthesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic 
or thrombolytic therapy: American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine Evidence-
Based Guidelines (Th ird Edition). Reg Anesth 
Pain Med 2010;35:64. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Auroy Y, Narchi P, Messiah A, et al: Serious 
complications related to regional anesthesia: 
results of a prospective survey in France. 
Anesthesiology 1997;87:479. 
 Auroy Y, Benhamou D, Bargues L, et al: Major 
complications of regional anesthesia in France. 
Anesthesiology 2002; 97:1274. 
 Apfel CC, Saxena A, Cakmakkaya O, et al: Prevention 
of postdural puncture headache aft er accidental 
dural puncture: a quantitative systematic review. 
Br J Anaesth 2010; 105: 255. 
 Arzola C, Davies S, Rofaeel A, et al: Ultrasound using 
the transverse approach to the lumbar spine provides 
reliable landmarks for labor epidurals. Anesth Analg 
2007;104:1188. 
 Birnbach D, Ranasinghe J. Anesthesia complications in 
the birthplace; is the neuraxial block always to blame? 
Clin Perinatol 2008;35:35. 
 Broadman LM, Hannallah RS, Norden JM, McGill WA: 
“Kiddie caudals”: experience with 1154 consecutive 
cases without complications. Anesth Analg 
1987;66:S18. 
of a failure, inadvertent dural puncture during 
epidural anesthesia, paresthesias, and unpredict-
able spread of the local anesthetics. Most clinicians 
believe that the neuraxial blockade can be safely 
performed above or below the level of surgery. 
Indeed, lumbar laminectomy can facilitate spinal 
anesthesia at the level of the surgery . 
 If the patient chooses to have neuraxial 
anesthesia, would spinal or epidural anesthesia 
be more appropriate? 
 The associated sympathectomy and subse-
quent drop in blood pressure are more gradual 
after epidural anesthesia than that following spinal 
anesthesia. With either type of anesthesia, signiﬁ -
cant hypotension should be treated with vasocon-
strictors and ﬂ uids; bradycardia should be treated . 
 After an explanation of the options, the patient 
seems to understand the risks of both types of 
anesthesia and desires epidural anesthesia. 
Placement of an epidural catheter is attempted 
at the L1–L2 interspace, but accidental dural 
puncture occurs: What options are now 
available? 
 Options include injecting a spinal dose of local 
anesthetic through the epidural needle to induce 
spinal anesthesia, passing an epidural catheter into 
the subarachnoid space to perform a continuous 
spinal anesthetic, or  proceeding with an awake 
ﬁ beroptic intubation in advance of general anes-
thesia. If a spinal dose of local anesthetic is to be 
injected, the syringe and needle should be kept 
in place for a few moments to prevent signiﬁ cant 
back leakage of anesthetic through the large dural 
hole. Threading an epidural catheter through the 
needle into the subarachnoid space allows sub-
sequent redosing and may reduce the incidence 
of dural puncture headache. When a catheter is 
advanced in the subarachnoid space well below 
L2, it should not be advanced more than 2–3 cm to 
avoid injury to the cauda equina . 
 How might a dural puncture aﬀ ect subsequent 
epidural or spinal anesthesia? 
 A potential hazard of epidural anesthesia at 
a level adjacent to a large dural puncture is the 
974 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Khalil S, Campos C, Farag AM, et al: Caudal block in 
children. Anesthesiology 1999;91:1279. 
 Lee LA, Posner KL, Domino KB, et al: Injuries 
associated with regional anesthesia in the 1980s 
and 1990s: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 
2004;101:143. 
 Liu SS, McDonald SB: Current issues in spinal anesthesia. 
Anesthesiology 2001;94:888. 
 Munnur U, Suresh S: Backache, headache, and 
neurological defi cit aft er regional anesthesia. 
Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2003;21:71. 
 Peutrell JM, Lonnqvist P: Neuraxial blocks for 
anaesthesia and analgesia in children. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2003;16:461. 
 Pollard JB: Cardiac arrest during spinal anesthesia: 
common mechanisms and strategies for prevention. 
Anesth Analg 2001;92:252. 
 Reynolds F: Neurological infections aft er neuraxial 
anesthesia. Anesthesiol Clin 2008;26:23. 
 Rodgers A, Walker N, Schug S, et al: Reduction of 
postoperative mortality and morbidity with epidural 
or spinal anaesthesia: results from overview of 
randomised trials. BMJ 2000;321:1493. 
 Rukewe A, Alonge T, Fatiregun A: Spinal anesthesia in 
children: no longer an anathema. Pediatr Anesth 
2010;20:1036. 
 Sarubbi FA, Vasquez JE: Spinal epidural abscess 
associated with the use of temporary epidural 
catheters: report of two cases and review. Clin Infect 
Dis 1997;25:1155. 
 Steiner L, Hauenstein L, Ruppen W, et al: Bupivacaine 
concentrations in lumbar cerebrospinal fl uid in 
patients with failed spinal anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 
2009; 102:839. 
 Suresh S, Wheeler M: Practical pediatric regional 
anesthesia. Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2002;
20:83. 
 Vercauteren M, Heytens L: Anaesthetic considerations for 
patients with a pre-existing neurological defi cit: are 
neuraxial techniques safe? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 
2007;51:831. 
 Wong CA: Nerve injuries aft er neuraxial anaesthesia and 
their medico legal implications. Best Pract Res Clin 
Obstet Gynaecol 2010;24:367. 
 Brookman CA, Rutledge ML: Epidural abscess: case report 
and literature review. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2000;25:428. 
 Chin KJ, Karmakar M, Peng P: Ultrasonography of the 
adult thoracic and lumbar spine for central neuraxial 
blockade. Anesthesiology 2011;114:1459. 
 Chin K J, Perlas A, Chan V, et al: Ultrasound imaging 
facilitates spinal anesthesia in adults with diffi  cult 
surface anatomic landmarks. Anesthesiology 
2011;115:94. 
 Choi S, Brull R. Neuraxial techniques in obstetric 
and nonobstetric patients with common bleeding 
diasthesis. Anesth Analg 2009;109:648. 
 Cook TM, Counsell D, Wildsmith JA. Major 
complications of central neuraxial block: report on 
the Th ird National Audit Project of the Royal College 
of Anaesthetists. Br J Anaesthes 2009;102:179. 
 Cousins MJ, Bridenbaugh PO, Carr DB, Horlocker TT: 
 Neural Blockade in Clinical Anesthesia and Pain 
Management , 4th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 
2008. 
 Dahlgren N, Tornebrandt K: Neurological complications 
aft er anaesthesia. A follow-up of 18,000 spinal and 
epidural anaesthetics performed over three years. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1995;39:872. 
 Dalens B: Some current controversies in paediatric regional 
anaesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2006;19:301. 
 Ecoff ey C, Lacroiz F, Giaufre E, et al: Epidemiology 
and morbidity of regional anesthesia in children: a 
follow-up one year prospective survey of the French-
Language Society of Paediatric Anaesthesiologists 
(ADARPEF). Pediatr Anesth 2010;20:1061. 
 Ellis H, Feldman S, Harrop-Griffi  ths W:  Anatomy for 
Anaesthetists , 8th ed. Blackwell Publishing, 2004. 
 Grände P: Mechanisms behind postspinal headache 
and brain stem compression following lumbar 
dural puncture—a physiological approach. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand 2005;49:619. 
 Green L, Machin S: Managing anticoagulated patients 
during neuraxial anaesthesia. Br J Haematol 
2010;149:195. 
 Hebl J, Horlocker T, Kopp S, et al: Neuraxial blockade in 
patients with preexisting spinal stenosis, lumbar disk 
disease, or prior spinae surgery: effi  cacy and neurologic 
complications. Anesth Analg 2010;111:1511. 
 975
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
46
 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
 In addition to potent analgesia, regional 
anesthesia may lead to reductions in 
the stress response, systemic analgesic 
requirements, opioid-related side 
eﬀ ects, general anesthesia requirements, 
and possibly the incidence of chronic pain. 
 Regional anesthetics should be 
administered in an area where standard 
hemodynamic monitors, supplemental 
oxygen, and resuscitative medications and 
equipment are readily available. 
 Local anesthetic may be deposited at any 
point along the brachial plexus, depending 
on the desired block eﬀ ects: interscalene 
for shoulder and proximal humerus 
surgical procedures; and supraclavicular, 
infraclavicular, and axillary for surgeries 
distal to the mid-humerus. 
 A properly performed interscalene block 
invariably blocks the ipsilateral phrenic 
nerve, so careful consideration should be 
given to patients with severe pulmonary 
disease or preexisting contralateral phrenic 
nerve palsy. 
 Brachial plexus block at the level of the 
cords provides excellent anesthesia for 
procedures at or distal to the elbow. 
The upper arm and shoulder are not 
anesthetized with this approach. As 
with other brachial plexus blocks, the 
intercostobrachial nerve (T2 dermatome) 
is spared. 
1
2
3
4
5
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 The axillary, musculocutaneous, and medial 
brachial cutaneous nerves branch from the 
brachial plexus proximal to the location 
in which local anesthetic is deposited 
during an axillary nerve block, and thus 
are usually spared. 
 Often it is necessary to anesthetize a single 
terminal nerve, either for minor surgical 
procedures with a limited ﬁ eld or as a 
supplement to an incomplete brachial plexus 
block. Terminal nerves may be anesthetized 
anywhere along their course, but the elbow 
and the wrist are the two most favored sites. 
 Intravenous regional anesthesia, also called 
a Bier block, can provide intense surgical 
anesthesia for short surgical procedures 
(45–60 min) on an extremity. 
 A femoral nerve block alone will seldom 
provide surgical anesthesia, but it is often 
used to provide postoperative analgesia for 
hip, thigh, knee, and ankle procedures. 
 Posterior lumbar plexus blocks are useful 
for surgical procedures involving areas 
innervated by the femoral, lateral femoral 
cutaneous, and obturator nerves. Complete 
anesthesia of the knee can be attained 
with a proximal sciatic nerve block. 
 Blockade of the sciatic nerve may occur 
anywhere along its course and is indicated 
for surgical procedures involving the hip, 
thigh, knee, lower leg, and foot. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
 Sarah J. Madison, MD and Brian M. Ilfeld, MD, MS 
—Continued next page
976 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
Continued—
 Popliteal nerve blocks provide excellent 
coverage for foot and ankle surgery, 
while sparing much of the hamstring 
muscles, allowing lifting of the foot with 
knee ﬂ exion, thus easing ambulation. All 
sciatic nerve blocks fail to provide complete 
anesthesia for the cutaneous medial 
leg and ankle joint capsule, but when a 
saphenous (or femoral) block is added, 
complete anesthesia below the knee is 
provided. 
 A complete ankle block requires a series of 
ﬁ ve nerve blocks, but the process may be 
streamlined to minimize needle insertions. 
All ﬁ ve injections are required to anesthetize 
the entire foot; however, many surgical 
procedures involve only a few terminal 
nerves, and only aﬀ ected nerves should 
be blocked. 
12
13
 Intercostal blocks result in the highest 
blood levels of local anesthetic per volume 
injected of any block in the body, and care 
must be taken to avoid toxic levels of local 
anesthetic. 
 The thoracic paravertebral space is 
deﬁ ned posteriorly by the superior 
costotransverse ligament, anterolaterally 
by the parietal pleura, medially by the 
vertebrae and the intervertebral foramina, 
and inferiorly and superiorly by the heads 
of the ribs. 
 The subcostal (T12), ilioinguinal (L1), 
and iliohypogastric (L1) nerves are 
targeted in the transversus abdominus 
plane block, providing anesthesia to the 
ipsilateral lower abdomen below the 
umbilicus. 
14
15
16
 An understanding of regional anesthesia anatomy 
and techniques is required of the well-rounded 
 anesthesiologist. Although anatomic relationships 
have not changed over time, our ability to identify 
them has evolved. From the paresthesia-seeking 
techniques described by Winnie in the mid-twen-
tieth century, to the popularization of the nerve 
stimulator, to the introduction of ultrasound 
guidance, anesthesiologists and their patients 
have benefitted from technology’s evolution. The 
field of regional anesthesia has accordingly 
expanded to one that addresses not only the intra-
operative concerns of the anesthesiologist, but 
also longer term perioperative pain management. 
 In addition to potent analgesia, regional 
anesthesia may lead to reductions in the 
stress response, systemic analgesic requirements, 
opioid-related side effects, general anesthesia 
requirements, and possibly the development of 
chronic pain. 
1
 PATIENT SELECTION 
 Th e selection of a regional anesthetic technique is 
a process that begins with a thorough history and 
physical examination. Although many patients are 
candidates for regional anesthesia/analgesia, as 
with any medical procedure a risk–benefi t analy-
sis must be performed. Th e risk–benefi t ratio oft en 
favors regional anesthesia in patients with multiple 
comorbidities for whom a general anesthetic car-
ries a greater risk. In addition, patients intolerant to 
systemic analgesics (eg, those with obstructive sleep 
apnea or at high risk for nausea) may benefi t from 
the opioid-sparing eff ects of a regional analgesic. 
Patients with chronic pain and opioid tolerance may 
receive optimal analgesia with a continuous periph-
eral nerve block (so-called perineural local anes-
thetic infusion). 
 A comprehensive knowledge of anatomy and an 
understanding of the planned surgical procedure are 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
977
 Other risks associated with regional anesthesia 
include local anesthetic toxicity from intravascular 
injection or perivascular absorption. In the event of 
a local anesthetic toxic reaction, seizure activity and 
cardiovascular collapse may occur. Supportive mea-
sures should begin immediately, including solici-
tation of assistance with a code blue, the initiation 
of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, lipid emulsion 
administration to sequester local anesthetic, and 
preparation for cardiopulmonary bypass. 
 Site-specifi c risks should also be considered for 
each individual patient. In a patient with severe pul-
monary compromise or hemidiaphragmatic paraly-
sis, for example, a contralateral interscalene or deep 
cervical plexus block with resultant phrenic nerve 
block could be disastrous. 
 CHOICE OF LOCAL 
ANESTHETIC 
 Th e decision about which local anesthetic to employ 
for a particular nerve block depends on the desired 
onset, duration, and relative blockade of sensory and 
motor fi bers. Potential for toxicity should be consid-
ered, as well as site-specifi c risks. A detailed discus-
sion of local anesthetics is provided elsewhere (see 
Chapter 16). 
 PREPARATION 
 Regional anesthetics should be administered 
in an area where standard hemodynamic 
monitors, supplemental oxygen, and resuscitative 
medications and equipment are readily available. 
Patients should be monitored with pulse oximetry, 
noninvasive blood pressure, and electrocardiogra-
phy; measurement of end-tidal CO 2 and fraction 
of inspired oxygen (Fi o 2 ) should also be available. 
Positioning should be ergonomically favorable for 
the practitioner and comfortable for the patient. 
Intravenous premedication should be employed to 
allay anxiety and minimize discomfort. A relatively 
short-acting benzodiazepine and opioid are most 
oft en used and should be titrated for comfort while 
ensuring that patients respond to verbal cues. Sterile 
technique should be strictly observed. 
2
important for selection of the appropriate regional 
anesthetic technique. If possible, discussion with the 
surgeon about various considerations (tourniquet 
placement, bone graft ing, projected surgical dura-
tion) is ideal. Also, knowing the anticipated course 
of recovery and anticipated level of postoperative 
pain will oft en infl uence specifi c decisions regarding 
a regional anesthetic technique (eg, a single-injec-
tion versus continuous peripheral nerve block). 
 RISKS & CONTRAINDICATIONS 
 Patient cooperation and participation are key to 
the success and safety of every regional anesthetic 
procedure; patients who are unable to remain still 
for a procedure may be exposed to increased risk. 
Examples include younger pediatric patients and 
some developmentally delayed individuals, as well 
as patients with dementia or movement disorders. 
Bleeding disorders and pharmacological anticoagu-
lation heighten the risk of local hematoma or hem-
orrhage, and this risk must be balanced against the 
possible benefi ts of regional block. Specifi c periph-
eral nerve block locations warranting the most con-
cern are posterior lumbar plexus and paravertebral 
blocks owing to their relative proximity to the retro-
peritoneal space and neuraxis, respectively. 
 Placement of a block needle through a site of 
infection can theoretically track infectious mate-
rial into the body, where it poses a risk to the target 
nerve tissue and surrounding structures. Th erefore, 
the presence of a local infection is a relative contra-
indication to performing a peripheral nerve block. 
Indwelling perineural catheters can serve as a nidus 
of infection; however, the risk in patients with sys-
temic infection remains unknown. 
 Although nerve injury is always a possibil-
ity with a regional anesthetic, some patients are at 
increased risk. Individuals with a preexisting condi-
tion (eg, peripheral neuropathy or previous nerve 
injury) may have a higher incidence of complica-
tions, including prolonged or permanent sensori-
motor block. Th e precise mechanisms have yet to be 
clearly defi ned but may involve local ischemia from 
high injection pressure or vasoconstrictors, a neuro-
toxic eff ect of local anesthetics, or direct trauma to 
nerve tissue. 
978 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Paresthesia Technique 
 Formerly the mainstay of regional anesthesia, this 
technique is now rarely used for nerve localiza-
tion. Using known anatomic relationships and sur-
face landmarks as a guide, a block needle is placed 
in proximity to the target nerve or plexus. When a 
needle makes direct contact with a sensory nerve, 
a paresthesia (abnormal sensation) is elicited in its 
area of sensory distribution. 
 Nerve Stimulation Technique 
 For this technique, an insulated needle concen-
trates electrical current at the needle tip, while a 
wire attached to the needle hub connects to a nerve 
 stimulator—a battery-powered machine that emits a 
small amount (0–5 mA) of electric current at a set 
interval (usually 1 or 2 Hz). A grounding electrode 
is attached to the patient to complete the circuit 
( Figure 46–2 ). When the insulated needle is placed in 
 BLOCK TECHNIQUES 
 Field Block Technique 
 A  fi eld block is a local anesthetic injection that tar-
gets terminal cutaneous nerves ( Figure 46–1 ). Field 
blocks are used commonly by surgeons to minimize 
incisional pain and may be used as a supplementary 
technique or as a sole anesthetic for minor, super-
fi cial procedures. Anesthesiologists oft en use fi eld 
blocks to anesthetize the superfi cial cervical plexus 
for procedures involving the neck or shoulder; the 
intercostobrachial nerve for surgery involving the 
medial upper extremity proximal to the elbow (in 
combination with a brachial plexus nerve block); 
and the saphenous nerve for surgery involving the 
medial leg or ankle joint (in combination with a sci-
atic nerve block). Field blocks may be undesirable in 
cases where they obscure the operative anatomy, or 
where local tissue acidosis from infection prevents 
eff ective local anesthetic functioning. 
 FIGURE 461  A ﬁ eld block targets 
terminal cutaneous nerves, such as 
the intercostobrachial nerve. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
979 
technique, 30–40 mL of anesthetic is usually injected 
with gentle aspiration between divided doses. 
 Ultrasound Technique 
 Ultrasound for peripheral nerve localization is 
becoming increasingly popular; it may be used alone 
or combined with other modalities such as nerve 
stimulation. Ultrasound uses high-frequency (1–20 
MHz) sound waves emitted from piezoelectric crys-
tals that travel at diff erent rates through tissues of dif-
ferent densities, returning a signal to the transducer. 
Depending on the amplitude of signal received, the 
crystals deform to create an electronic voltage that is 
converted into a two-dimensional grayscale image. 
Th e degree of effi  ciency with which sound passes 
through a substance determines its echogenicity. 
Structures and substances through which sound 
passes easily are described as  hypoechoic and appear 
dark or black on the ultrasound screen. In contrast, 
structures refl ecting more sound waves appear 
brighter—or white—on the ultrasound screen, and 
are termed  hyperechoic . 
 Th e optimal transducer varies depending upon 
the depth of the target nerve and approach angle of 
the needle relative to the transducer ( Figure 46–3 ). 
High-frequency transducers provide a high-res-
olution picture with a relatively clear image but 
proximity to a motor nerve, muscle contractions are 
induced, and local anesthetic is injected. Although it 
is common to redirect the block needle until muscle 
contractions occur at a current less than 0.5 mA, 
there is scant evidence to support this specifi c cur-
rent in all cases. Similarly, although some have sug-
gested that muscle contraction with current less 
than 0.2 mA implies intraneural needle placement, 
there is little evidence to support this specifi c cutoff . 
Nonetheless, most practitioners inject local anes-
thetic when current between 0.2 and 0.5 mA results 
in a muscle response. For most blocks using this 
 FIGURE 462  A nerve stimulator delivers a small 
amount of electric current to the block needle to facilitate 
nerve localization. 
Linear
Curvilinear
Good
Poor
No image
 FIGURE 463  A linear probe oﬀ ers higher resolution with less penetration. A curvilinear probe provides better 
penetration with lower resolution. 
980 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
placement of a percutaneous catheter adjacent 
to a peripheral nerve, followed by local anes-
thetic administration to prolong a nerve block 
( Figure 46–5 ). Potential advantages appear to 
depend on successfully improving analgesia and 
include reductions in resting and dynamic pain, sup-
plemental analgesic requirements, opioid-related 
side eff ects, and sleep disturbances. In some cases 
patient satisfaction, ambulation, and functioning 
may be improved; an accelerated resumption of 
passive joint range-of-motion realized; and reduced 
time until discharge-readiness as well as actual dis-
charge from the hospital or rehabilitation center 
achieved. 
 Th ere are many types of catheters, including 
nonstimulating and stimulating, fl exible and more 
rigid, through-the-needle and over-the- needle. 
Currently, there is little evidence that a single 
design results in superior eff ects. Local anesthetic 
is the primary medication infused, as adjuvants 
do not add benefi ts to perineural infusions (unlike 
single-injection peripheral nerve blocks). Long-
acting local anesthetics (eg, ropivacaine) are more 
commonly used as they provide a more favorable 
 sensory-to-motor block ratio (optimizing analgesia 
while minimizing motor block). In an attempt to 
further minimize any induced motor block, dilute 
off er poor tissue penetration and are therefore used 
predominantly for more superfi cial nerves. Low-
frequency transducers provide an image of poorer 
quality but have better tissue penetration and are 
therefore used for deeper structures. Transducers 
with a linear array off er an undistorted image and 
are therefore oft en the fi rst choice among practitio-
ners. However, for deeper target nerves that require 
a more acute angle between the needle and long-axis 
of the transducer, a curved array (curvilinear) trans-
ducer will maximize returning ultrasound waves, 
providing the optimal needle image ( Figure 46–3 ). 
Nerves are best imaged in cross-section, where 
they have a characteristic honeycomb appearance 
(“short axis”). Needle insertion can pass either par-
allel (“in plane”) or not parallel (“out of plane”) to 
the plane of the ultrasound waves ( Figure 46–4 ). 
Unlike nerve stimulation alone, ultrasound guid-
ance allows for a variable volume of local anesthetic 
to be injected, with the fi nal amount determined by 
what is observed under direct vision. Th is technique 
usually results in a far lower injected volume of local 
anesthetic (10–30 mL). 
 Continuous Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
 Also termed  perineural local anesthetic infusion , 
continuous peripheral nerve blocks involve the 
A
B
 FIGURE 464  In-plane ( A ) and out-of-plane ( B ) ultrasound approaches. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
981 
formation. In addition, a perineural infusion aff ect-
ing the femoral nerve increases the risk of fall-
ing, although to what degree and by what specifi c 
mechanism (eg, sensory, motor, or proprioception 
defi cits) remain unknown. 
 UPPER EXTREMITY 
PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCKS 
 Brachial Plexus Anatomy 
 Th e brachial plexus is formed by the union of the 
anterior primary divisions (ventral rami) of 
the fi ft h through the eighth cervical nerves and 
the fi rst thoracic nerves. Contributions from C4 
and T2 are oft en minor or absent. As the nerve 
roots leave the intervertebral foramina, they con-
verge, forming trunks, divisions, cords, branches, 
and then fi nally terminal nerves. Th e three distinct 
trunks formed between the anterior and middle 
scalene muscles are termed superior, middle, and 
inferior based on their vertical orientation. As the 
trunks pass over the lateral border of the fi rst rib 
local anesthetic (0.1–0.2%) is oft en infused; how-
ever, recent evidence suggests that it is the total dose, 
and not concentration, that determines the major-
ity of block eff ects. Unlike  single -injection peripheral 
nerve blocks, no adjuvant added to a perineural local 
anesthetic  infusion has been demonstrated to be of 
benefi t. Th e local anesthetic may be administered 
exclusively as repeated bolus doses or a basal infu-
sion, or as a combination of the two methods. Using 
a small, portable infusion pump ( Figure 46–6 ), con-
tinuous peripheral nerve blocks may be provided on 
an ambulatory basis. 
 As with all medical procedures, there are 
potential risks associated with continuous periph-
eral nerve blocks. Th erefore, these infusions are 
usually reserved for patients having procedures 
expected to result in postoperative pain that is dif-
fi cult to control with oral analgesics and will not 
resolve in less time than the duration of a single-
injection peripheral nerve block. Serious compli-
cations, which are relatively rare, include systemic 
local anesthetic toxicity, catheter retention, nerve 
injury, infection, and retroperitoneal hematoma 
 FIGURE 465  Placement of a percutaneous catheter adjacent to a peripheral nerve. 
982 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 FIGURE 466  Elastomeric ( A ) and electronic ( B ) portable infusion pumps. 
A
B
and under the clavicle, each trunk divides into 
anterior and posterior divisions. As the brachial 
plexus emerges below the clavicle, the fi bers com-
bine again to form three cords that are named 
according to their relationship to the axillary 
artery: lateral, medial, and posterior. At the lateral 
border of the pectoralis minor muscle, each cord 
gives off  a large branch before ending as a major 
terminal nerve. Th e lateral cord gives off  the lateral 
branch of the median nerve and terminates as the 
musculocutaneous nerve; the medial cord gives off  
the medial branch of the median nerve and termi-
nates as the ulnar nerve; and the posterior cord 
gives off  the axillary nerve and terminates as the 
radial nerve.  Local anesthetic may be depos-
ited at any point along the brachial plexus, 
depending 
on 
the 
desired 
block 
eff ects 
( Figure 46–7 ): interscalene for shoulder and proxi-
mal humerus surgical procedures; and supracla-
vicular, infraclavicular, and axillary for surgeries 
distal to the mid-humerus. 
3
 Interscalene Block 
 An interscalene brachial plexus block is indicated 
for procedures involving the shoulder and upper 
arm ( Figure 46–8 ). Roots C5–7 are most densely 
blocked with this approach; and the ulnar nerve 
originating from C8 and T1 may be spared. Th ere-
fore, interscalene blocks are not appropriate for sur-
gery at or distal to the elbow. For complete surgical 
anesthesia of the shoulder, the C3 and C4 cutane-
ous branches may need to be supplemented with a 
superfi cial cervical plexus block or local infi ltration. 
 Contraindications to an interscalene block 
include local infection, severe coagulopathy, local 
anesthetic allergy, and patient refusal.  A 
properly performed interscalene block invari-
ably blocks the ipsilateral phrenic nerve (completely 
for nerve stimulation techniques; unclear for ultra-
sound-guided techniques), so careful consideration 
should be given to patients with severe pulmonary 
disease or preexisting contralateral phrenic nerve 
palsy. Th e hemidiaphragmatic paresis may result in 
4
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
983 
 FIGURE 467  The location of local anesthetic deposition along the brachial plexus depends on the desired eﬀ ects 
of the block. 
Anterior (palmar) view
Posterior (dorsal) view
Axillary nerve
Superior lateral
brachial cutaneous
nerve
Radial nerve
Inferior lateral
brachial cutaneous
nerve
Radial nerve
Superficial branch
Median nerve
Palmar and
palmar digital
branches
Ulnar nerve
Palmar and
palmar digital
branches
Ulnar nerve
Dorsal branch,
dorsal digital
branches, and
proper palmar
digital branches
Lateral
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
(terminal part of
musculocutaneous
nerve)
Medial
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
Intercostobrachial
and medial brachial
cutaneous nerve
Suprascapular
nerve
Supraclavicular
nerves
(from cervical
plexus)
Axillary nerve
Superior lateral
brachial cutaneous
nerve
Radial nerve
Posterior brachial
cutaneous nerve,
inferior lateral
brachial cutaneous
nerve, and posterior
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
Radial nerve
Superficial branch
and dorsal digital
branches
Median nerve
Proper palmar
digital branches
Lateral
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
(terminal part of
musculocutaneous
nerve)
dyspnea, hypercapnia, and hypoxemia. A Horner’s 
syndrome (myosis, ptosis, and anhidrosis) may 
result from proximal tracking of local anesthetic 
and blockade of sympathetic fi bers to the cervico-
thoracic ganglion. Recurrent laryngeal nerve 
involvement oft en induces hoarseness. In a patient 
with contralateral vocal cord paralysis, respiratory 
distress may ensue. Other site-specifi c risks include 
vertebral artery injection (suspect if immediate sei-
zure activity is observed), spinal or epidural injec-
tion, and pneumothorax. Even 1 mL of local 
anesthetic delivered into the vertebral artery may 
induce a seizure. Similarly, intrathecal, subdural, 
and epidural local anesthetic spread is possible. 
Lastly, pneumothorax is possible due to the close 
proximity of the pleura. 
 Th e brachial plexus passes between the anterior 
and middle scalene muscles at the level of the cricoid 
cartilage, or C6 ( Figure 46–9 ). Palpation of the inter-
scalene groove is usually accomplished with the 
patient supine and the head rotated 30° or less to the 
contralateral side. Th e external jugular vein oft en 
crosses the interscalene groove at the level of the 
cricoid cartilage. Th e interscalene groove should not 
be confused with the groove between the sternoclei-
domastoid and the anterior scalene muscle, which 
lies further anterior. Having the patient lift  and turn 
the head against resistance oft en helps delineate the 
984 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 FIGURE 468  An interscalene block is appropriate for shoulder and proximal humerus procedures. The ventral rami of 
C5–C8 and T1 form the brachial plexus. 
Nerves or
plexus roots
Trunks
Divisions
Cords
Main branches
Lower trunk
Medial cord
Lateral cord
Posterior cord
Middle trunk
Upper
trunk
C6
C5
C4
C7
C8
T1
Interscalene
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
985 
withdrawn, pressure held for 3–5 min, and land-
marks reassessed. 
 B. Ultrasound 
 A needle in-plane or out-of-plane technique may 
be used, and an insulated needle attached to a nerve 
stimulator can be used to confi rm the accuracy of 
the targeted structure. For both techniques, aft er 
identifi cation of the sternocleidomastoid muscle 
and interscalene groove at the approximate level 
of C6, a high-frequency linear transducer is placed 
perpendicular to the course of the interscalene mus-
cles (short axis;  Figure 46–11 ). Th e brachial plexus 
and anterior and middle scalene muscles should 
be visualized in cross-section ( Figure 46–12 ). Th e 
brachial plexus at this level appears as three to fi ve 
hypoechoic circles. Th e carotid artery and internal 
jugular vein may be seen lying anterior to the ante-
rior scalene muscle; the sternocleidomastoid is vis-
ible superfi cially as it tapers to form its lateral edge. 
 For an out-of-plane technique, the block nee-
dle is inserted just cephalad to the transducer and 
advanced in a caudal direction toward the visual-
ized plexus. Aft er careful aspiration for nonappear-
ance of blood, local anesthetic (hypoechoic) spread 
anatomy. If surgical anesthesia is desired for the 
entire shoulder, the intercostobrachial nerve must 
usually be targeted separately with a fi eld block since 
it originates from T2 and is not aff ected with an 
interscalene block. Interscalene perineural infusions 
provide potent analgesia  following shoulder surgery. 
 A. Nerve Stimulation 
 A relatively short (5-cm) insulated needle is usu-
ally employed. Th e interscalene groove is palpated 
using the nondominant hand, pressing fi rmly to 
stabilize the skin against the underlying structures 
( Figure 46–10 ). Aft er the skin is anesthetized, the 
block needle is inserted at a slightly medial and cau-
dad angle and advanced to optimally elicit a motor 
response of the deltoid or biceps muscles (suggesting 
stimulation of the superior trunk). A motor response 
of the diaphragm indicates that the needle is placed 
in too anterior a direction; a motor response of the 
trapezius or serratus anterior muscles indicates that 
the needle is placed in too posterior a direction. If 
bone (transverse process) is contacted, the needle 
should be redirected more anteriorly. Aspiration 
of arterial blood should raise concern for vertebral 
or carotid artery puncture; the needle should be 
Cricoid
cartilage
 FIGURE 469  The brachial plexus passes between 
the anterior and middle scalene muscles at the level of 
the cricoid cartilage, or C6. 
 FIGURE 4610  Interscalene block using nerve 
stimulation. 
986 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
middle scalene muscle until it has passed through 
the fascia anteriorly into the interscalene groove. 
Th e needle tip and shaft  should be visualized during 
the entire block performance. Depending on visu-
alized spread relative to the target nerve(s), a lower 
volume (10 mL) may be employed for postoperative 
analgesia, whereas a larger volume (20–30 mL) is 
commonly used for surgical anesthesia. 
 Supraclavicular Block 
 Once described as the “spinal of the arm,” a supra-
clavicular block off ers dense anesthesia of the 
brachial plexus for surgical procedures at or dis-
tal to the elbow ( Figure 46–13 ). Historically, the 
supraclavicular block fell out of favor due to the 
high incidence of complications (namely, pneumo-
thorax) that occurred with paresthesia and nerve 
stimulator techniques. It has seen a resurgence in 
recent years as the use of ultrasound guidance has 
theoretically improved safety. Th e supraclavicu-
lar block does not reliably anesthetize the axillary 
and suprascapular nerves, and thus is not ideal for 
shoulder surgery. Sparing of distal branches, par-
ticularly the ulnar nerve, may occur. Supraclavicu-
lar perineural catheters provide inferior analgesia 
compared with infraclavicular infusion and are 
oft en displaced due to a lack of muscle mass to aid 
catheter retention. 
should occur adjacent to (sometimes surrounding) 
the plexus. 
 For an in-plane technique, the needle is inserted 
just posterior to the ultrasound transducer in a direc-
tion exactly parallel to the ultrasound beam. A lon-
ger block needle (8 cm) is usually necessary. It may 
be helpful to have the patient turn slightly laterally 
with the aff ected side up to facilitate manipulation 
of the needle. Th e needle is advanced through the 
 FIGURE 4612  Interscalene block. 
Ultrasound image of the brachial plexus in 
the interscalene groove. ASM, anterior scalene 
muscle; MSM, middle scalene muscle; SCM, 
sternocleidomastoid; N, brachial plexus nerve 
roots in cross-section. 
Clavicle
 FIGURE 4611  Ultrasound-guided interscalene block 
(in-plane technique). 
ASM
MSM
SCM
N
N
N
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
987 
 FIGURE 4613  A supraclavicular block can provide dense anesthesia for procedures at or distal to the elbow. Light 
blue shading indicates regions of variable blockade; purple shading indicates regions of more reliable blockade. 
Nerves or
plexus roots
Trunks
Divisions
Cords
Main branches
Lower trunk
Medial cord
Lateral cord
Posterior cord
Middle trunk
Upper
trunk
C6
C5
C4
C7
C8
T1
Supraclavicular
988 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Many of the same precautions that are taken 
with patient selection for an interscalene block 
should be exercised with a supraclavicular block. 
Nearly half of patients undergoing supraclavicu-
lar block will experience ipsilateral phrenic nerve 
palsy, although this incidence may be decreased by 
using ultrasound guidance, allowing use of a mini-
mal volume of local anesthetic. Horner’s syndrome 
and recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy may also occur. 
Pneumothorax and subclavian artery puncture, 
although theoretically less likely under ultrasound 
guidance, remain potential risks. 
 A. Ultrasound 
 Th e patient should be supine with the head turned 
30 o toward the contralateral side. A linear, high-
frequency transducer is placed in the supraclavicu-
lar fossa superior to the clavicle and angled slightly 
toward the thorax ( Figure 46–14 ). Th e subclavian 
artery should be easily identifi ed. Th e brachial plexus 
appears as multiple hypoechoic disks just superfi cial 
and lateral to the subclavian artery ( Figure 46–15 ). 
Th e fi rst rib should also be identifi ed as a hyperechoic 
line just deep to the artery. Pleura may be identifi ed 
adjacent to the rib, and can be distinguished from 
bone by its movement with breathing. 
 For an out-of-plane technique, a short, 22-gauge 
blunt-tipped needle is used. Th e skin is anesthe-
tized, and the needle inserted just cephalad to the 
ultrasound transducer in a posterior and caudad 
 FIGURE 4614  Ultrasound probe placement for 
supraclavicular block (in-plane technique). 
 FIGURE 4615  Supraclavicular block. 
Ultrasound image of the brachial plexus in the 
supraclavicular fossa. SA, subclavian artery; 
R, rib; N, brachial plexus in cross-section. 
SA
R
N
N
N
direction. Aft er careful aspiration for the nonap-
pearance of blood, 30–40 mL of local anesthetic s 
injected in 5-mL increments while visualizing local 
anesthetic spread around the brachial plexus. 
 For an in-plane technique, a longer needle may 
be necessary. Th e needle is inserted lateral to the 
transducer in a direction parallel to the ultrasound 
beam. Th e needle is advanced medially toward the 
subclavian artery until the tip is visualized near the 
brachial plexus just lateral and superfi cial to the 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
989
oft en provide inadequate needle visualization due 
to the relatively acute needle-to-transducer angle. 
Th e axillary artery and vein are identifi ed in cross-
section (Figure 46–18B). Th e medial, lateral, and 
posterior cords appear as hyperechoic bundles posi-
tioned caudad, cephalad, and posterior to the artery, 
respectively. A relatively long needle is inserted 2–3 
cm cephalad to the transducer. Optimal needle 
positioning is between the axillary artery and the 
posterior cord. Th ree randomized, controlled trials 
have demonstrated equivalent results with a single 
30-mL injection adjacent to the posterior cord or 
divided among each of the cords. Insertion of a 
perineural catheter should always be in the same 
location posterior to the axillary artery, and infra-
clavicular infusion has been shown to provide supe-
rior analgesia to both supraclavicular and axillary 
catheters. 
 Axillary Block 
 At the lateral border of the pectoralis minor muscle, 
the cords of the brachial plexus form large terminal 
branches.  Th e axillary, musculocutaneous, 
and medial brachial cutaneous nerves branch 
from the brachial plexus proximal to the location in 
which local anesthetic is deposited during an axil-
lary nerve block, and thus are usually spared 
( Figure 46–19 ). At this level, the major terminal 
nerves oft en are separated by fascia; therefore mul-
tiple injections (10-mL each) may be required to 
reliably produce anesthesia of the entire arm distal 
to the elbow ( Figure 46–20 ). 
 Th ere are few contraindications to axillary bra-
chial plexus blocks. Local infection, neuropathy, and 
bleeding risk must be considered. Because the axilla 
is highly vascularized, there is a risk of local anes-
thetic uptake through small veins traumatized by 
needle placement. Th e axilla is also a suboptimal site 
for perineural catheter placement because of greatly 
inferior analgesia versus an infraclavicular infusion, 
as well as theoretically increased risks of infection 
and catheter dislodgement. 
 All of the numerous axillary block techniques 
require the patient to be positioned supine, with the 
arm abducted 90 o and the head turned toward the 
contralateral side ( Figure 46–20 ). Th e axillary artery 
pulse should be palpated and its location marked as 
a reference point. 
6
artery. Local anesthetic spread should be visualized 
surrounding the plexus aft er careful aspiration and 
incremental injection, which oft en requires injec-
tions in multiple locations and a highly variable vol-
ume (20–30 mL). 
 Infraclavicular Block 
 Brachial plexus block at the level of the 
cords provides excellent anesthesia for pro-
cedures at or distal to the elbow ( Figure 46–16 ). 
Th e upper arm and shoulder are not anesthetized 
with this approach. As with other brachial plexus 
blocks, the intercostobrachial nerve (T2 derma-
tome) is spared. Site-specifi c risks of the infracla-
vicular approach include vascular puncture and 
pneumothorax (although less common than with 
supraclavicular block). It is oft en prudent to avoid 
this approach in patients with vascular catheters in 
the subclavian region, or patients with an ipsilat-
eral pacemaker. 
 As the brachial plexus traverses beyond the fi rst 
rib and into the axilla, the cords are arranged around 
the axillary artery according to their anatomic posi-
tion: medial, lateral, and posterior. 
 A. Nerve Stimulation 
 Th e patient is positioned supine with the head turned 
to the contralateral side, and the coracoid process is 
identifi ed (a bony prominence of the scapula that 
can be palpated between the acromioclavicular 
joint and the deltopectoral groove). Th e subclavian 
artery and brachial plexus run deep to the cora-
coid process and can be found approximately 2 cm 
medial and 2 cm caudad to it, about 4–5 cm deep 
in the average patient ( Figure 46–17 ). A relatively 
long (8 cm) insulated needle is placed perpendicu-
lar to the skin and advanced directly posterior until 
a motor response is elicited. An acceptable motor 
response is fi nger fl exion or extension at a current 
less than 0.5 mA, but not elbow fl exion/extension. 
 B. Ultrasound 
 With the patient in the supine position, a small 
curvilinear transducer is placed in the parasag-
ittal plane over the point 2 cm medial and 2 cm 
caudad to the coracoid process ( Figure 46–18A ). 
(Abducting the arm 90 o improves axillary artery 
imaging.) A high-frequency linear transducer will 
5
990 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 FIGURE 4616  Infraclavicular block coverage and anatomy. Light blue shading indicates regions of variable blockade; 
purple shading indicates regions of more reliable blockade. 
Nerves or
plexus roots
Trunks
Divisions
Cords
Main branches
Lower trunk
Medial cord
Lateral cord
Posterior cord
Middle trunk
Upper
trunk
C6
C5
C4
C7
C8
T1
Infraclavicular
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
991 
2 cm
2 cm
 FIGURE 4617  Infraclavicular block using nerve stimulation: coracoid technique. 
 FIGURE 4618 Infraclavicular block.  A: Use a small curvilinear 
probe in a parasagittal plane to visualize the brachial plexus. 
 B: Ultrasound image of the brachial plexus surrounding the axillary 
artery. AA, axillary artery; N, medial, lateral, and posterior cords of the 
brachial plexus; AV, axillary vein; PMa, pectoralis major muscle; PMi, 
pectoralis minor muscle. The red dot indicates the location of local 
anesthetic deposition. 
A
B
AA
AV
PMi
N
PMa
N
N
N
992 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
Musculocutaneous n.
Axillary n.
Medial brachial
cutaneous n.
 FIGURE 4619  Axillary block. The axillary, musculocutaneous, and medial brachial cutaneous nerves are usually 
spared with an axillary approach. 
 A. Transarterial Technique 
 Th is technique has fallen out of favor due to the 
trauma of twice purposefully penetrating the axil-
lary artery along with a theoretically increased risk 
of inadvertent intravascular local anesthetic injec-
tion. Th e nondominant hand is used to palpate 
and immobilize the axillary artery, and a 22-gauge 
needle is inserted high in the axilla ( Figure 46–20 ) 
until bright red blood is aspirated. Th e needle 
is then slightly advanced until blood aspiration 
ceases. Injection can be performed posteriorly, 
anteriorly, or in both locations in relation to the 
artery. A total of 30–40 mL of local anesthetic is 
typically used. 
 B. Nerve Stimulation 
 Again the nondominant hand is used to palpate 
and immobilize the axillary artery. With the arm 
abducted and externally rotated, the terminal nerves 
usually lie in the following positions relative to 
the artery ( Figure 46–21 , although variations are 
 common): median nerve superior (wrist fl exion, 
thumb opposition, forearm pronation); ulnar nerve 
inferior (wrist fl exion, thumb adduction, fourth/
fi ft h digit fl exion); and radial nerve inferior–poste-
rior (digit/wrist/elbow extension, forearm supina-
tion). Th e musculocutaneous nerve (elbow fl exion) 
is separate and deep within the coracobrachialis 
muscle, which is more superior (lateral) in this posi-
tion and, as a consequence, is oft en not blocked with 
this procedure ( Figure 46–21 ). A 2-in., 22-gauge 
insulated needle is inserted proximal to the palpat-
ing fi ngers to elicit muscle twitches in the hand. 
Once an acceptable muscle response is identifi ed, 
and aft er reducing the stimulation to less than 0.5 
mA, careful aspiration is performed and local anes-
thetic is injected. Although a single injection of 40 
mL may be used, greater success will be seen with 
multiple nerve stimulations (ie, two or three nerves) 
and divided doses of local anesthetic. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
993 
 FIGURE 4620  A: Patient positioning and needle angle for axillary brachial plexus block.  B: A multiple injection 
technique is more eﬀ ective because of fascial separation between nerves. 
A
B
Biceps m.
Intercostobrachial n.
Axillary a.
Coracobrachialis m.
Radial n.
Ulnar n.
Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Axillary v.
Median n.
Brachial
plexus
Triceps m.
Musculocutaneous n.
 FIGURE 4621  Positioning of terminal nerves about the axillary artery (variations are common). 
994 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
( Figure 46–23 ). As it enters the antecubital space, it 
lies medial to the brachial artery near the insertion 
of the biceps tendon. Just distal to this point, it gives 
off  numerous motor branches to the wrist and fi nger 
 C. Ultrasound 
 Using a high-frequency linear array ultrasound 
transducer, the axillary artery and vein are visual-
ized in cross-section. Th e brachial plexus can be 
identifi ed surrounding the artery ( Figure 46–22 ). 
Th e needle is inserted superior (lateral) to the trans-
ducer and advanced inferiorly (medially) toward the 
plexus under direct visualization. Ten milliliters of 
local anesthetic is then injected around each nerve 
(including the musculocutaneous, if indicated). 
 Blocks of the Terminal Nerves 
 Oft en it is necessary to anesthetize a single ter-
minal nerve, either for minor surgical proce-
dures with a limited fi eld or as a supplement to an 
incomplete brachial plexus block. Terminal nerves 
may be anesthetized anywhere along their course, but 
the elbow and the wrist are the two most favored sites. 
 A. Median Nerve Block 
 Th e median nerve is derived from the lateral and 
medial cords of the brachial plexus. It enters the 
arm and runs just medial to the brachial artery 
7
 FIGURE 4622  Ultrasound image of axillary brachial 
plexus block. AA, Axillary artery; AV, axillary vein; U, ulnar 
nerve; M, median nerve; MC, musculocutaneous nerve; 
R, radial nerve; CB, coracobrachialis muscle; TM, triceps 
muscle; BM, biceps muscle. 
AV
AA
U
R
CB
TM
BM
M
MC
Palmar branch
Median n.
Palmar
digital
nerves
Brachial a.
Biceps tendon
Palmaris longus
Flexor digitorum
superficialis
Flexor digitorum
profundus
Flexor carpi
radialis
 FIGURE 4623  Median nerve course. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
995 
fl exors and follows the interosseous membrane to 
the wrist. At the level of the proximal wrist fl exion 
crease, it lies directly behind the palmaris longus 
tendon in the carpal tunnel. 
 To block the median nerve at the elbow, the 
brachial artery is identifi ed in the antecubital 
crease just medial to the biceps insertion. A short 
22-gauge  insulated needle is inserted just medial 
to the artery and directed toward the medial epi-
condyle until wrist fl exion or thumb opposition is 
elicited ( Figure 46–24 ); 3–5 mL of local anesthetic 
is then injected. If ultrasound is used, the median 
nerve may be identifi ed in cross-section just medial 
to the brachial artery and local anesthetic injected to 
surround it ( Figure 46–25 ). 
 To block the median nerve at the wrist, the 
palmaris longus tendon is fi rst identifi ed by ask-
ing the patient to fl ex the wrist against resistance. 
A short 22-gauge needle is inserted just medial and 
deep to the palmaris longus tendon, and 3–5 mL 
 FIGURE 4624  Median nerve block at the elbow. 
Dorsal
Palmar
Flexors
Bicipital aponeurosis
Medial epicondyle
Medial
Lateral
Biceps
Brachial artery
Median nerve
Brachialis m.
Brachioradialis m.
Radial n.
Biceps m.
Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Median n.
Brachial a.
Triceps m.
Humerus
 FIGURE 4625  Cross-sectional anatomy of median nerve at the elbow. 
996 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
Palmar
retinaculum
Palmaris
longus tendon
Flexor carpi
radialis m.
Median n.
 FIGURE 4626  Median nerve block at the wrist. 
of local anesthetic is injected ( Figure 46–26 ). With 
ultrasound, the median nerve may be identifi ed at 
the level of the mid-forearm between the muscle 
bellies of the fl exor digitorum profundus, fl exor 
digitorum superfi cialis, and fl exor pollicis longus 
(transducer faces perpendicular to the trajectory of 
the nerves). 
 B. Ulnar Nerve Block 
 Th e ulnar nerve is the continuation of the medial 
cord of the brachial plexus and maintains a position 
medial to the axillary and brachial arteries in the 
upper arm ( Figure 46–27 ). At the distal third of the 
humerus, the nerve moves more medially and passes 
under the arcuate ligament of the medial epicondyle. 
Th e nerve is frequently palpable just proximal to the 
medial epicondyle. In the mid-forearm, the nerve 
 FIGURE 4627  Ulnar nerve course. 
Palmar
branch
Dorsal branch
Deep branch
Superficial branch
Ulnar n.
Arcuate
ligament
Medial
epicondyle
Brachial a.
Radial a.
Biceps tendon
Flexor digitorum
profundus
Flexor carpi
ulnaris
Ulnar a.
lies between the fl exor digitorum profundus and the 
fl exor carpi ulnaris. At the wrist, it is lateral to the 
fl exor carpi ulnaris tendon and medial to the ulnar 
artery. 
 To block the ulnar nerve at the level of the 
elbow, an insulated 22-gauge needle is inserted 
approximately one fi ngerbreadth proximal to the 
arcuate ligament ( Figure 46–28 ), and advanced 
until fourth/fi ft h digit fl exion or thumb adduction is 
elicited; 3–5 mL of local anesthetic is then injected. 
To block the ulnar nerve at the wrist, the ulnar artery 
pulse is palpated just lateral to the fl exor carpi ulna-
ris tendon. Th e needle is inserted just medial to the 
artery ( Figure 46–29 ) and 3–5 mL of local anesthetic 
is injected. If ultrasound is used, the ulnar nerve may 
be identifi ed just medial to the ulnar artery. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
997 
 C. Radial Nerve Block 
 Th e radial nerve—the terminal branch of the pos-
terior cord of the brachial plexus—courses poste-
rior to the humerus, innervating the triceps muscle, 
and enters the spiral groove of the humerus before 
it moves laterally at the elbow ( Figure 46–30 ). Ter-
minal sensory branches include the lateral cutane-
ous nerve of the arm and the posterior cutaneous 
nerve of the forearm. Aft er exiting the spiral groove 
as it approaches the lateral epicondyle, the radial 
nerve separates into superfi cial and deep branches. 
Th e deep branch remains close to the periosteum 
and innervates the postaxial extensor group of the 
forearm. Th e superfi cial branch becomes superfi cial 
and follows the radial artery to innervate the radial 
aspects of the dorsal wrist and the dorsal aspect of 
the lateral three digits and half of the fourth. 
 To block the radial nerve at the elbow, the 
biceps tendon is identifi ed in the antecubital fossa. 
A short 22-gauge insulated needle is inserted just 
lateral to the tendon and directed toward the lateral 
Olecranon
process
Dorsal
Palmar
Ulnar
nerve
Medial
epicondyle
Arcuate
ligament
 FIGURE 4628  Ulnar nerve block at the elbow with region of anesthesia illustrated on the hand. 
Ulnar a.
Ulnar n.
Palmaris
longus tendon
Flexor carpi
ulnaris tendon
 FIGURE 4629  Ulnar nerve block at the wrist. 
998 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
epicondyle ( Figure 46–31 ) until wrist or fi nger 
extension is elicited; 5 mL of local anesthetic is then 
injected. With ultrasound, the radial nerve can be 
identifi ed in cross-section just proximal to the ante-
cubital fossa between the biceps and brachioradialis 
muscles. 
 At the wrist, the superfi cial branch of the radial 
nerve lies just lateral to the radial artery, which can 
be easily palpated lateral to the fl exor carpi radia-
lis tendon ( Figure 46–32 ). Using a short 22-gauge 
needle, 3–5 mL local anesthetic is injected lateral to 
the artery. Ultrasound may be used at the level of the 
wrist or mid-forearm to identify the radial nerve just 
lateral to the radial artery. 
 D. Musculocutaneous Nerve Block 
 A musculocutaneous nerve block is essential to 
complete the anesthesia for the forearm and wrist 
and is commonly included when performing the 
axillary block. Th e musculocutaneous nerve is the 
terminal branch of the lateral cord and the most 
proximal of the major nerves to emerge from the 
brachial plexus ( Figure 46–33 ). Th is nerve inner-
vates the biceps and brachialis muscles and distally 
terminates as the lateral antebrachial cutaneous 
nerve, supplying sensory input to the lateral aspect 
of the forearm and wrist. 
 FIGURE 4631  Radial nerve block 
at the elbow. 
Radial n.
Dorsal digital
nerves
Radial a.
Deep branch
Superficial branch
Flexor carpi
radialis m.
Lateral
epicondyle
Brachioradialis m.
Posterior
interosseous n.
 FIGURE 4630  Radial nerve course. 
Lateral
Medial
Brachialis m.
Lateral
epicondyle
Radial n.
Brachioradialis m.
Median n.
Brachial a.
Biceps
Dorsal
Palmar
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
999 
 FIGURE 4633  Musculocutaneous nerve course. 
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Lateral antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
Anterior branch
Biceps muscle
Brachialis muscle
Coracobrachialis
muscle
Posterior branch
Radial nerve
Flexor carpi
radialis tendon
Ulnar styloid
process
Palmar longus
tendon
Radius
Radial artery
 FIGURE 4632  Radial nerve block at the wrist. 
Dorsal
Palmar
Digital
nerve
 FIGURE 4634  Sensory innervation of the ﬁ ngers 
is provided by the digital nerves. 
the coracobrachialis muscle is pierced, and 5–10 mL 
of local anesthetic is injected, with or without elici-
tation of elbow fl exion. (Simple infi ltration may be 
used, although the success rate using this technique 
is questionable.) Ultrasound may be used to con-
fi rm the location of the musculocutaneous nerve in 
the coracobrachialis muscle or between this muscle 
and the biceps (see  Figure 46–22 ). Alternatively, the 
block can be performed at the elbow as the nerve 
courses superfi cially at the interepicondylar line. 
Th e insertion of the biceps tendon is identifi ed, and 
a short 22-guage needle is inserted 1–2 cm later-
ally; 5–10 mL of local anesthetic is then injected as 
a fi eld block. 
 E. Digital Nerve Blocks 
 Digital nerve blocks are used for minor operations 
on the fi ngers and to supplement incomplete brachial 
plexus and terminal nerve blocks. Sensory innerva-
tion of each fi nger is provided by four small digital 
nerves that enter each digit at its base in each of the 
four corners ( Figure 46–34 ). A small-gauge needle is 
inserted at the medial and lateral aspects of the base 
of the selected digit, and 2–3 mL of local anesthetic 
 To target the musculocutaneous nerve follow-
ing an axillary block, the needle is redirected supe-
rior and proximal to the artery (see  Figure 46–21 ), 
1000 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
intravenous catheter is usually inserted on the 
dorsum of the hand (or foot) and a double pneu-
matic tourniquet is placed on the arm or thigh. Th e 
extremity is elevated and exsanguinated by tightly 
wrapping an Esmarch elastic bandage from a distal 
to proximal direction. Th e proximal tourniquet is 
infl ated, the Esmarch bandage removed, and 0.5% 
lidocaine (25 mL for a forearm, 50 mL for an arm, 
and 100 mL for a thigh tourniquet) injected over 2–
3 min through the catheter, which is subsequently 
removed ( Figure 46–37 ). Anesthesia is usually 
established aft er 5–10 min. Tourniquet pain usually 
develops aft er 20–30 min, at which time the distal 
tourniquet is infl ated and the proximal tourniquet 
subsequently defl ated. Patients usually tolerate 
the distal tourniquet for an additional 15–20 min 
because it is infl ated over an anesthetized area. Even 
is inserted  without epinephrine. Addition of a vaso-
constrictor (epinephrine) has been claimed to seri-
ously compromise blood fl ow to the digit; however, 
there are no case reports involving lidocaine or other 
modern local anesthetics to confi rm this claim. 
 F. Intercostobrachial Nerve Block 
 Th e intercostobrachial nerve originates in the upper 
thorax (T2) and becomes superfi cial on the medial 
upper arm. It supplies cutaneous innervation to the 
medial aspect of the proximal arm and is  not anes-
thetized with a brachial plexus block ( Figure 46–35 ). 
Th e patient should be supine with the arm abducted 
and externally rotated. Starting at the deltoid promi-
nence and proceeding inferiorly, a fi eld block is 
performed in a linear fashion using 5 mL of local 
anesthetic, extending to the most inferior aspect of 
the medial arm ( Figure 46–36 ). 
 Intravenous Regional Anesthesia 
 Intravenous regional anesthesia, also called 
a Bier block, can provide surgical anesthe-
sia for short surgical procedures (45–60  min) 
on an extremity (eg, carpal tunnel release). An 
8
 FIGURE 4637  Intravenous regional anesthesia 
provides surgical anesthesia for procedures of short 
duration. 
Skin wheal
 FIGURE 4636  Intercostobrachial nerve block. 
 FIGURE 4635  Intercostobrachial nerve cutaneous 
innervation. 
T2
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1001 
for surgical procedures of a very short duration, the 
tourniquet  must be left  infl ated for a total of at least 
15–20 min to avoid a rapid intravenous systemic 
bolus of local anesthetic resulting in toxicity. Slow 
defl ation is also recommended to provide an addi-
tional margin of safety. 
 LOWER EXTREMITY 
PERIPHERAL NERVE BLOCKS 
 Lumbar & Sacral Plexus Anatomy 
 Th e lumbosacral plexus provides innervation to 
the lower extremities ( Figure 46–38 ). Th e lumbar 
plexus is formed by the ventral rami of L1–4, with 
occasional contribution from T12. It lies within 
the psoas muscle with branches descending into 
the proximal thigh. Th ree major nerves from the 
 FIGURE 4638  The ventral rami of L1–5 and S1–4 form the lumbosacral plexus, which provides innervation to the 
lower extremities. 
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Inguinal nerve
Sciatic nerve
Obturator nerve
Femoral nerve
Inguinal ligament
Genitofemoral nerve
Sacral plexus
Lumbar plexus
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
L4
L3
L2
L1
lumbar plexus make contributions to the lower 
limb: the femoral (L2–4), lateral femoral cutaneous 
(L1–3), and obturator (L2–4). Th ese provide motor 
and sensory innervation to the anterior portion of 
the thigh and sensory innervation to the medial leg. 
Th e sacral plexus arises from L4–5 and S1–4. Th e 
posterior thigh and most of the leg and foot are sup-
plied by the tibial and peroneal portions of the sci-
atic nerve. Th e posterior femoral cutaneous nerve 
(S1–3), and not the sciatic nerve, provides sensory 
innervation to the posterior thigh; it travels with 
the sciatic nerve as it emerges around the pirifor-
mis muscle. 
 Femoral Nerve Block 
 Th e femoral nerve innervates the main hip fl exors, 
knee extensors, and provides much of the sensory 
1002 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
innervation of the hip and thigh ( Figure 46–39 ). Its 
most medial branch is the saphenous nerve, which 
innervates much of the skin of the medial leg and 
ankle joint. Th e term  3-in-1 block refers to anesthe-
tizing the femoral, lateral femoral cutaneous, and 
obturator nerves with a single injection below the 
inguinal ligament; this term has largely been aban-
doned as evidence accumulated demonstrating the 
failure of most single injections to consistently aff ect 
9
Articular branch
Anterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Obturator nerve
Femoral nerve
Femoral nerve
Rectus femoris muscle
(cut and reflected)
Saphenous
nerve
Quadriceps femoris
muscle
Vastus intermedius muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Vastus lateralis muscle
 FIGURE 4639  The femoral nerve provides sensory innervation to the hip and thigh, and to the medial leg via its 
terminal branch, the saphenous nerve. 
all three nerves.  A femoral nerve block alone 
will seldom provide surgical anesthesia, but it 
is oft en used to provide postoperative analgesia for 
hip, thigh, knee, and ankle (for the saphenous nerve) 
procedures. Femoral nerve blocks have a relatively 
low rate of complications and few contraindications. 
Local infection, previous vascular graft ing, and local 
adenopathy should be carefully considered in patient 
selection. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1003 
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Femoral nerve
Genitofemoral nerve
Inguinal
ligament
Pubic
symphysis
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Anterior superior
iliac spine
 FIGURE 4640  Femoral block 
using nerve stimulation. 
 A. Nerve Stimulation 
 With the patient positioned supine, the femoral artery 
pulse is palpated at the level of the inguinal ligament. A 
short (5-cm) insulated needle is inserted at a 45° angle 
to the skin in a cephalad direction ( Figure 46–40 ) 
until a clear quadriceps twitch is elicited at a current 
below 0.5 mA (look for patella motion). 
 B. Ultrasound 
 A high-frequency linear ultrasound transducer is 
placed over the area of the inguinal crease paral-
lel to the crease itself, or slightly more transverse 
( Figure 46–41 ). Th e femoral artery and femoral 
vein are visualized in cross-section, with the overly-
ing fascia iliaca. Just lateral to the artery and deep to 
the fascia iliaca, the femoral nerve appears in cross-
section as a spindle-shaped structure with a “honey-
comb” texture ( Figure 46–42 ). 
 For an out-of-plane technique, the block needle 
is inserted just lateral to where the femoral nerve 
is seen, and directed cephalad at an angle approxi-
mately 45° to the skin. Th e needle is advanced until 
it is seen penetrating the fascia iliaca, or (if using 
concurrent electrical stimulation) until a motor 
response is elicited. Following careful aspiration 
for the nonappearance of blood, 30–40 mL of local 
anesthetic is injected. 
 For an in-plane technique, a longer needle may 
be used. Th e needle is inserted parallel to the ultra-
sound transducer just lateral to the outer edge. Th e 
needle is advanced through the sartorius muscle, 
deep to the fascia iliaca, until it is visualized just lat-
eral to the femoral nerve. Local anesthetic is injected, 
visualizing its hypoechoic spread deep to the fascia 
iliaca and around the nerve. 
 C. Fascia Iliaca Technique 
 Th e goal of a fascia iliaca block is similar to that of 
a femoral nerve block, but the approach is slightly 
diff erent. Without use of a nerve stimulator or 
ultrasound machine, a relatively reliable level of 
anesthesia may be attained simply with anatomic 
landmarks and tactile sensation. Once the inguinal 
ligament and femoral artery pulse are identifi ed, 
1004 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 FIGURE 4641  Ultrasound-guided femoral nerve 
block (in-plane technique). 
the length of the inguinal ligament is divided into 
thirds ( Figure 46–43 ). Two centimeters distal to 
the junction of the middle and outer thirds, a short, 
blunt-tipped needle is inserted in a slightly cephalad 
direction. As the needle passes through the two layers 
of fascia in this region (fascia lata and fascia iliaca), 
two “pops” will be felt. Once the needle has passed 
through the fascia iliaca, careful aspiration is per-
formed and 30–40 mL of local anesthetic is injected. 
Th is block usually anesthetizes both the femoral 
nerve and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves, since the 
 FIGURE 4642  Femoral nerve block. Ultrasound 
image of the femoral nerve. FA, femoral artery; FV, 
femoral vein; FN, femoral nerve; SM, Sartorius muscle; 
IM, iliacus muscle. 
FA
IM
SM
FN
FV
local anesthetic is deposited under the fascia iliaca 
between the two nerves which run in the same plane 
between the fascia and underlying muscle. 
 Lateral Femoral 
Cutaneous Nerve Block 
 Th e lateral femoral cutaneous nerve provides sensory 
innervation to the lateral thigh (see  Figure 46–39 ). It 
may be anesthetized as a supplement to a femoral 
nerve block or as an isolated block for limited anes-
thesia of the lateral thigh. As there are few vital struc-
tures in proximity to the lateral femoral cutaneous 
nerve, complications with this block are exceedingly 
rare. Th e lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (L2–3) 
departs from the lumbar plexus, traverses laterally 
from the psoas muscle, and courses anterolater-
ally along the iliacus muscle (see  Figure 46–38 ). It 
emerges inferior and medial to the anterior superior 
iliac spine to supply the cutaneous sensory innerva-
tion of the lateral thigh. 
 Th e patient is positioned supine or lateral, and 
the point 2 cm medial and 2 cm distal to the anterior 
superior iliac spine is identifi ed. A short 22-gauge 
block needle is inserted and directed laterally, 
observing for a “pop” as it passes through the fascia 
lata. A fi eld block is performed with 10–15 mL of 
local anesthetic, which is deposited above and below 
the fascia ( Figure 46–44 ). 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1005 
 FIGURE 4643  Fascia iliaca block. 
Needle insertion point
 FIGURE 4644  Lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerve block. 
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Femoral nerve
Genitofemoral nerve
Inguinal
ligament
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Anterior superior
iliac spine
2 cm
1006 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
posteriorly until bone is contacted ( Figure 46–46 ). 
Redirecting laterally and caudally, the needle is 
advanced an additional 2–4 cm until a motor 
response (thigh adduction) is elicited and main-
tained below 0.5 mA. Following careful aspiration 
for the nonappearance of blood, 15–20 mL of local 
anesthetic is injected. 
 Posterior Lumbar Plexus 
(Psoas Compartment) Block 
 Posterior lumbar plexus blocks are useful for 
surgical procedures involving areas inner-
vated by the femoral, lateral femoral cutaneous, and 
obturator nerves ( Figure 46–47 ). Th ese include 
10
 FIGURE 4645  Obturator nerve innervation. 
Obturator externus muscle
Adductor brevis muscle
Adductor longus muscle
Adductor magnus muscle
Gracilis muscle
L4
L3
L2
 Obturator Nerve Block 
 A block of the obturator nerve is usually required 
for complete anesthesia of the knee and is most 
oft en performed in combination with femoral and 
sciatic nerve blocks for this purpose. Th e obturator 
nerve contributes sensory branches to the hip and 
knee joints, a variable degree of sensation to the 
medial thigh, and innervates the adductors of the 
hip ( Figure 46–45 ). Th is nerve exits the pelvis and 
enters the medial thigh through the obturator fora-
men, which lies beneath the superior pubic ramus. 
Aft er identifi cation of the pubic tubercle, a long 
(10-cm) block needle is inserted 1.5 cm inferior and 
1.5 cm lateral to the tubercle. Th e needle is advanced 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1007 
 FIGURE 4646  Obturator nerve block. 
Contact pubic tubercle (1), then redirect 
laterally and caudally (2) until a motor 
response is elicited. 
Obturator
foramen
1
2
External
obturator
muscle
Pubic ramus
Obturator
nerve
Obturator
nerve,
anterior
branch
Obturator
nerve,
posterior
branch
Obturator n.
Femoral n.
Sciatic nerve, posterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
Lateral femoral
cutaneous n.
Needle insertion
point
Femoral nerve, lateral cutaneous
nerve of thigh, obturator nerve
 FIGURE 4647  Lumbar plexus blocks provide anesthesia to the femoral, lateral femoral cutaneous, and 
obturator nerves. 
1008 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
procedures on the hip, knee, and anterior thigh. 
Complete anesthesia of the knee can be attained 
with a proximal sciatic nerve block. Th e lumbar 
plexus is relatively close to multiple sensitive struc-
tures ( Figure 46–48 ) and reaching it requires a very 
long needle. Hence, the posterior lumbar plexus 
block has one of the highest complication rates of 
any peripheral nerve block; these include retroperi-
toneal hematoma, intravascular local anesthetic 
injection with toxicity, intrathecal and epidural 
injections, and renal capsular puncture with subse-
quent hematoma. 
 Lumbar nerve roots emerge into the body of 
the psoas muscle and travel within the muscle com-
partment before exiting as terminal nerves (see 
 Figure 46–38 ). Modern posterior lumbar plexus 
blocks deposit local anesthetic within the body of 
the psoas muscle. Th e patient is positioned in lateral 
decubitus with the side to be blocked in the non-
dependent position ( Figure 46–49 ). Th e midline is 
palpated, identifying the spinous processes if possi-
ble. A line is fi rst drawn through the lumbar spinous 
processes, and both iliac crests are identifi ed and 
connected with a line to approximate the level of L4. 
Th e posterior superior iliac spine is then palpated 
and a line is drawn cephalad, parallel to the fi rst line. 
If available, ultrasound imaging of the transverse 
process may be helpful to estimate lumbar plexus 
depth. A long (10- to 15-cm) insulated needle is 
inserted at the point of intersection between the 
transverse (intercristal) line and the intersection of 
the lateral and middle thirds of the two sagittal lines. 
Th e needle is advanced in an anterior direction 
until a femoral motor response is elicited (quadri-
ceps contraction). If the transverse process is con-
tacted, the needle should be withdrawn slightly 
Testicular/ovarian
vein and artery
Ureter
Psoas muscle
Lumbar plexus
Spinal cord
Inferior
vena cava
 FIGURE 4648  The lumbar plexus lies 
in close proximity to several important 
structures. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1009 
and “walked off ” the transverse process in a caudal 
direction, maintaining the needle in the parasagit-
tal plane. Th e needle should never be inserted more 
than 3 cm past the depth at which the transverse 
process was contacted. Local anesthetic volumes 
greater than 20 mL will increase the risk of bilateral 
spread and contralateral limb involvement. 
 Saphenous Nerve Block 
 Th e saphenous nerve is the most medial branch of 
the femoral nerve and innervates the skin over the 
medial leg and the ankle joint (see  Figure 46–39 ). 
Th erefore, this block is used mainly in conjunc-
tion with a sciatic nerve block to provide complete 
 anesthesia/analgesia below the knee. 
Iliac crest
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
Needle entry
point
1/3
2/3
L4
L5
Curvilinear array
ultrasound transducer
 FIGURE 4649  Patient positioning and surface landmarks for posterior lumbar plexus block. 
1010 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 A. Trans-Sartorial Technique 
 Th e saphenous nerve may be accessed proximal 
to the knee, just deep to the sartorius muscle. A 
high-frequency linear probe is used to identify the 
junction between the sartorius, vastus medialis, 
and adductor muscles in cross-section just distal to 
the adductor canal. A long needle is inserted from 
medial to lateral (in-plane) or angled cephalad (out-
of-plane) and 5–10 mL of local anesthetic deposited 
within this fascial plane. 
 B. Proximal Saphenous Technique 
 A short block needle is inserted 2 cm distal to the 
tibial tuberosity and directed medially, infi ltrating 
5–10  mL of local anesthetic as the needle passes 
toward the posterior aspect of the leg ( Figure 46–50 ). 
Ultrasound may be used to identify the saphenous 
vein near the tibial tuberosity, facilitating a  perivas-
cular technique with infi ltration about the vein. 
 C. Distal Saphenous Technique 
 Th e medial malleolus is identifi ed, infi ltrating 5 mL 
of local anesthetic in a line running anteriorly 
around the ankle (see Ankle Block below). 
 Sciatic Nerve Block 
 Th e sciatic nerve originates from the lumbosacral 
trunk and is composed of nerve roots L4–5 and S1–3
11
(see  Figure 46–38 ).  Blockade of the sciatic 
nerve may occur anywhere along its course 
and is indicated for surgical procedures involving 
the hip, thigh, knee, lower leg, and foot. Th e poste-
rior femoral cutaneous nerve is variably anesthe-
tized as well, depending on the approach. If sacral 
plexus or posterior femoral cutaneous nerve anes-
thesia is required, the parasacral approach is used 
(a technique that is beyond the scope of this chapter). 
 A. Posterior (Classic or Labat) Approach 
 Th e patient is positioned laterally with the side 
to be blocked in the nondependent position. Th e 
patient is asked to bend the knee of the aff ected leg 
and tilt the pelvis slightly forward (Sim’s position; 
Figure 46–51 ). Th e greater trochanter, posterior 
superior iliac spine (PSIS), and sacral hiatus are then 
identifi ed. A line is drawn from the greater trochan-
ter to the PSIS, its midpoint identifi ed, and a per-
pendicular line extended in a caudal direction. Next, 
a line is drawn from the greater trochanter to the 
Tibial tuberosity
Medial
Lateral
Line of injection
 FIGURE 4650  Proximal saphenous nerve block. 
 FIGURE 4651  Patient positioning, surface landmarks, 
and needle positioning for proximal sciatic nerve block 
(classic approach). 
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
Greater
trochanter
Sacral
hiatus
5 cm
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1011 
sacral hiatus and the intersection point is marked; 
this is the initial needle insertion point. A long 
(10-cm) insulated needle is inserted at an angle per-
pendicular to all planes to the skin ( Figure 46–51 ). 
Th e needle is advanced through the gluteal muscles 
(a motor response of these muscles may be encoun-
tered) until plantar- or dorsifl exion is elicited (plan-
tarfl exion or foot inversion is preferred for surgical 
anesthesia). A local anesthetic volume of 25 mL pro-
vides surgical anesthesia. 
 B. Anterior Approach 
 Aft er leaving the sciatic notch, the sciatic nerve 
descends behind the lesser trochanter to a position 
posterior to the femur. It can be accessed from the 
anterior thigh just medial to the lesser trochanter. 
Lateral or prone positioning may present a challenge 
for some patients requiring a sciatic nerve block (ie, 
elderly patients, pediatric patients under general 
anesthesia). An anterior approach can be technically 
challenging but off ers an alternative path to the sci-
atic nerve. Before proceeding with this block, which 
carries a risk of vascular puncture (femoral artery 
and vein), patient-specifi c risks should be consid-
ered (eg, coagulopathy and vascular graft ing). In 
 FIGURE 4652  Anatomy and surface landmarks for anterior sciatic nerve block. 
Greater
trochanter
Lesser
trochanter
Femoral artery
and vein
Needle
insertion
point
Pubic
tubercle
Anterior
superior
iliac spine
addition, if combining this block with the femoral 
nerve block in an unanesthetized patient, perform-
ing the sciatic block fi rst is recommended to avoid 
passing the block needle through a previously anes-
thetized femoral nerve. A local anesthetic volume of 
25 mL provides surgical anesthesia. 
 1. Nerve stimulation —With the patient positioned 
supine, a line is drawn along the inguinal ligament, 
from the anterior superior iliac spine to the pubic 
tubercle ( Figure 46–52 ). A second line is drawn par-
allel to the fi rst that traverses the greater trochanter 
(intertrochanteric line). Next, these two lines are 
connected with a third line drawn from the point 
between the medial one third and lateral two thirds 
of the fi rst line, at a 90° angle, and extended caudally 
to intersect with the intertrochanteric line. A long 
(10- to 15-cm) needle is inserted through this inter-
section and directly posterior until foot inversion 
or plantarfl exion is elicited (dorsifl exion is accept-
able for postoperative analgesia). Oft en with this 
approach, the femur is contacted before the needle 
reaches the sciatic nerve. When this occurs, the nee-
dle should be withdrawn 2–3 cm, the patient should 
be asked to internally rotate the leg, and then the 
needle should be advanced. If the femur is contacted 
1012 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
tuberosity are identifi ed and a line drawn between 
them ( Figure 46–53 ). From the midpoint of this 
line, a second line is drawn perpendicularly and 
extended caudally 4 cm. Th rough this point a long 
(10-cm) insulated needle is inserted directly slightly 
cephalad until foot plantarfl exion or inversion is 
elicited (dorsifl exion is acceptable for analgesia). A 
local anesthetic volume of 25 mL provides surgical 
anesthesia. 
 2. Ultrasound —Using the same positioning and 
landmarks ( Figure 46–53 ), a linear or low- frequency 
curvilinear (best) ultrasound transducer is placed 
over the midpoint between the ischial tuberosity 
and the greater trochanter in a transverse orienta-
tion. Both bony structures should be visible in the 
ultrasound fi eld simultaneously. Gluteal muscles 
are identifi ed superfi cially, along with the fascial 
layer defi ning their deep border. Th e triangular 
sciatic nerve should be visible in cross-section just 
deep to this layer in a location approximately mid-
way between the ischial tuberosity and the greater 
trochanter, superfi cial to the quadratus femoris 
muscle. 
 For an out-of-plane ultrasound-guided sciatic 
block, the block needle is inserted just caudad to 
the ultrasound transducer and advanced in an ante-
rior and cephalad direction. Once the needle passes 
through the gluteus muscles with the tip next to 
sciatic nerve, careful aspiration for the nonappear-
ance of blood is performed and local anesthetic is 
injected, visualizing spread around the nerve. 
 For an in-plane technique, the block needle is 
inserted just lateral to the ultrasound transducer 
near the greater trochanter. It is advanced through 
again, the landmarks may require reassessment. A 
local anesthetic volume of 25 mL provides surgical 
anesthesia. 
 2. Ultrasound —With the patient positioned supine 
and the leg externally rotated, a low-frequency cur-
vilinear transducer is placed transversely over the 
medial thigh, approximately at the level of the lesser 
trochanter. Th e femur, femoral vessels, adductor 
muscles, and gluteus maximus are identifi ed in cross-
section. Th e elliptical, hyperechoic sciatic nerve is 
found in the fascial plane between adductors and 
gluteus muscles, posterior to the femur. Using a long 
(10-cm) needle, the nerve is approached in-plane 
(anterior to posterior) or out-of-plane (cephalad to 
caudad), taking care to avoid femoral vessels, until 
the needle tip lies in this muscle plane and a local 
anesthetic injection can be observed as hypoechoic 
spread surrounding the sciatic nerve. 
 C. Subgluteal Approach 
 A subgluteal approach to the sciatic nerve is a useful 
alternative to the traditional posterior approach. In 
many patients the landmarks are more easily iden-
tifi ed, and less tissue is traversed. With the sciatic 
nerve at a more superfi cial location, the exclusive 
use of ultrasound becomes far more practical, as 
well. If sciatic nerve block is being combined with 
a femoral block and ambulation is desired within 
the local anesthetic duration, consider a popliteal 
approach (below) that will not aff ect the hamstring 
muscles to the same degree, allowing knee fl exion to 
lift  the foot with the use of crutches. 
 1. Nerve stimulation —With the patient in 
Sim’s position, the greater trochanter and ischial 
Greater trochanter
4 cm
Ischial tuberosity
 FIGURE 4653  Patient positioning and surface landmarks for subgluteal sciatic block. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
1013
Tibial n.
Semimembranosus m.
Semitendinosus m.
Common peroneal n.
Sural n.
Sciatic n.
Medial calcaneal
branches of
tibial nerve
Sural nerve
Saphenous
nerve
Deep peroneal
nerve
Common
peroneal
nerve
Superficial
peroneal
nerve
 FIGURE 4654  The sciatic nerve divides into tibial and peroneal branches just proximal to the popliteal fossa and 
provides sensory innervation to much of the lower leg. 
the fi eld of the ultrasound beam until the tip is vis-
ible deep to the gluteus maximus, next to the sci-
atic nerve. Again, local anesthetic spread around the 
nerve should be visualized. 
 D. Popliteal Approach 
 Popliteal nerve blocks provide excellent cover-
age for foot and ankle surgery, while sparing 
much of the hamstring muscles, allowing lift ing of 
the foot with knee fl exion, thus easing ambulation. 
All sciatic nerve blocks fail to provide complete 
 anesthesia for the cutaneous medial leg and ankle 
joint capsule, but when a saphenous (or femoral) 
12
block is added, complete anesthesia below the knee 
is provided. Th e major site-specifi c risk of a popliteal 
block is vascular puncture, owing to the sciatic nerve’s 
proximity to the popliteal vessels at this location. 
 Th e sciatic nerve divides into the tibial and 
common peroneal nerves within or just proximal to 
the popliteal fossa ( Figure 46–54 ). Th e upper pop-
liteal fossa is bounded laterally by the biceps femo-
ris tendon and medially by the semitendinosus and 
semimembranosus tendons. Cephalad to the fl exion 
crease of the knee, the popliteal artery is immedi-
ately lateral to the semitendinosus tendon. Th e pop-
liteal vein is lateral to the artery, and the tibial and 
1014 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
relationship to the biceps femoris muscle, just deep 
to its medial edge. 
 For an out-of-plane technique, the needle is 
inserted just caudad to the ultrasound transducer and 
directed anteriorly and slightly cephalad. When the 
needle is positioned in proximity to the sciatic nerve, 
and following careful aspiration, local anesthetic 
injected, observing for spread around the nerve. 
common peroneal nerves are just lateral to the vein 
and medial to the biceps tendon, 2–6 cm deep to 
the skin. Th e tibial nerve continues deep behind the 
gastrocnemius muscle, and the common peroneal 
nerve leaves the popliteal fossa by passing between 
the head and neck of the fi bula to supply the lower 
leg. Th e sciatic nerve is approached by either a poste-
rior or a lateral approach. For posterior approaches, 
the patient is usually positioned prone with the knee 
slightly fl exed by propping the ankle on pillows or 
towels. For lateral approaches, the patient may be in 
the lateral or supine position. 
 1. Nerve stimulation (posterior approach) —With 
the patient in the prone position, the apex of the 
popliteal fossa is identifi ed. Th e hamstring muscles 
are palpated to locate the point where the biceps 
femoris (lateral) and the semimembranosus/semi-
tendinosus complex (medial) join ( Figure 46–55 ). 
Having the patient fl ex the knee against resistance 
facilitates recognition of these structures. Th e nee-
dle entry point is 1 cm caudad from the apex. An 
insulated needle (5–10 cm) is advanced until foot 
plantarfl exion or inversion is elicited (dorsifl exion is 
acceptable for analgesia). A volume of 30–40 mL of 
local anesthetic is oft en required for single-injection 
popliteal–sciatic nerve block. 
 2. Nerve stimulation (lateral approach) —With 
the patient in the supine position and the knee fully 
extended, the intertendinous groove is palpated 
between the vastus lateralis and biceps femoris 
muscles approximately 10 cm proximal to the supe-
rior notch of the patella. A long (10-cm) insulated 
needle is inserted at this point and advanced at a 
30° angle posteriorly until an appropriate motor 
response is elicited. If bone (femur) is contacted, 
the needle is withdrawn and redirected slightly 
posteriorly until an acceptable motor response is 
encountered. 
 3. Ultrasound —With the patient positioned 
prone, the apex of the popliteal fossa is identifi ed, 
as described above. Using a high-frequency linear 
ultrasound transducer placed in a transverse orien-
tation, the femur, biceps femoris muscle, popliteal 
vessels, and sciatic nerve or branches are identi-
fi ed in cross-section ( Figure 46–55 ). Th e nerve is 
usually posterior and lateral (or immediately pos-
terior) to the vessels and is oft en located in close 
 FIGURE 4655  Anatomy and sonoanatomy of the 
sciatic nerve in the popliteal fossa. PA, popliteal artery; 
PV, popliteal vein; N, sciatic nerve; BFM, biceps femoris 
muscle; F, femur. 
Distal
BFM
N
F
PA
PV
Proximal
Medial
Lateral
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks 
1015 
 FIGURE 4656  Patient positioning, probe, and needle 
orientation for popliteal block. 
 For an in-plane technique, the block needle 
is inserted lateral to the ultrasound transducer, 
 traversing—or just anterior to—the biceps femoris 
muscle ( Figure 46–56 ). Th e needle is advanced in 
the ultrasound plane, while visualizing its approach 
either deep or superfi cial to the nerve. 
 If surgical anesthesia is desired, local anesthetic 
should be seen surrounding all sides of the nerve, 
which usually requires multiple needle tip place-
ments with incremental injection. For analgesia 
alone, a single injection of local anesthetic is accept-
able. Ultrasound-guided popliteal sciatic blocks 
may be performed with the patient in the lateral or 
supine positions (the latter with leg up-raised on 
several pillows). Th ese maneuvers are oft en more 
technically challenging. 
 Ankle Block 
 For surgical procedures of the foot, an ankle block 
is a fast, low-technology, low-risk means of provid-
ing anesthesia. Excessive injectate volume and use 
of vasoconstrictors such as epinephrine must be 
avoided to minimize the risk of ischemic complica-
tions. Since this block includes fi ve separate injec-
tions, it is oft en uncomfortable for patients and 
adequate premedication is required. 
 Five nerves supply sensation to the foot 
( Figure 46–57 ). Th e saphenous nerve is a terminal 
branch of the femoral nerve and the only innervation 
Medial calcaneal
branches
Medial calcaneal
branches of
tibial nerve
Sural nerve
Sural nerve
Medial plantar
nerve
Lateral plantar
nerve
Saphenous nerve
From
tibial
nerve
Saphenous
nerve
Deep peroneal
nerve
Common
peroneal
nerve
Superficial
peroneal
nerve
 FIGURE 4657  Cutaneous innervation of the foot. 
1016 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 FIGURE 4658  Tibial and common peroneal nerve courses. 
Common
peroneal n.
Superficial
peroneal n.
Deep
peroneal n.
Peroneus longus
and brevis m.
Extensor hallucis
longus m.
Flexor hallucis
longus m.
Extensor
digitorum
longus m.
Tibialis anterior m.
Tibialis posterior m.
Gastrocnemius m.
Popliteus m.
Soleus m.
Peroneus longus
muscle (cut)
Tibial n.
Tibial n.
of the foot not a part of the sciatic system. It supplies 
superfi cial sensation to the anteromedial foot and is 
most constantly located just anterior to the medial 
malleolus. Th e deep peroneal nerve runs in the 
anterior leg aft er branching off  the common pero-
neal nerve, entering the ankle between the extensor 
hallucis longus and the extensor digitorum longus 
tendons ( Figure 46–58 ), just lateral to the dorsa-
lis pedis artery. It provides innervation to the toe 
extensors and sensation to the fi rst dorsal webspace. 
Th e superfi cial peroneal nerve, also a branch of the 
common peroneal nerve, descends toward the ankle 
in the lateral compartment, giving motor branches 
to the muscles of eversion. It enters the ankle just 
lateral to the extensor digitorum longus and pro-
vides cutaneous sensation to the dorsum of the 
foot and toes. Th e posterior tibial nerve is a direct 
continuation of the tibial nerve and enters the foot 
posterior to the medial malleolus, branching into 
calcaneal, lateral plantar, and medial plantar nerves. 
It is located behind the posterior tibial artery at the 
level of the medial malleolus and provides sensory 
innervation to the heel, the medial sole, and part of 
the lateral sole of the foot, as well as the tips of the 
toes. Th e sural nerve is a branch of the tibial nerve 
and enters the foot between the Achilles tendon 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
1017
and the lateral malleolus to provide sensation to the 
 lateral foot. 
13
A complete ankle block requires a series of fi ve 
nerve blocks, but the process may be stream-
lined to minimize needle insertions ( Figure 46–59 ). 
All fi ve injections are required to anesthetize the 
entire foot; however, many surgical procedures 
involve only a few terminal nerves, and only aff ected 
nerves should be blocked. In addition, unlike a sci-
atic nerve block, an ankle block provides no analge-
sia for (below-the-knee) tourniquet pain, nor does it 
allow for perineural catheter insertion. To block the 
deep peroneal nerve, the groove between the exten-
sor hallucis longus and extensor digitorum longus 
tendons is identifi ed. Th e dorsalis pedis pulse is 
oft en palpable here. A short, small-gauge block nee-
dle is inserted perpendicular to the skin just lateral 
to the pulse, bone is contacted, and 5 mL of local 
anesthetic is infi ltrated as the needle is withdrawn. 
Continuing from this insertion site, a subcutaneous 
wheal of 5 mL of local anesthetic is extended toward 
the lateral malleolus to target the superfi cial pero-
neal nerve. Th e needle is withdrawn and redirected 
from the same location in a medial direction, infi l-
trating 5 mL of local anesthetic toward the medial 
malleolus to target the saphenous nerve. Th e poste-
rior tibial nerve may be located by identifying the 
posterior tibial artery pulse behind the medial mal-
leolus. A short, small-gauge block needle is inserted 
just posterior to the artery and 5 mL of local anes-
thetic is distributed in the pocket deep to the fl exor 
retinaculum. To target the sural nerve, 5 mL of local 
anesthetic is injected subcutaneously posterior to 
the lateral malleolus. 
 PERIPHERAL NERVE 
BLOCKS OF THE TRUNK 
 Superﬁ cial Cervical Plexus Block 
 Th e superfi cial cervical plexus block provides cuta-
neous analgesia for surgical procedures on the neck, 
anterior shoulder, and clavicle. It is helpful to iden-
tify and avoid the external jugular vein. Th e cervi-
cal plexus is formed from the anterior rami of C1–4, 
which emerge from the platysma muscle posterior to 
the sternocleidomastoid ( Figure 46–60 ). It supplies 
sensation to the jaw, neck, occiput, and areas of the 
chest and shoulder. 
 Th e patient is positioned supine with the head 
turned away from the side to be blocked. Th e ster-
nocleidomastoid muscle is identifi ed and its lateral 
edge marked. At the junction of the upper and mid-
dle thirds, a short (5-cm) block needle is inserted, 
A
B
Tibialis anterior tendon
Deep peroneal nerve
Saphenous nerve
Posterior tibial nerve
Achilles tendon
Extensor hallucis
longus tendon
Superficial
peroneal nerve
Tibia
Fibula
Sural nerve
 FIGURE 4659  Needle placement for ankle block. 
1018 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
C2
C3
C4
 FIGURE 4660  Distribution of the superﬁ cial cervical plexus. 
directed cephalad toward the mastoid process, 
and 5 mL of local anesthetic is injected in a sub-
cutaneous plane. Th e needle is turned to advance 
it in a caudad direction, maintaining a path along 
the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid. An 
additional 5 mL of local anesthetic is infi ltrated 
subcutaneously. 
 Intercostal Block 
 Intercostal blocks provide analgesia following tho-
racic and upper abdominal surgery, and relief of 
pain associated with rib fractures, herpes zoster, and 
cancer. Th ese blocks require individual injections 
delivered at the various vertebral levels that corre-
spond to the area of body wall to be anesthetized. 
 Intercostal blocks result in the highest blood 
levels of local anesthetic per volume injected 
of any block in the body, and care must be taken to 
avoid toxic levels of local anesthetic. Th e intercostal 
block has one of the highest complication rates of 
any peripheral nerve block due to the close proxim-
ity of the intercostal artery and vein (intravascular 
local anesthetic injection), as well as underlying 
pleura (pneumothorax). In addition, duration is 
impressively short due to the high vascular fl ow, and 
14
placement of a perineural catheter is tenuous, at 
best. With the advent of ultrasound guidance, the 
paravertebral approach is rapidly replacing the 
intercostal approach. 
 Th e intercostal nerves arise from the dorsal and 
ventral rami of the thoracic spinal nerves. Th ey exit 
from the spine at the intervertebral foramen and 
enter a groove on the underside of the correspond-
ing rib, running with the intercostal artery and vein; 
the nerve is generally the most inferior structure in 
the neurovascular bundle ( Figure 46–61 ). Branches 
are given off  for sensation in a single dermatome 
from the midline dorsally all the way to across the 
midline ventrally. 
 With the patient in the lateral decubitus or 
supine position, the level of each rib in the mid 
and posterior axillary line is palpated and marked. 
A small-gauge needle is inserted at the inferior 
edge of each of the selected ribs, bone is con-
tacted, and the needle is then “walked off ” inferi-
orly ( Figure 46–61 ). Th e needle is redirected in a 
slightly cephalad direction and advanced approxi-
mately 0.25 cm. Following aspiration, observing for 
blood or air, 3–5 mL of local anesthetic is injected 
at each desired level. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
1019
Needle insertion
point
Intercostal nerve,
artery, and vein
 FIGURE 4661  Anatomy and needle positioning for intercostal nerve block. 
 Paravertebral Block 
 Paravertebral blocks provide surgical anesthesia or 
postoperative analgesia for procedures involving 
the thoracic or abdominal wall, mastectomy, ingui-
nal or abdominal hernia repair, and more invasive 
unilateral procedures such as open nephrectomy. 
Paravertebral blocks usually require individual 
injections delivered at the various vertebral levels 
that correspond to the area of body wall to be anes-
thetized. For example, a simple mastectomy would 
require blocks at levels T3–6; for axillary node dis-
section, additional injections should be made from 
C7 through T2. For inguinal hernia repair, blocks 
should be performed at T10 through L2. Ventral 
hernias require bilateral injections corresponding 
to the level of the surgical site. Th e major com-
plication of thoracic injections is pneumothorax, 
whereas retroperitoneal structures may be at risk 
with lumbar-level injections. Hypotension sec-
ondary to sympathectomy can be observed with 
multilevel thoracic blocks. Unlike the intercostal 
approach, long-acting local anesthetic will have a 
nearly 24-hour duration, and perineural catheter 
insertion is a viable option (although local anes-
thetic spread from a single catheter to multiple lev-
els is variable). 
 Each spinal nerve emerges from the interverte-
bral foramina and divides into two rami: a larger 
anterior ramus, which innervates the muscles and 
skin over the anterolateral body wall and limbs, and 
a smaller posterior ramus, which refl ects posteriorly 
and innervates the skin and muscles of the back 
and neck ( Figure 46–62 ).  Th e thoracic para-
vertebral space is defi ned posteriorly by the 
superior costotransverse ligament, anterolaterally by 
the parietal pleura, medially by the vertebrae and the 
intervertebral foramina, and inferiorly and superi-
orly by the heads of the ribs. 
 With the patient seated and vertebral column 
fl exed, each spinous process is palpated, counting 
from the prominent C7 for thoracic blocks, and the 
iliac crests as a reference for lumbar levels. From 
the midpoint of the superior aspect of each spinous 
process, a point 2.5 cm laterally is measured and 
marked. In the thorax, the target nerve is located lat-
eral to the spinous process  above it, due to the steep 
15
1020 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
2 1
Intervertebral
foramen
Spinous
process
Transverse
process
Pleura
Lung
Spinal cord
Spinal nerve
2.5 cm
 FIGURE 4662  Paravertebral anatomy and traditional 
approach. Contact transverse process (1), then redirect the 
needle caudally (2) and advance 1 cm. 
angulation of thoracic spinous processes (eg, the T4 
nerve root is located lateral to the spinous process 
of T3). 
 A. Traditional Technique 
 A pediatric Tuohy needle (20 gauge) is inserted at 
each point and advanced perpendicular to the skin 
( Figure 46–62 ). Upon contact with the transverse 
process, the needle is withdrawn slightly and redi-
rected caudally an additional 1 cm (0.5 cm for lum-
bar placement). A “pop” or loss of resistance may be 
felt as the needle passes through the costotransverse 
ligament. Some practitioners use a loss-of-resistance 
syringe to guide placement; others prefer use of a 
nerve stimulator with chest wall motion for the end 
point. Inject 5 mL of local anesthetic at each level. 
Th e diffi  culty with this technique is that the depth 
of the transverse process is simply estimated; thus 
the risk of pneumothorax is relatively high. Using 
ultrasound to gauge transverse process depth prior 
to needle insertion theoretically decreases the risk of 
pneumothorax. 
 B. Ultrasound 
 An ultrasound transducer with a curvilinear array 
is used, with the beam oriented in a parasagittal or 
transverse plane. Th e transverse process, head of the 
rib, costotransverse ligament, and pleura are iden-
tifi ed. Th e paravertebral space may be approached 
from a caudal-to-cephalad direction (parasagittal) 
or a lateral-to-medial direction (transverse). It is 
helpful to visualize the needle in-plane as it passes 
through the costotransverse ligament and observe a 
downward displacement of the pleura as local anes-
thetic is injected. At each level 5 mL of local anes-
thetic is injected. 
 
CHAPTER 46 Peripheral Nerve Blocks
1021
lower abdomen below the umbilicus ( Figure 46–63 ). 
For part of their course, these three nerves travel in 
the muscle plane between the internal oblique and 
transversus abdominis muscles. Needle placement 
should be between the two fascial layers of these 
muscles, with local anesthetic fi lling the transversus 
abdominis plane. Th e patient is ideally positioned in 
lateral decubitus, but if mobility is limited the block 
may be performed in the supine position. 
A.  Ultrasound 
 With a linear or curvilinear array transducer ori-
ented parallel to the inguinal ligament, the layers of 
the external oblique, internal oblique, and transver-
sus abdominis muscles are identifi ed just superior 
 FIGURE 4663  Transversus 
abdominis plane (TAP) 
anatomy. 
External oblique muscle (cut)
Transversus abdominis muscle
Internal oblique muscle
Anterior and lateral cutaneous
branches of subcostal nerve (T12)
Anterior cutaneous branch
of iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Anterior branch of
iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Ilioinguinal nerve (L1)
Ilioinguinal nerve (L1)
 Transversus Abdominis Plane Block 
 Th e transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block is 
most oft en used to provide surgical anesthesia for 
minor, superfi cial procedures on the lower abdom-
inal wall, or postoperative analgesia for procedures 
below the umbilicus. For hernia surgeries, intrave-
nous or local supplementation may be necessary 
to provide anesthesia during peritoneal traction. 
Potential complications include violation of the 
peritoneum with or without bowel perforation, 
and the use of ultrasound is highly recommended 
to minimize this risk. 
16
 Th e subcostal (T12), ilioinguinal (L1), and 
iliohypogastric (L1) nerves are targeted in the 
TAP block, providing anesthesia to the ipsilateral 
1022 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Hadzic A (editor):  Peripheral Nerve Blocks and Anatomy 
for Ultrasound-guided Regional Anesthesia, 2nd ed. 
McGraw-Hill Medical, 2012. 
 Hebl JR, Lennon RL (editors):  Mayo Clinic Atlas of 
Regional Anesthesia and Ultrasound-Guided Nerve 
Blockade . Oxford University Press, 2010. 
 Heil JW, Ilfeld BM, Loland VJ, et al: Ultrasound-guided 
transversus abdominis plane catheters and ambulatory 
perineural infusions for outpatient inguinal hernia 
repair. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010;35:556. 
 Horn JL, Pitsch T, Salinas F, Benninger B: Anatomic basis 
to the ultrasound-guided approach for saphenous 
nerve blockade. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2009;34:486. 
 Ilfeld BM: Continuous peripheral nerve blocks: 
A review of the published evidence. Anesth Analg 
2011;113:904. 
 Ilfeld BM, Fredrickson MJ, Mariano ER: Ultrasound-
guided perineural catheter insertion: Th ree 
approaches, but little illuminating data. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med 2010;35:123. 
 Mariano ER, Loland VJ, Sandhu NS, et al: Ultrasound 
guidance versus electrical stimulation for femoral 
perineural catheter insertion. J Ultrasound Med 
2009;28:1453. 
 Perlas A, Brull R, Chan VW, et al: Ultrasound 
guidance improves the success of sciatic nerve 
block at the popliteal fossa. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2008;33:259. 
 Perlas A, Chan VW, Simons M: Brachial plexus 
examination and localization using ultrasound 
and electrical stimulation: A volunteer study. 
Anesthesiology 2003;99:429. 
 Sites BD, Brull R, Chan VW, et al: Artifacts and pitfall 
errors associated with ultrasound-guided regional 
anesthesia. Part I: Understanding the basic principles 
of ultrasound physics and machine operations. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med 2007;32: 412. 
 Sites BD, Brull R, Chan VW, et al: Artifacts and 
pitfall errors associated with ultrasound-guided 
regional anesthesia. Part II: A pictorial approach to 
understanding and avoidance. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 
2007;32:419. 
to the anterior superior iliac spine ( Figure 46–64 ). 
Muscles appear as striated hypoechoic structures 
with hyperechoic layers of fascia at their borders. 
A long (10-cm) needle is inserted in-plane just lat-
eral (posterior) to the transducer and advanced, 
noting tactile feedback from fascial planes, to the 
hyperechoic eff acement of the deep border of inter-
nal oblique and the superfi cial border of transver-
sus abdominis. Following careful aspiration for the 
nonappearance of blood, 20 mL of local anesthetic 
is injected, observing for an elliptical separation 
between the two fascial layers ( Figure 46–64 ). 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Capdevila X, Coimbra C, Choquet O: Approaches to 
the lumbar plexus: Success, risks, and outcome. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med 2005;30:150. 
 FIGURE 4664  Ultrasound image of TAP block. 
SQ, subcutaneous tissue; EO, external oblique; IO, internal 
oblique; TA, transversus abdominis; TAP, transversus 
abdominis plane. 
TA
TAP
IO
EO
SQ
 1023
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
47
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Pain may be classiﬁ ed according to 
pathophysiology (eg, nociceptive or 
neuropathic pain), etiology (eg, postoperative 
or cancer pain), or the aﬀ ected area 
(eg, headache or low back pain). 
 Nociceptive pain is caused by activation 
or sensitization of peripheral nociceptors, 
specialized receptors that transduce 
noxious stimuli. Neuropathic pain is the 
result of injury or acquired abnormalities 
of peripheral or central neural structures. 
 Acute pain is caused by noxious stimulation 
due to injury, a disease process, or the 
abnormal function of muscle or viscera. 
It is nearly always nociceptive. 
 Chronic pain is pain that persists beyond 
the usual course of an acute disease or 
after a reasonable time for healing to occur; 
this healing period can vary from 1 to 
6 months. Chronic pain may be nociceptive, 
neuropathic, or mixed. 
 Modulation of pain occurs peripherally 
at the nociceptor, in the spinal cord, or in 
supraspinal structures. This modulation 
can either inhibit (suppress) or facilitate 
(intensify) pain. 
 At least three mechanisms are responsible 
for central sensitization in the spinal cord: 
(1) wind-up and sensitization of second-
order wide dynamic range neurons; (2) dorsal 
horn neuron receptor ﬁ eld expansion; and 
(3) hyperexitability of ﬂ exion reﬂ exes. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Chronic pain may be caused by a 
combination of peripheral, central, and 
psychological mechanisms. 
 Moderate to severe acute pain, regardless 
of site, can aﬀ ect the function of nearly 
every organ and may adversely inﬂ uence 
perioperative morbidity and mortality. 
 The evaluation of any patient with pain 
should include several key components. 
Information about location, onset, and quality 
of pain, as well as alleviating and exacerbating 
factors, should be obtained along with a pain 
history that includes previous therapies and 
changes in symptoms over time. 
 Psychological evaluation is useful whenever 
medical evaluation fails to reveal an 
apparent cause for pain, pain intensity is 
disproportionate to disease or injury, or 
when depression or other psychological 
issues are apparent. 
 Myofascial pain syndromes are common 
disorders characterized by aching muscle 
pain, muscle spasm, stiﬀ ness, weakness, 
and, occasionally, autonomic dysfunction. 
 Ninety percent of disc herniations occur at 
L5–S1 or L4–L5. Symptoms usually develop 
following ﬂ exion injuries or heavy lifting and 
may be associated with bulging, protrusion, 
or extrusion of the disc. 
 Back pain caused by spinal stenosis usually 
radiates into the buttocks, thighs, and legs. 
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
 Chronic Pain Management 
 Richard W. Rosenquist, MD and Bruce M. Vrooman, MD 
—Continued next page
1024 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
Continued—
 Complications of stellate block include 
intravascular and subarachnoid injection, 
hematoma, pneumothorax, epidural 
anesthesia, brachial plexus block, 
hoarseness due to blockade of the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve, and, rarely, 
osteomyelitis or mediastinitis. 
 Ganglion impar block is eﬀ ective for patients 
with visceral or sympathetically maintained 
pain in the perineal area. 
 Neurolytic blocks are indicated for 
patients with severe, intractable cancer 
pain in whom more conventional therapy 
proves inadequate or conventional 
analgesic modalities are accompanied by 
unacceptable side eﬀ ects. 
 Spinal cord stimulation may be most 
eﬀ ective for neuropathic pain; accepted 
indications include sympathetically 
mediated pain, spinal cord lesions with 
localized segmental pain, phantom limb 
pain, ischemic lower extremity pain due 
to peripheral vascular disease, adhesive 
arachnoiditis, peripheral neuropathies, post-
thoracotomy pain, intercostal neuralgia, 
postherpetic neuralgia, angina, visceral 
abdominal pain, and visceral pelvic pain. 
 Patients with pathological or osteoporotic 
vertebral compression fracture may 
beneﬁ t from vertebral augmentation 
with polymethylmethacrylate cement. 
Vertebroplasty involves injection of 
the cement through the trocar needle. 
Kyphoplasty involves inﬂ ation of a balloon 
inserted through a percutaneously placed 
trocar needle, with subsequent injection 
of cement. 
 Acupuncture can be a useful adjunct for 
patients with chronic pain, particularly that 
associated with chronic musculoskeletal 
disorders and headaches. 
20
21
22
23
24
25
Termed  pseudoclaudication or  neurogenic 
claudication, the pain is characteristically 
worse with exercise and relieved by rest, 
particularly sitting with the spine ﬂ exed. 
 Diabetic neuropathy is the most common 
type of neuropathic pain. 
 Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) 
is a neuropathic pain disorder with 
signiﬁ cant autonomic features that is 
usually subdivided into two variants: CRPS 
1, formerly known as  reﬂ ex sympathetic 
dystrophy (RSD), and CRPS 2, formerly 
known as  causalgia. The major diﬀ erence 
between the two is the absence or presence, 
respectively, of documented nerve injury. 
 Trigeminal neuralgia ( tic douloureux ) is 
classically unilateral and usually located in 
the V2 or V3 distribution of the trigeminal 
nerve. It has an electric shock quality lasting 
from seconds to minutes at a time and is 
often provoked by contact with a discrete 
trigger. 
 Antidepressants are most useful for patients 
with neuropathic pain. These medications 
demonstrate an analgesic eﬀ ect that 
occurs at a dose lower than needed for 
antidepressant activity. 
 Anticonvulsant medications are useful 
for patients with neuropathic pain, 
especially trigeminal neuralgia and 
diabetic neuropathy. 
 Patients who experience opioid tolerance 
require escalating doses of opioid to 
maintain the same analgesic eﬀ ect. 
Physical dependence manifests in opioid 
withdrawal when the opioid medication is 
either abruptly discontinued or the dose 
is abruptly and signiﬁ cantly decreased. 
Psychological dependence, characterized 
by behavioral changes focusing on drug 
craving, is rare in cancer patients. 
14
15
16
17
18
19
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1025 
 Anesthesiologists trained in pain manage-
ment are in a unique position to coordinate multi-
disciplinary pain management centers because of 
their broad training in dealing with a wide variety 
of patients from surgical, obstetric, pediatric, and 
medical subspecialties and their expertise in clinical 
pharmacology and applied neuroanatomy, including 
the use of peripheral and central nerve blocks. 
 DEFINITIONS & 
CLASSIFICATION OF PAIN 
 Like other conscious sensations, normal pain per-
ception depends on specialized neurons that func-
tion as receptors, detecting the stimulus, and then 
transducing and conducting it to the central nervous 
system. Sensation is oft en described as either proto-
pathic (noxious) or epicritic (nonnoxious). Epicritic 
sensations (light touch, pressure, proprioception, 
and temperature discrimination) are characterized 
by low-threshold receptors and are generally con-
ducted by large myelinated nerve fi bers. In con-
trast, protopathic sensations (pain) are detected by 
high-threshold receptors and conducted by smaller, 
lightly myelinated (Aδ) and unmyelinated (C) nerve 
fi bers. 
 What Is Pain? 
 Pain is not just a sensory modality but an experi-
ence. Th e International Association for the Study 
of Pain defi nes pain as “an unpleasant sensory and 
emotional experience associated with actual or 
potential tissue damage, or described in terms of 
such damage.” Th is defi nition recognizes the inter-
play between the objective, physiological sensory 
aspects of pain and its subjective, emotional, and 
psychological components. Th e response to pain 
can be highly variable among diff erent individuals 
as well as in the same person at diff erent times. 
 Th e term  nociception is derived from  noci 
(Latin for harm or injury) and is used to describe 
neural responses to traumatic or noxious stimuli. 
All nociception produces pain, but not all pain 
results from nociception. Many patients experience 
pain in the absence of noxious stimuli. It is there-
fore clinically useful to divide pain into one of two 
 Pain—the most common symptom that brings 
patients to see a physician—is nearly always a mani-
festation of a pathological process. Th is symptom 
may have a wide variety of causes ranging from rela-
tively benign conditions to acute injury, myocardial 
ischemia, degenerative changes, or malignancy. In 
most cases, aft er a diagnosis is made, conservative 
measures are prescribed and the patient responds 
successfully. In others, referral to a pain medicine 
specialist for evaluation and treatment improves out-
comes and conserves health care resources. In still 
other situations, pain persists and patients develop 
chronic pain, the cause of which remains obscure 
aft er preliminary investigations have excluded seri-
ous and life-threatening illnesses and, if warranted, 
surgical intervention has either failed to relieve pain 
or has produced a new pain syndrome. 
 Th e term  pain management in a general sense 
applies to the entire discipline of anesthesiology, 
but its modern usage more specifi cally involves 
management of pain throughout the perioperative 
period as well as nonsurgical pain in both inpa-
tient and outpatient settings. Pain medicine prac-
tice may be broadly divided into acute and chronic 
pain management. Th e former primarily deals with 
patients recovering from surgery or with acute 
medical conditions in a hospital setting (see Chap-
ter 48), whereas the latter includes diverse groups 
of patients almost always seen in the outpatient set-
ting. Unfortunately, this distinction is artifi cial and 
considerable overlap exists; a good example is the 
patient with cancer who frequently requires short- 
and long-term pain management in both inpatient 
and outpatient settings. 
 Th e contemporary practice of pain manage-
ment is not limited to anesthesiologists but oft en 
includes other physicians (physiatrists, surgeons, 
internists, oncologists, psychiatrists, and neurolo-
gists) and nonphysicians (psychologists, physical 
therapists, acupuncturists, and hypnotists). Th e 
most eff ective approaches are multidisciplinary, in 
which the patient is evaluated by one or more phy-
sicians who conduct an initial examination, make 
a diagnosis, and formulate a treatment plan, and 
where subsequent evaluation and use of the services 
and resources of other health care providers are 
readily available. 
1026 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
transduce noxious stimuli. Neuropathic pain is the 
result of injury or acquired abnormalities of periph-
eral or central neural structures. 
 Th ere are diff erences in pain perception related 
to gender and age. Research has confi rmed diff er-
ences in pain experiences and coping strategies 
between genders, and there is ongoing investigation 
into exactly how this processing diff ers. Brain activa-
tion diff ers between genders, with men particularly 
infl uenced by the type and intensity of a noxious 
stimulus. Brain imaging patterns diff er as well. Some 
of these diff erences decrease with age and may dis-
appear aft er age 40. 
 A. Acute Pain 
 Acute pain is caused by noxious stimula-
tion due to injury, a disease process, or the 
abnormal function of muscle or viscera. It is usu-
ally nociceptive. Nociceptive pain serves to detect, 
localize, and limit tissue damage. Four physiologi-
cal processes are involved: transduction, transmis-
sion, modulation, and perception. Th is type of pain 
is typically associated with a neuroendocrine stress 
response that is proportional to the pain’s intensity. 
Its most common forms include post-traumatic, 
postoperative, and obstetric pain as well as pain 
associated with acute medical illnesses, such as myo-
cardial infarction, pancreatitis, and renal calculi. 
Most forms of acute pain are self-limited or resolve 
with treatment in a few days or weeks. When pain 
fails to resolve because of either abnormal healing or 
inadequate treatment, it becomes chronic (below). 
Two types of acute (nociceptive) pain—somatic 
and visceral—are diff erentiated based on origin and 
features. 
 1. Somatic pain —Somatic pain can be further clas-
sifi ed as superfi cial or deep. Superfi cial somatic pain 
is due to nociceptive input arising from skin, subcu-
taneous tissues, and mucous membranes. It is char-
acteristically well localized and described as a sharp, 
pricking, throbbing, or burning sensation. 
 Deep somatic pain arises from muscles, ten-
dons, joints, or bones. In contrast to superfi cial 
somatic pain, it usually has a dull, aching quality 
and is less well localized. An additional feature is 
that both the intensity and duration of the stimulus 
aff ect the degree of localization. For example, pain 
3
categories: (1) acute pain, which is primarily due to 
nociception, and (2) chronic pain, which may be 
due to nociception, but in which psychological and 
behavioral factors oft en play a major role.  Table 47–1 
lists terms frequently used in describing pain. 
 Pain may also be classifi ed according to patho-
physiology (eg, nociceptive or neuropathic 
pain), etiology (eg, arthritis or cancer pain), or the 
aff ected area (eg, headache or low back pain). Such 
classifi cations are useful in the selection of treatment 
modalities and drug therapy.  Nociceptive pain 
is caused by activation or sensitization of 
peripheral nociceptors, specialized receptors that 
1
2
 TABLE 471 Terms used in pain management. 
Term
Description
Allodynia
Perception of an ordinarily nonnoxious 
stimulus as pain
Analgesia
Absence of pain perception
Anesthesia
Absence of all sensation
Anesthesia 
dolorosa
Pain in an area that lacks sensation
Dysesthesia
Unpleasant or abnormal sensation with 
or without a stimulus
Hypalgesia 
(hypoalgesia)
Diminished response to noxious 
stimulation (eg, pinprick)
Hyperalgesia
Increased response to noxious stimulation
Hyperesthesia
Increased response to mild stimulation
Hyperpathia
Presence of hyperesthesia, allodynia, 
and hyperalgesia usually associated with 
overreaction, and persistence of the 
sensation after the stimulus
Hypesthesia 
(hypoesthesia)
Reduced cutaneous sensation (eg, light 
touch, pressure, or temperature)
Neuralgia
Pain in the distribution of a nerve or a 
group of nerves
Paresthesia
Abnormal sensation perceived without 
an apparent stimulus
Radiculopathy
Functional abnormality of one or more 
nerve roots
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1027
convergence of visceral and somatic aff erent input 
into the central nervous system. Th us, pain associat-
ed with disease processes involving the peritoneum 
or pleura over the central diaphragm is frequently 
referred to the neck and shoulder, whereas pain 
from disease processes aff ecting the parietal surfaces 
of the peripheral diaphragm is referred to the chest 
or upper abdominal wall. 
 B. Chronic Pain 
 Chronic pain is pain that persists beyond 
the usual course of an acute disease or aft er 
a reasonable time for healing to occur; this heal-
ing period typically can vary from 1 to 6 months. 
Chronic pain may be nociceptive, neuropathic, or 
mixed. A distinguishing feature is that psychologi-
cal mechanisms or environmental factors frequently 
play a major role. Patients with chronic pain oft en 
have attenuated or absent neuroendocrine stress 
responses and have prominent sleep and aff ective 
(mood) disturbances. Neuropathic pain is classically 
paroxysmal and lancinating, has a burning quality, 
and is associated with hyperpathia. When it is also 
associated with loss of sensory input (eg, amputa-
tion) into the central nervous system, it is termed 
deaff erentation pain . When the sympathetic system 
plays a major role, it is oft en termed  sympathetically 
maintained pain . 
 Th e most common forms of chronic pain 
include those associated with musculoskeletal disor-
ders, chronic visceral disorders, lesions of peripheral 
nerves, nerve roots, or dorsal root ganglia (including 
diabetic neuropathy, causalgia, phantom limb pain, 
and postherpetic neuralgia), lesions of the central 
nervous system (stroke, spinal cord injury, and mul-
tiple sclerosis), and cancer pain. Th e pain of most 
musculoskeletal disorders (eg, rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteoarthritis) is primarily nociceptive, whereas 
pain associated with peripheral or central neural 
disorders is primarily neuropathic. Th e pain asso-
ciated with some disorders, eg, cancer and chronic 
back pain (particularly aft er surgery), is oft en mixed. 
Some clinicians use the term  chronic benign pain
when pain does not result from cancer. Th is termi-
nology should be discouraged, however, because 
pain is never benign from the patient’s point of view, 
regardless of its cause. 
4
following brief minor trauma to the elbow joint 
is localized to the elbow, but severe or sustained 
trauma oft en causes pain in the whole arm. 
 2. Visceral pain —Visceral acute pain is due to a 
disease process or abnormal function involving an 
internal organ or its covering (eg, parietal pleura, 
pericardium, or peritoneum). Four subtypes are de-
scribed: (1) true localized visceral pain, (2) localized 
parietal pain, (3) referred visceral pain, and (4) re-
ferred parietal pain. True visceral pain is dull, diff use, 
and usually midline. It is frequently associated with 
abnormal sympathetic or parasympathetic activity 
causing nausea, vomiting, sweating, and changes in 
blood pressure and heart rate. Parietal pain is typi-
cally sharp and oft en described as a stabbing sensa-
tion that is either localized to the area around the 
organ or referred to a distant site ( Table 47–2 ). Th e 
phenomenon of visceral or parietal pain referred to 
cutaneous areas results from patterns of embryolog-
ical development and migration of tissues, and the 
 TABLE 472 Patterns of referred pain. 
Location
Cutaneous Dermatome
Central diaphragm
C4
Lungs
T2–T6
Aorta
T1–L2
Heart
T1–T4
Esophagus
T3–T8
Pancreas and spleen
T5–T10
Stomach, liver, and gallbladder
T6–T9
Adrenals
T8–L1
Small intestine
T9–T11
Colon
T10–L1
Kidney, ovaries, and testes
T10–L1
Ureters
T10–T12
Uterus
T11–L2
Bladder and prostate
S2–S4
Urethra and rectum
S2–S4
1028 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Anatomy & Physiology 
of Nociception 
 PAIN PATHWAYS 
 Pain is conducted along three neuronal pathways 
that transmit noxious stimuli from the periphery to 
the cerebral cortex ( Figure 47–1 ). Th e cell bodies of 
primary aff erent neurons are located in the dorsal 
root ganglia, which lie in the vertebral foramina at 
each spinal cord level. Each neuron has a single axon 
that bifurcates, sending one end to the peripheral 
tissues it innervates and the other into the dorsal 
horn of the spinal cord. In the dorsal horn, the pri-
mary aff erent neuron synapses with a second-order 
neuron whose axon crosses the midline and ascends 
in the contralateral  spinothalamic tract to reach the 
thalamus. Second-order neurons synapse in tha-
lamic nuclei with third-order neurons, which in 
turn send projections through the internal capsule 
and corona radiata to the postcentral gyrus of the 
cerebral cortex ( Figure 47–2 ). 
 First-Order Neurons 
 Th e majority of fi rst-order neurons send the proximal 
end of their axons into the spinal cord via the dorsal 
(sensory) spinal root at each cervical, thoracic, lum-
bar, and sacral level. Some unmyelinated aff erent (C) 
fi bers have been shown to enter the spinal cord via 
the ventral nerve (motor) root, accounting for obser-
vations that some patients continue to feel pain even 
aft er transection of the dorsal nerve root (rhizotomy) 
and report pain following ventral root stimulation. 
Once in the dorsal horn, in addition to synapsing 
with second-order neurons, the axons of fi rst-order 
neurons may synapse with interneurons, sympathetic 
neurons, and ventral horn motor neurons. 
 Pain fi bers originating from the head are carried 
by the trigeminal (V), facial (VII), glossopharyngeal 
(IX), and vagal (X) nerves. Th e  gasserian ganglion 
contains the cell bodies of sensory fi bers in the oph-
thalmic, maxillary, and mandibular divisions of the 
trigeminal nerve. Cell bodies of fi rst-order aff erent 
neurons of the facial nerve are located in the  genicu-
late ganglion ; those of the glossopharyngeal nerve 
lie in its  superior and petrosal ganglia ; and those of 
the vagal nerve are located in the  jugular ganglion 
(somatic) and the  ganglion nodosum (visceral). Th e 
Cerebral
cortex
Thalamus
STT
DC
Posterior root
Spinal ganglion
Posterior
division
Sympathetic ganglion
Anterior root
Viscera
la, b
Aδ, C
Aδ
Muscle
spindle
Tendon
bundle
Receptors in skin
Skeletal
muscle
Blood
vessels
Aα
Aβ
C
 FIGURE 471  Pain pathways. DC, dorsal column; STT, 
spinothalamic tracts. 
proximal axonal processes of the fi rst-order neurons 
in these ganglia reach the brainstem nuclei via their 
respective cranial nerves, where they synapse with 
second-order neurons in brainstem nuclei. 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1029 
Precentral gyrus
Lateral cerebral fissure
(fissure of Sylvius)
Primary
visual area
Occipital lobe
Frontal lobe
Parietal lobe
Temporal lobe
Primary sensory area
Primary motor area
Postcentral gyrus
Postcentral gyrus
Central sulcus (fissure of Rolando)
A
B
Arm
Arm
Face Face
Larynx
Pharynx
Leg
Leg
Brain stem
Temporal lobe
Lateral fissure
Central
lobule
 FIGURE 472  Lateral ( A ) and coronal ( B ) views of the 
brain show the location of the primary sensory cortex. 
Note the cortical representation of body parts, the sensory 
homunculus ( B ). 
 Second-Order Neurons 
 As aff erent fi bers enter the spinal cord, they segre-
gate according to size, with large, myelinated fi bers 
becoming medial, and small, unmyelinated fi bers 
becoming lateral. Pain fi bers may ascend or descend 
one to three spinal cord segments in  Lissauer’s tract 
before synapsing with second-order neurons in the 
gray matter of the ipsilateral dorsal horn. In many 
instances they communicate with second-order 
neurons through interneurons. 
1030 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
discrete, somatic receptive fi elds; they are normally 
silent and respond only to high-threshold noxious 
stimulation, poorly encoding stimulus intensity. 
WDR neurons are the most prevalent cell type in the 
dorsal horn. Although they are found throughout 
the dorsal horn, WDR neurons are most abundant 
in lamina V. During repeated stimulation, WDR 
neurons characteristically increase their fi ring rate 
exponentially in a graded fashion (“wind-up”), even 
with the same stimulus intensity. Th ey also have 
large receptive fi elds compared with nociceptive-
specifi c neurons. 
 Spinal cord gray matter was divided by Rexed 
into 10 laminae ( Figure 47–3 and  Table 47–3 ). Th e 
fi rst six laminae, which make up the dorsal horn, 
receive all aff erent neural activity and represent the 
principal site of modulation of pain by ascending 
and descending neural pathways. Second-order neu-
rons are either  nociceptive-specifi c or  wide dynamic 
range (WDR) neurons. Nociceptive- specifi c neu-
rons serve only noxious stimuli, but WDR  neurons 
also receive nonnoxious aff erent input from Aβ, 
Aδ, and C fi bers. Nociceptive-specifi c neurons 
are arranged somatotopically in lamina I and have 
Mechanoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors
Nociceptors
Cold receptors
Nociceptors
Thermoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors
To dorsal columns
Aβ
C
Aδ
IX
VIII
VII
X
V
IV
III
II
I
 FIGURE 473  Rexed’s spinal cord laminae. Note the termination of the diﬀ erent types of primary aﬀ erent neurons. 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1031 
somatic fi bers, visceral nociceptive fi bers are fewer 
in number, more widely distributed, proportionately 
activate a larger number of spinal neurons, and are 
not organized somatotopically. 
 A. The Spinothalamic Tract 
 Th e axons of most second-order neurons cross the 
midline close to their dermatomal level of origin (at 
the anterior commissure) to the contralateral side of 
the spinal cord before they form the spinothalamic 
tract and send their fi bers to the thalamus, the  retic-
ular formation , the  nucleus raphe magnus , and the 
 periaqueductal gray. Th e spinothalamic tract, which 
is classically considered the major pain pathway, lies 
anterolaterally in the white matter of the spinal cord 
( Figure 47–4 ). Th is ascending tract can be divided 
into a lateral and a medial tract. Th e  lateral spino-
thalamic (neospinothalamic) tract projects mainly 
to the  ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus 
and carries discriminative aspects of pain, such as 
location, intensity, and duration. Th e  medial spino-
thalamic (paleospinothalamic) tract projects to the 
medial thalamus and is responsible for mediating 
the autonomic and unpleasant emotional percep-
tions of pain. Some spinothalamic fi bers also proj-
ect to the periaqueductal gray and thus may be an 
 Most nociceptive C fi bers send collaterals to, or 
terminate on, second-order neurons in laminae I and 
II, and, to a lesser extent, in lamina V. In contrast, 
nociceptive Aδ fi bers synapse mainly in laminae I 
and V, and, to a lesser degree, in lamina X. Lamina I 
responds primarily to noxious (nociceptive) stimuli 
from cutaneous and deep somatic tissues. Lamina II, 
also called the  substantia gelatinosa , contains many 
interneurons and is believed to play a major role in 
processing and modulating nociceptive input from 
cutaneous nociceptors. It is also of special interest 
because it is believed to be a major site of action for 
opioids. Laminae III and IV primarily receive non-
nociceptive sensory input. Laminae VIII and IX 
make up the anterior (motor) horn. Lamina VII is 
the  intermediolateral column and contains the cell 
bodies of preganglionic sympathetic neurons. 
 Visceral aff erents terminate primarily in lamina 
V, and, to a lesser extent, in lamina I. Th ese two lami-
nae represent points of central convergence between 
somatic and visceral inputs. Lamina V responds to 
both noxious and nonnoxious sensory input and 
receives both visceral and somatic pain aff erents. 
Th e phenomenon of convergence between visceral 
and somatic sensory input is manifested clinically 
as referred pain (see  Table 47–2 ). Compared with 
 TABLE 473 Spinal cord lamina. 
Lamina
Predominant Function
Input
Name
I
Somatic nociception thermoreception
Aδ, C
Marginal layer
II
Somatic nociception thermoreception
C, Aδ
Substantia gelatinosa
III
Somatic mechanoreception
Aβ, Aδ
Nucleus proprius
IV
Mechanoreception
Aβ, Aδ
Nucleus proprius
V
Visceral and somatic nociception and 
mechanoreception
Aβ, Aδ, (C)
Nucleus proprius WDR neurons 1 
VI
Mechanoreception
Aβ
Nucleus proprius
VII
Sympathetic
Intermediolateral column
VIII
Aβ
Motor horn
IX
Motor
Aβ
Motor horn
X
Aβ, (Aδ)
Central canal
 1 WDR, wide dynamic range.
1032 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
to the contralateral thalamus; this tract is likely a 
major alternative pathway for pain. Lastly, some 
fi bers in the dorsal columns (which mainly carry 
light touch and proprioception) are responsive to 
pain; they ascend medially and ipsilaterally. 
 C. Integration with the 
Sympathetic and Motor Systems 
 Somatic and visceral aff erents are fully integrated 
with the skeletal motor and sympathetic systems 
in the spinal cord, brainstem, and higher centers. 
Aff erent dorsal horn neurons synapse both directly 
and indirectly with anterior horn motor neurons. 
Th ese synapses are responsible for the refl ex mus-
cle  activity—whether normal or abnormal—that is 
associated with pain. In a similar fashion, synapses 
between aff erent nociceptive neurons and sympa-
thetic neurons in the intermediolateral column result 
in refl ex sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction, 
smooth muscle spasm, and the release of catechol-
amines, both locally and from the adrenal medulla. 
 Third-Order Neurons 
 Th ird-order neurons are located in the thalamus 
and send fi bers to somatosensory areas I and II in 
the postcentral gyrus of the parietal cortex and the 
superior wall of the sylvian fi ssure, respectively. Per-
ception and discrete localization of pain take place 
in these cortical areas. Although most neurons from 
the lateral thalamic nuclei project to the primary 
somatosensory cortex, neurons from the intralami-
nar and medial nuclei project to the anterior cingu-
late gyrus and are likely involved in mediating the 
suff ering and emotional components of pain. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF NOCICEPTION 
 1. Nociceptors 
 Nociceptors are characterized by a high threshold 
for activation and encode the intensity of stimula-
tion by increasing their discharge rates in a graded 
fashion. Following repeated stimulation, they char-
acteristically display delayed adaptation, sensitiza-
tion, and aft erdischarges. 
 Noxious sensations can oft en be broken down 
into two components: a fast, sharp, and well-localized 
important link between the ascending and descend-
ing pathways. Collateral fi bers also project to the 
reticular activating system and the hypothalamus; 
these are likely responsible for the arousal response 
to pain. 
 B. Alternate Pain Pathways 
 As with epicritic sensation, pain fi bers ascend dif-
fusely, ipsilaterally, and contralaterally; some 
patients continue to perceive pain following ablation 
of the contralateral spinothalamic tract, and there-
fore other ascending pain pathways are also impor-
tant. Th e  spinoreticular tract is thought to mediate 
arousal and autonomic responses to pain. Th e  spi-
nomesencephalic tract may be important in activat-
ing antinociceptive, descending pathways, because it 
has some projections to the periaqueductal gray. Th e 
 spinohypothalamic and  spinotelencephalic tracts 
activate the hypothalamus and evoke emotional 
behavior. Th e  spinocervical tract ascends uncrossed 
to the lateral cervical nucleus, which relays the fi bers 
Dorsal column
(touch, pressure,
vibration, joint
position)
Gracile
fasciculus
Cuneate
fasciculus
S
L
T
C
S
S
L
L
T
T
C
C
Lateral
spinothalamic
tract
Ventral spinothalamic tract
 FIGURE 474  A cross section of the spinal cord 
showing the spinothalamic and other ascending sensory 
pathways. Note the spatial distribution of ﬁ bers from 
diﬀ erent spinal levels: cervical (C), thoracic (T), lumbar (L), 
and sacral (S). 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1033 
 Visceral Nociceptors 
 Visceral organs are generally insensitive tissues that 
mostly contain silent nociceptors. Some organs 
appear to have specifi c nociceptors, such as the 
heart, lung, testis, and bile ducts. Most other organs, 
such as the intestines, are innervated by polymodal 
nociceptors that respond to smooth muscle spasm, 
ischemia, and infl ammation. Th ese receptors gen-
erally do not respond to the cutting, burning, or 
crushing that occurs during surgery. A few organs, 
such as the brain, lack nociceptors altogether; how-
ever, the brain’s meningeal coverings do contain 
nociceptors. 
 Like somatic nociceptors, those in the viscera 
are the free nerve endings of primary aff erent neu-
rons whose cell bodies lie in the dorsal horn. Th ese 
aff erent nerve fi bers, however, frequently travel 
with eff erent sympathetic nerve fi bers to reach the 
viscera. Aff erent activity from these neurons enters 
the spinal cord between T1 and L2. Nociceptive 
C fi bers from the esophagus, larynx, and trachea 
travel with the vagus nerve to enter the nucleus sol-
itarius in the brainstem. Aff erent pain fi bers from 
the bladder, prostate, rectum, cervix and urethra, 
and genitalia are transmitted into the spinal cord 
via parasympathetic nerves at the level of the S2–S4 
nerve roots. Th ough relatively few compared with 
somatic pain fi bers, fi bers from primary visceral 
aff erent neurons enter the cord and synapse more 
diff usely with single fi bers, oft en synapsing with 
multiple dermatomal levels and oft en crossing to 
the contralateral dorsal horn. 
 2. Chemical Mediators of Pain 
 Several neuropeptides and excitatory amino acids 
function as neurotransmitters for aff erent neurons 
subserving pain ( Table 47–4 ). Many, if not most, of 
these neurons contain more than one neurotrans-
mitter, which are simultaneously released. Th e most 
important of these peptides are  substance P and 
 calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). Glutamate 
is the most important excitatory amino acid. 
 Substance P is an 11 amino acid peptide that is 
synthesized and released by fi rst-order neurons both 
peripherally and in the dorsal horn. Also found in 
other parts of the nervous system and the intestines, 
sensation (“fi rst pain”), which is conducted with 
a short latency (0.1 s) by Aδ fi bers (tested by pin-
prick); and a slower onset, duller, and oft en poorly 
localized sensation (“second pain”), which is con-
ducted by C fi bers. In contrast to epicritic sensation, 
which may be transduced by specialized end organs 
on the aff erent neuron (eg, pacinian corpuscle for 
touch), protopathic sensation is transduced mainly 
by free nerve endings. 
 Most nociceptors are free nerve endings that 
sense heat and mechanical and chemical tissue 
damage. Types include (1)  mechanonociceptors , 
which respond to pinch and pinprick, (2)  silent 
nociceptors , which respond only in the presence 
of infl ammation, and (3)  polymodal mechanoheat 
nociceptors . Th e last are most prevalent and respond 
to excessive pressure, extremes of temperature 
(>42°C and <40°C), and noxious substances such as 
bradykinin, histamine, serotonin (5-hydroxytrypta-
mine or 5-HT), H + , K + , some prostaglandins, capsa-
icin, and possibly adenosine triphosphate. At least 
two nociceptor receptors (containing ion channels 
in nerve endings) have been identifi ed, TRPV1 and 
TRPV2. Both respond to high temperatures. Cap-
saicin stimulates the TRPV1 receptor. Polymodal 
nociceptors are slow to adapt to strong pressure and 
display heat sensitization. 
 Cutaneous Nociceptors 
 Nociceptors are present in both somatic and visceral 
tissues. Primary aff erent neurons reach tissues by 
traveling along spinal somatic, sympathetic, or para-
sympathetic nerves.  Somatic nociceptors include 
those in skin (cutaneous) and deep tissues (muscle, 
tendons, fascia, and bone), whereas  visceral nocicep-
tors include those in internal organs. Th e cornea and 
tooth pulp are unique in that they are almost exclu-
sively innervated by nociceptive Aδ and C fi bers. 
 Deep Somatic Nociceptors 
 Deep somatic nociceptors are less sensitive to nox-
ious stimuli than cutaneous nociceptors but are 
easily sensitized by infl ammation. Th e pain arising 
from them is characteristically dull and poorly local-
ized. Specifi c nociceptors exist in muscles and joint 
capsules, and they respond to mechanical, thermal, 
and chemical stimuli. 
1034 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 3. Modulation of Pain 
 Modulation of pain occurs peripherally at the 
nociceptor, in the spinal cord, and in supra-
spinal structures. Th is modulation can either inhibit 
(suppress) or facilitate (intensify) pain. 
 Peripheral Modulation of Pain 
 Nociceptors and their neurons display sensitization 
following repeated stimulation. Sensitization may 
be manifested as an enhanced response to noxious 
stimulation or a newly acquired responsiveness to 
a wider range of stimuli, including nonnoxious 
stimuli. 
 A. Primary Hyperalgesia 
 Sensitization of nociceptors results in a decrease in 
threshold, an increase in the frequency response to 
the same stimulus intensity, a decrease in response 
latency, and spontaneous fi ring even aft er cessation 
5
it facilitates transmission in pain pathways via neu-
rokinin-1 receptor activation. In the periphery, sub-
stance P neurons send collaterals that are closely 
associated with blood vessels, sweat glands, hair 
follicles, and mast cells in the dermis. Substance P 
sensitizes nociceptors, degranulates histamine from 
mast cells and 5-HT from platelets, and is a potent 
vasodilator and chemoattractant for leukocytes. 
Substance P–releasing neurons also innervate the 
viscera and send collateral fi bers to paravertebral 
sympathetic ganglia; intense stimulation of viscera, 
therefore, can cause direct postganglionic sympa-
thetic discharge. 
 Both opioid and α 2 -adrenergic receptors have 
been described on or near the terminals of unmy-
elinated peripheral nerves. Although their physi-
ological role is not clear, the latter may explain the 
observed analgesia of peripherally applied opioids, 
particularly in the presence of infl ammation. 
 TABLE 474 Major neurotransmitters mediating or modulating pain. 
Neurotransmitter
Receptor 1 
Eﬀ ect on Nociception
Substance P
Neurokinin–1
Excitatory
Calcitonin gene-related peptide
Excitatory
Glutamate
NMDA, AMPA, kainate, quisqualate
Excitatory
Aspartate
NMDA, AMPA, kainate, quisqualate
Excitatory
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
P 1 , P 2 
Excitatory
Somatostatin
Inhibitory
Acetylcholine
Muscarinic
Inhibitory
Enkephalins
µ, δ, κ
Inhibitory
β-Endorphin
µ, δ, κ
Inhibitory
Norepinephrine
α 2 
Inhibitory
Adenosine
A 1 
Inhibitory
Serotonin
5-HT 1 (5-HT 3 )
Inhibitory
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA)
A, B
Inhibitory
Glycine
Inhibitory
1 NMDA,  N -methyl- D -aspartate; AMPA, 2-(aminomethyl)phenylacetic acid; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine.
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1035 
acetaminophen, and nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) produce analgesia by inhibition of 
COX. Th e analgesic eff ect of corticosteroids is likely 
the result of inhibition of prostaglandin production 
through blockade of phospholipase A 2 activation. 
 B. Secondary Hyperalgesia 
 Neurogenic infl ammation, also called  secondary 
hyperalgesia, plays an important role in peripheral 
sensitization following injury. It is manifested by the 
“triple response (of Lewis)” of a red fl ush around the 
site of injury (fl are), local tissue edema, and sensiti-
zation to noxious stimuli. Secondary hyperalgesia is 
primarily due to antidromic release of substance P 
(and probably CGRP). Substance P degranulates his-
tamine and 5-HT, vasodilates blood vessels, causes 
tissue edema, and induces the formation of leukotri-
enes. Th e neural origin of this response is supported 
by the following fi ndings: (1) it can be produced by 
electrical stimulation of a sensory nerve, (2) it is not 
observed in denervated skin, and (3) it is diminished 
by injection of a local anesthetic. Capsaicin applied 
topically in a gel, cream, or patch depletes substance 
P and diminishes neurogenic infl ammation, and is 
useful for some patients with postherpetic neuralgia. 
of the stimulus ( aft erdischarges ). Such sensitization 
commonly occurs with injury and following applica-
tion of heat. Primary hyperalgesia is mediated by the 
release of noxious substances from damaged tissues. 
Histamine is released from mast cells, basophils, 
and platelets, whereas serotonin is released from 
mast cells and platelets. Bradykinin is released from 
tissues following activation of factor XII. Bradyki-
nin activates free nerve endings via specifi c B1 and 
B2 receptors. 
 Prostaglandins are produced following tissue 
damage by the action of phospholipase A 2 on phos-
pholipids released from cell membranes to form 
 arachidonic acid ( Figure 47–5 ). Th e cyclooxygen-
ase (COX) pathway then converts the latter into 
 endoperoxides , which in turn are transformed into 
 prostacyclin and  prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ). PGE 2 
directly activates free nerve endings, whereas pros-
tacyclin potentiates the edema from bradykinin. 
Th e lipoxygenase pathway converts arachidonic 
acid into hydroperoxy compounds, which are sub-
sequently converted into  leukotrienes . Th e role 
of the latter is not well defi ned, but they appear to 
potentiate certain types of pain. Pharmacological 
agents such as acetylsalicylic acid (ASA, or aspirin), 
Phosphorylation
of proteins
IP3
Cell membrane
PC
AA
Release of
intracellular
calcium
Thromboxane
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
Lipooxygenase
Cyclooxygenase
PLA2
PIP2
DAG
PKC
PLC
G-protein
Receptor
 FIGURE 475  Phospholipase C (PLC) catalyzes the 
hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP 2 ) 
to produce inositol triphosphate (IP 3 ) and diacylglycerol 
(DAG). Protein kinase C (PKC) is also important. 
Phospholipase A 2 (PLA 2 ) catalyzes the conversion of 
phosphatidylcholine (PC) to arachidonic acid (AA). 
1036 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
of noxious stimuli in noncontiguous parts of the 
body inhibits WDR neurons at other levels, which 
may explain why pain in one part of the body inhibits 
pain in other parts. Th ese two phenomena support a 
“gate” theory for pain processing in the spinal cord. 
 Glycine and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) are 
amino acids that function as inhibitory neurotrans-
mitters and likely play an important role in segmen-
tal inhibition of pain in the spinal cord. Antagonism 
of glycine and GABA results in powerful facilita-
tion of WDR neurons and produces allodynia and 
hyperesthesia. Th ere are two subtypes of GABA 
receptors: GABA A , of which muscimol is an agonist, 
and GABA B , of which baclofen is an agonist. Seg-
mental inhibition appears to be mediated by GABA B
receptor activity. Th e GABA A receptor functions as a 
Cl − channel, and benzodiazepines activate this chan-
nel. Activation of glycine receptors also increases 
Cl − conductance across neuronal cell membranes. 
Th e action of glycine is more complex than that of 
GABA, because the former also has a facilitatory 
(excitatory) eff ect on the NMDA receptor. 
 Adenosine also modulates nociceptive activity 
in the dorsal horn. At least two receptors are known: 
A 1 , which inhibits adenyl cyclase, and A 2 , which 
stimulates adenyl cyclase. Th e A 1 receptor mediates 
adenosine’s antinociceptive action. Methylxanthines 
can reverse this eff ect through phosphodiesterase 
inhibition. 
 2. Supraspinal inhibition —Several supraspinal 
structures send fi bers down the spinal cord to inhib-
it pain in the dorsal horn. Important sites of origin 
for these descending pathways include the periaque-
ductal gray, reticular formation, and nucleus raphe 
magnus (NRM). Stimulation of the periaqueduc-
tal gray area in the midbrain produces widespread 
analgesia in humans. Axons from these tracts act 
presynaptically on primary aff erent neurons and 
postsynaptically on second-order neurons (or in-
terneurons). Th ese pathways mediate their antino-
ciceptive action via α 2 -adrenergic, serotonergic, and 
opiate (µ, δ, and κ) receptor mechanisms. Th e role of 
monoamines in pain inhibition explains the analge-
sic effi  cacy of antidepressants that block reuptake of 
catecholamines and serotonin. 
 Inhibitory adrenergic pathways originate pri-
marily from the periaqueductal gray area and the 
 Central Modulation of Pain 
 A. Facilitation 
 At least three mechanisms are responsible for 
central sensitization in the spinal cord: 
1. 
 Wind-up and sensitization of second-order 
neurons. WDR neurons increase their 
frequency of discharge with the same repetitive 
stimuli and exhibit prolonged discharge, even 
aft er aff erent C fi ber input has stopped. 
2. 
 Receptor fi eld expansion. Dorsal horn neurons 
increase their receptive fi elds such that 
adjacent neurons become responsive to stimuli 
(whether noxious or not) to which they were 
previously unresponsive. 
3. 
 Hyperexcitability of fl exion refl exes. 
Enhancement of fl exion refl exes is observed 
both ipsilaterally and contralaterally. 
 Neurochemical mediators of central sensitiza-
tion include substance P, CGRP, vasoactive intestinal 
peptide (VIP), cholecystokinin (CCK), angiotensin, 
and galanin, as well as the excitatory amino acids 
 l -glutamate and  l -aspartate. Th ese substances trig-
ger changes in membrane excitability by interacting 
with G protein–coupled membrane receptors on 
neurons ( Figure 47–5 ). 
 Glutamate and aspartate play important roles 
in wind-up, via activation of  N -methyl- d -aspartate 
(NMDA) and other receptor mechanisms, and in 
the induction and maintenance of central sensitiza-
tion. Activation of NMDA receptors also induces 
nitric oxide synthetase, increasing formation of 
nitric oxide. Both prostaglandins and nitric oxide 
facilitate the release of excitatory amino acids in the 
spinal cord. Th us, COX inhibitors such as ASA and 
NSAIDs have important analgesic actions in the spi-
nal cord. 
 B. Inhibition 
 Transmission of nociceptive input in the spinal cord 
can be inhibited by segmental activity in the cord 
itself, as well as by descending neural activity from 
supraspinal centers. 
 1. Segmental inhibition —Activation of large aff er-
ent fi bers subserving sensation inhibits WDR neuron 
and spinothalamic tract activity. Moreover,  activation 
6
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1037
 Th e sympathetic nervous system appears to 
play a major role in some patients with chronic pain. 
Th e effi  cacy of sympathetic nerve blocks in some 
of these patients supports the concept of  sympa-
thetically maintained pain . Painful disorders that 
oft en respond to sympathetic blocks include com-
plex regional pain syndrome, deaff erentation syn-
dromes due to nerve avulsion or amputations, and 
postherpetic neuralgia. However, the simplistic 
theory of heightened sympathetic activity resulting 
in vasoconstriction, edema, and hyperalgesia fails 
to account for the warm and erythematous phase 
observed in some patients. Similarly, clinical and 
experimental observations do not satisfactorily sup-
port the theory of ephaptic transmission between 
pain fi bers and demyelinated sympathetic fi bers. 
 Psychological mechanisms or environmental 
factors are rarely the sole mechanisms for chronic 
pain but are commonly seen in combination with 
other mechanisms ( Table 47–6 ). 
 SYSTEMIC RESPONSES TO PAIN 
 Systemic Responses to Acute Pain 
 Acute pain is typically associated with a neuroendo-
crine stress response that is proportional to pain 
intensity. Th e pain pathways mediating the aff erent 
limb of this response are discussed above. Th e 
reticular formation. Norepinephrine mediates this 
action via activation of presynaptic or postsynaptic 
α 2 receptors. At least part of the descending inhibi-
tion from the periaqueductal gray is relayed fi rst to 
the NRM and medullary reticular formation; sero-
tonergic fi bers from the NRM then relay the inhi-
bition to dorsal horn neurons via the  dorsolateral 
funiculus . 
 Th e endogenous opiate system (primarily the 
NRM and reticular formation) acts via methionine 
enkephalin, leucine enkephalin, and β-endorphin, 
all of which are antagonized by naloxone. Th ese 
opioids act presynaptically to hyperpolarize pri-
mary aff erent neurons and inhibit the release of 
substance P; they also appear to cause some postsyn-
aptic inhibition. Exogenous opioids preferentially 
act postsynaptically on the second-order neurons or 
interneurons in the substantia gelatinosa. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
OF CHRONIC PAIN 
 Chronic pain may be caused by a combina-
tion of peripheral, central, and psychologi-
cal mechanisms. Sensitization of nociceptors plays 
a major role in the origin of pain associated with 
peripheral mechanisms, such as chronic musculo-
skeletal and visceral disorders. 
 Neuropathic pain involves peripheral–central 
and central neural mechanisms that are complex 
and generally associated with partial or complete 
lesions of peripheral nerves, dorsal root ganglia, 
nerve roots, or more central structures ( Table 47–5 ). 
Peripheral mechanisms include spontaneous dis-
charges; sensitization of receptors to mechanical, 
thermal, and chemical stimuli; and up-regulation 
of adrenergic receptors. Neural infl ammation may 
also be present. Systemic administration of local 
anesthetics and anticonvulsants has been shown 
to suppress the spontaneous fi ring of sensitized or 
traumatized neurons. Th is observation is supported 
by the effi  cacy of agents such as lidocaine, mexi-
letine, and carbamazepine in many patients with 
neuropathic pain. Central mechanisms include loss 
of segmental inhibition, wind-up of WDR neurons, 
spontaneous discharges in deaff erentated neurons, 
and reorganization of neural connections. 
7
 TABLE 475 Mechanisms of neuropathic pain. 
Spontaneous self-sustaining neuronal activity in the 
primary afferent neuron (such as a neuroma).
Marked mechanosensitivity associated with chronic nerve 
compression.
Short-circuits between pain fibers and other types of fibers 
following demyelination, resulting in activation of 
nociceptive fibers by nonnoxious stimuli at the site of 
injury (ephaptic transmission).
Functional reorganization of receptive fields in dorsal horn 
neurons such that sensory input from surrounding intact 
nerves emphasizes or intensifies any input from the area 
of injury.
Spontaneous electrical activity in dorsal horn cells or 
thalamic nuclei.
Release of segmental inhibition in the spinal cord.
Loss of descending inhibitory influences that are 
dependent on normal sensory input.
Lesions of the thalamus or other supraspinal structures.
1038 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
capacity; this promotes atelectasis, intrapulmonary 
shunting, hypoxemia, and, less commonly, hypoven-
tilation. Reductions in vital capacity impair cough-
ing and clearing of secretions. Regardless of the 
pain’s location, prolonged bed rest or immobilization 
can produce similar changes in pulmonary function. 
 C. Gastrointestinal and Urinary Eﬀ ects 
 Enhanced sympathetic tone increases sphincter 
tone and decreases intestinal and urinary motility, 
promoting ileus and urinary retention, respectively. 
Hypersecretion of gastric acid can promote stress 
ulceration and worsen the consequences of pulmo-
nary aspiration. Nausea, vomiting, and constipation 
are common. 
 D. Endocrine Eﬀ ects 
 Stress increases catabolic hormones (catecholamines, 
cortisol, and glucagon) and decreases anabolic hor-
mones (insulin and testosterone). Patients develop 
a negative nitrogen balance, carbohydrate intoler-
ance, and increased lipolysis. Th e increase in cortisol, 
renin, angiotensin, aldosterone, and antidiuretic hor-
mone results in sodium retention, water retention, 
and secondary expansion of the extracellular space. 
 E. Hematological Eﬀ ects 
 Stress-mediated increases in platelet adhesiveness, 
reduced fi brinolysis, and hypercoagulability have 
been reported. 
 F. Immune Eﬀ ects 
 Th e neuroendocrine stress response produces leuko-
cytosis and has been reported to depress the reticu-
loendothelial system. Th e latter predisposes patients 
to infection. Stress-related immunodepression may 
also enhance tumor growth and metastasis. 
 G. Psychological Eﬀ ects 
 Anxiety and sleep disturbances are common reac-
tions to acute pain. With prolonged duration of the 
pain, depression is not unusual. Some patients react 
with frustration and anger that may be directed at 
family, friends, or the medical staff . 
 Systemic Responses to Chronic Pain 
 Th e neuroendocrine stress response is generally 
observed only in patients with severe recurring pain 
due to peripheral (nociceptive) mechanisms and in 
eff erent limb is mediated by the sympathetic nervous 
and endocrine systems. Sympathetic activation 
increases eff erent sympathetic tone to all viscera and 
releases catecholamines from the adrenal medulla. 
Th e hormonal response results from increased sym-
pathetic tone and from hypothalamically mediated 
refl exes.  Moderate to severe acute pain, regard-
less of site, can aff ect the function of nearly 
every organ and may adversely aff ect perioperative 
morbidity and mortality. 
 A. Cardiovascular Eﬀ ects 
 Cardiovascular eff ects are oft en prominent and 
include hypertension, tachycardia, enhanced myo-
cardial irritability, and increased systemic vascular 
resistance. Cardiac output increases in most normal 
patients but may decrease in patients with compro-
mised ventricular function. Because of the increase 
in myocardial oxygen demand, pain can worsen or 
precipitate myocardial ischemia. 
 B. Respiratory Eﬀ ects 
 An increase in total body oxygen consumption 
and carbon dioxide production necessitates a con-
comitant increase in minute ventilation. Th e lat-
ter increases the work of breathing, particularly 
in patients with underlying lung disease. Pain due 
to abdominal or thoracic incisions further com-
promises pulmonary function because of guard-
ing (splinting). Decreased movement of the chest 
wall reduces tidal volume and functional residual 
8
 TABLE 476 Psychological mechanisms 
or environmental factors associated with 
chronic pain. 
Psychophysiological mechanisms in which emotional 
factors act as the initiating cause (eg, tension 
headaches).
Learned or operant behavior in which chronic behavior 
patterns are rewarded (eg, by attention of a spouse) 
following an often minor injury.
Psychopathology such as major affective disorders 
(depression), schizophrenia, and somatization 
disorders (conversion hysteria) in which the patient 
has an abnormal preoccupation with bodily functions.
Pure psychogenic mechanisms (somatoform pain disorder), 
in which suffering is experienced despite absence of 
nociceptive input.
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1039
Wong-Baker FACES pain scale, designed for children 
3 years of age and older, is useful in patients with 
whom communication may be diffi  cult. Th e patient 
is asked to point to various facial expressions rang-
ing from a smiling face (no pain) to an extremely 
unhappy one that expresses the worst possible pain. 
Th e VAS is a 10-cm horizontal line labeled “no pain” 
at one end and “worst pain imaginable” on the other 
end. Th e patient is asked to mark on this line where 
the intensity of the pain lies. Th e distance from “no 
pain” to the patient’s mark numerically quantifi es the 
pain. Th e VAS is a simple and effi  cient method that 
correlates well with other reliable methods. 
 Th e MPQ is a checklist of words describ-
ing symptoms. Unlike other pain rating methods 
that assume pain is one-dimensional and describe 
intensity but not quality, the MPQ attempts 
to defi ne the pain in three major dimensions: 
(1) sensory– discriminative (nociceptive pathways), 
(2)  motivational–aff ective (reticular and limbic 
structures), and (3) cognitive–evaluative (cerebral 
cortex). It contains 20 sets of descriptive words 
that are divided into four major groups: 10 sensory, 
5 aff ective, 1 evaluative, and 4 miscellaneous. Th e 
patient selects the sets that apply to his or her pain 
and circles the words in each set that best describe 
the pain. Th e words in each class are given rank 
according to severity of pain. A pain rating index is 
derived based on the words chosen. 
 PSYCHOLOGICAL EVALUATION 
 Psychological evaluation is useful whenever 
medical evaluation fails to reveal an apparent 
cause for pain, when pain intensity, characteristics, 
or duration are disproportionate to disease or injury, 
or when depression or other psychological issues are 
apparent. Th ese types of evaluations help defi ne the 
role of psychological or behavioral factors. Th e most 
commonly used tests are the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory (MMPI) and Beck Depression 
Inventory. 
 Th e MMPI is a 566-item true–false question-
naire that attempts to defi ne the patient’s personality 
on 10 clinical scales. Th ree validity scales serve to 
identify patients deliberately trying to hide traits or 
alter the results. Cultural diff erences can aff ect scores. 
10
patients with prominent central mechanisms such 
as pain associated with paraplegia. It is attenuated 
or absent in most patients with chronic pain. Sleep 
and aff ective disturbances, particularly depression, 
are oft en prominent. Many patients also experience 
signifi cant changes in appetite (increase or decrease) 
and stresses on social relationships. 
 Evaluation of the Patient 
with Chronic Pain 
 Th e evaluation of any patient with pain should 
include several key components. Information 
about location, onset, and quality of pain, as well 
as alleviating and exacerbating factors, should be 
obtained, along with a pain history that includes pre-
vious therapies and changes in symptoms over time. 
In addition to physical symptoms, chronic pain usu-
ally involves a psychological component that should 
be addressed as well. Questionnaires, diagrams, and 
pain scales are useful tools in helping patients ade-
quately describe the characteristics of their pain and 
how it aff ects their quality of life. Information gath-
ered during the physical examination can help dis-
tinguish pain location, type, and systemic sequelae, 
if any. Imaging studies such as plain radiographs, 
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), and bone scans can oft en suggest 
physiological causes. All components are necessary 
for a comprehensive evaluation of the pain patient 
prior to determining appropriate treatment options. 
 PAIN MEASUREMENT 
 Reliable quantitation of pain severity helps deter-
mine therapeutic interventions and evaluate the 
effi  cacy of treatments. Th is is a challenge, however, 
because pain is a subjective experience that is infl u-
enced by psychological, cultural, and other variables. 
Clear defi nitions are necessary, because pain may be 
described in terms of tissue destruction or bodily or 
emotional reaction. 
 Th e numerical rating scale, Wong-Baker FACES 
rating scale, visual analog scale (VAS), and McGill 
Pain Questionnaire (MPQ) are most commonly used. 
In the numerical scale, 0 corresponds to no pain and 
10 is intended to refl ect the worst possible pain. Th e 
9
1040 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
of denervation include persistent insertion poten-
tials, the presence of positive sharp waves, fi brillary 
activity, or fasciculation potentials. Abnormalities in 
muscles produce changes in amplitude and duration 
as well as polyphasic action potentials. 
 Peripheral nerve conduction studies employ 
supramaximal stimulations of motor or mixed sen-
sorimotor nerve, whereas muscle potentials are 
recorded over the appropriate muscle. Th e time 
between the onset of the stimulation and the onset 
of the muscle potential (latency) is a measurement 
of the fastest conducting motor fi bers in the nerve. 
Th e amplitude of the recorded potential indicates 
the number of functional motor units, whereas its 
duration refl ects the range of conduction velocities 
in the nerve. Conduction velocity can be obtained 
by stimulating the nerve from two points and com-
paring the latencies. When a pure sensory nerve 
is evaluated, the nerve is stimulated while action 
potentials are recorded either proximally or distally 
(antidromic conduction). 
Moreover, the test is lengthy and some patients fi nd 
its questions insulting. Th e MMPI is used primar-
ily to confi rm clinical impressions about the role of 
psychological factors; it cannot reliably distinguish 
between “organic” and “functional” pain. 
 Depression is very common in patients with 
chronic pain. It is oft en diffi  cult to determine the 
relative contribution of depression to the suff ering 
associated with pain. Th e Beck Depression Inven-
tory is a useful test for identifying patients with 
major depression. 
 Several tests have been developed to assess 
functional limitations or impairment (disability). 
Th ese include the Multidimensional Pain Inventory 
(MPI), Medical Outcomes Survey 36-Item Short 
Form (SF-36), Pain Disability Index (PDI), and 
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). 
 Emotional disorders are commonly associated 
with complaints of chronic pain, and chronic pain 
oft en results in varying degrees of psychological dis-
tress. Determination of which came fi rst is oft en dif-
fi cult. In either case, both the pain and emotional 
distress need to be treated.  Table 47–7 lists emo-
tional disorders in which treatment should be pri-
marily directed at the emotional disorder. 
 ELECTROMYOGRAPHY & 
NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES 
 Electromyography and nerve conduction studies 
complement one another and are useful for con-
fi rming the diagnosis of entrapment syndromes, 
radicular syndromes, neural trauma, and poly-
neuropathies. Th ey can oft en distinguish between 
neurogenic and myogenic disorders. Patterns of 
abnormalities can localize a lesion to the spinal cord, 
nerve root, limb plexus, or peripheral nerve. In addi-
tion, they may also be useful in excluding “organic” 
disorders when psychogenic pain or a “functional” 
syndrome is suspected. 
 Electromyography employs needle electrodes 
to record potentials in individual muscles. Mus-
cle potentials are recorded fi rst while the muscle 
is at rest and then as the patient is asked to move 
the muscle. A triphasic motor unit action poten-
tial is normally seen as the patient voluntarily 
moves the muscle. Abnormal fi ndings suggestive 
 TABLE 477 Emotional and related disorders 
commonly associated with chronic pain. 
Disorder
Brief Description
Somatization 
disorder
Physical symptoms of a medical 
condition that cannot be explained, 
resulting in involuntary distress and 
physical impairment.
Conversion 
disorder
Symptoms of voluntary motor or sensory 
deficits that suggest a medical condition; 
symptoms cannot be medically explained 
but are associated with psychological 
factors and are not intentionally feigned.
Hypochondriasis Prolonged (>6 months) preoccupation 
with the fear of having a serious illness 
despite adequate medical evaluation 
and reassurance.
Malingering
Intentional production of physical or 
psychological symptoms that is 
motivated by external incentives (eg, 
avoiding work or financial compensation).
Substance-
related 
disorders
Habitual misuse of prescribed or illicit 
substances that often precedes and 
drives complaints of pain and drug-
seeking behavior.
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1041 
 Nerve conduction studies distinguish between 
mononeuropathies (due to trauma, compression, 
or entrapment) and polyneuropathies. Th e latter 
include systemic disorders that may produce abnor-
malities that are widespread and symmetrical or that 
are random (eg, mononeuropathy multiplex). 
 Selected Pain Syndromes 
 ENTRAPMENT SYNDROMES 
 Neural compression may occur wherever a nerve 
courses through an anatomically narrowed pas-
sage, and entrapment neuropathies can involve 
 TABLE 478 Entrapment neuropathies. 
Nerve
Entrapment Site
Location of Pain
Cranial nerves VII, IX, 
and X
Styloid process or stylohyoid 
ligament
Ipsilateral tonsil, base of tongue, temporomandibular 
joint, and ear (Eagle’s syndrome)
Brachial plexus
Scalenus anticus muscle or a 
cervical rib
Ulnar side of arm and forearm 
(scalenus anticus syndrome)
Suprascapular nerve
Suprascapular notch
Posterior and lateral shoulder
Median nerve
Pronator teres muscle
Proximal forearm and palmar surface of the first 
three digits (pronator syndrome)
Median nerve
Carpal tunnel
Palmar surface of the first three digits (carpal 
tunnel syndrome)
Ulnar nerve
Cubital fossa (elbow)
Fourth and fifth digits of the hand (cubital 
tunnel syndrome)
Ulnar nerve
Guyon’s canal (wrist)
Fourth and fifth digits of the hand
Lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerve
Anterior iliac spine under the 
inguinal ligament
Anterolateral thigh (meralgia paresthetica)
Obturator nerve
Obturator canal
Upper medial thigh
Saphenous nerve
Subsartorial tunnel (adductor canal)
Medial calf
Sciatic nerve
Sciatic notch
Buttock and leg (piriformis syndrome)
Common peroneal nerve
Fibular neck
Lateral distal leg and foot
Deep peroneal nerve
Anterior tarsal tunnel
Big toe or foot
Superficial peroneal nerve
Deep fascia above the ankle
Anterior ankle and dorsum of foot
Posterior tibial nerve
Posterior tarsal tunnel
Undersurface of foot (tarsal tunnel syndrome)
Interdigital nerve
Deep transverse tarsal ligament
Between toes and foot (Morton’s neuroma)
sensory, motor, or mixed nerves. Genetic factors 
and repetitive macrotrauma or microtrauma are 
likely involved, and adjacent tenosynovitis is oft en 
responsible.  Table 47–8 lists the most commonly 
recognized entrapment syndromes. When a sen-
sory nerve is involved, patients complain of pain 
and numbness in its distribution distal to the site of 
entrapment; occasionally, a patient may complain 
of pain referred proximal to the site of entrapment. 
Entrapment of the sciatic nerve can mimic a her-
niated intervertebral disc. Entrapment of a motor 
nerve produces weakness in the muscles it inner-
vates. Even entrapments of “pure” motor nerves 
can produce a vague pain that may be mediated by 
1042 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
to have latent trigger points. When trigger points 
are active, treatment is directed at regaining muscle 
length and elasticity. Analgesia may be provided uti-
lizing local anesthetic (1–3 mL) trigger point injec-
tions. Topical cooling with either an ethyl chloride 
or fl uorocarbon (fl uoromethane) spray can also 
induce refl ex muscle relaxation, facilitating massage 
(“stretch and spray”) and ultrasound therapy. Physi-
cal therapy is important in establishing and main-
taining normal range of motion for aff ected muscles, 
and biofeedback may be helpful. 
 FIBROMYALGIA 
 Th e American College of Rheumatology recently 
identifi ed three criteria that, if met, suggest the diag-
nosis of fi bromyalgia: 
1. 
 Widespread Pain Index (WPI) score of 7 or 
higher, and Symptom Severity (SS) scale score 
of 5 or higher, or WPI of 3–6 and SS scale score 
of 9 or higher. 
2. 
 Symptoms present at a similar level for at least 
3 months. 
3. 
 Absence of another disorder that would 
otherwise explain the pain. 
 Treatment of fi bromyalgia includes cardiovas-
cular conditioning, strength training, improving 
sleep hygiene, cognitive–behavioral therapy, patient 
education, and pharmacotherapy. Medications 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) for the treatment of fi bromyalgia include 
pregabalin (Lyrica), duloxetine (Cymbalta), and 
milnacipran (Savella). 
 LOW BACK PAIN 
& RELATED SYNDROMES 
 Back pain is an extremely common complaint and 
a major cause of work disability worldwide. Lum-
bosacral strain, degenerative disc disease, and myo-
fascial syndromes are the most common causes. 
Low back pain, with or without associated leg pain, 
may also have congenital, traumatic, degenerative, 
infl ammatory, infectious, metabolic, psychologi-
cal, and neoplastic causes. Moreover, back pain can 
be due to disease processes in the abdomen and 
aff erent fi bers from muscles and joints. Th e diag-
nosis can usually be confi rmed by electromyogra-
phy and nerve conduction studies. Neural blockade 
of the nerve with local anesthetic, with or without 
corticosteroid, may be diagnostic and can provide 
temporary pain relief. Treatment is generally symp-
tomatic with oral analgesics and temporary immo-
bilization, whenever appropriate. Development 
of complex regional pain syndrome may respond 
to sympathetic blocks. Refractory symptoms may 
require surgical decompression. 
 MYOFASCIAL PAIN 
 Myofascial pain syndromes are common dis-
orders characterized by aching muscle pain, 
muscle spasm, stiff ness, weakness, and, occasion-
ally, autonomic dysfunction. Patients have discrete 
areas (trigger points) of marked tenderness in one 
or more muscles or the associated connective tissue. 
Palpation of the involved muscles may reveal tight, 
ropy bands over trigger points. Signs of autonomic 
dysfunction (vasoconstriction or piloerection) in 
the overlying muscles may be present. Th e pain 
characteristically radiates in a fi xed pattern that does 
not follow dermatomes. 
 Gross trauma or repetitive microtrauma is 
thought to play a major role in initiating myofas-
cial pain syndromes. Trigger points develop follow-
ing acute injury; stimulation of these active trigger 
points produces pain, and the ensuing muscle spasm 
sustains the pain. When the acute episode subsides, 
the trigger points become latent (tender, but not 
pain producing) only to be reactivated at a later time 
by subsequent stress. Th e pathophysiology is poorly 
understood. 
 Th e diagnosis of a myofascial pain syndrome 
is suggested by the character of the pain and by 
palpation of discrete trigger points that reproduce 
it. Common syndromes produce trigger points in 
the levator scapulae, masseter, quadratus lumbo-
rum, and gluteus medius muscles. Th e latter two 
syndromes produce low back pain and should be 
considered in all patients with back pain; moreover, 
gluteal trigger points can mimic S 1 radiculopathy. 
 Although myofascial pain may spontaneously 
resolve without sequelae, many patients continue 
11
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1043 
 2. Paravertebral Muscle & 
Lumbosacral Joint Sprain/Strain 
 Approximately 80–90% of low back pain is due to 
sprain or strain associated with lift ing heavy objects, 
falls, or sudden abnormal movements of the spine. 
Th e term  sprain is generally used when the pain is 
related to a well-defi ned acute injury, whereas  strain 
is used when the pain is more chronic and is likely 
related to repetitive minor injuries. 
 Injury to paravertebral muscles and ligaments 
results in refl ex muscle spasm, which may or may not 
be associated with trigger points. Th e pain is usually 
dull and aching, and occasionally radiates down the 
buttocks or hips. Sprain is a self-limited benign pro-
cess that resolves in 1–2 weeks. Symptomatic treat-
ment consists of rest and oral analgesics. 
 Th e sacroiliac joint is particularly vulnerable 
to rotational injuries. It is one of the largest joints 
in the body and functions to transfer weight from 
the upper body to the lower extremities. Acute or 
chronic injury can cause slippage, or subluxation, 
of the joint. Pain originating from this joint is char-
acteristically located along the posterior ilium and 
radiates down the hips and posterior thigh to the 
knees. Th e diagnosis is suggested by tenderness on 
palpation, particularly on the medial aspect of the 
posterior superior iliac spine, and by compression 
of the joints. Pain relief following injection of the 
joint with local anesthetic (3 mL) is diagnostic and 
may also be therapeutic. Injection of intraarticular 
steroid medication may be considered. For poten-
tially longer duration of analgesia, radiofrequency 
ablation may be performed at the dorsal ramus of 
L5 as well as the lateral branches of the S1, S2, and 
S3 nerves if the patient responded well to local anes-
thetic injections of the sacroiliac joint or to diagnos-
tic injections of these nerves. 
 3. Buttock Pain 
 Buttock pain may be due to several diff erent fac-
tors, and can be quite debilitating.  Coccydynia (or, 
 coccygodynia) may the result of trauma to the coc-
cyx or surrounding ligaments. It may resolve by 
means of physical therapy, coccygeal nerve blocks 
to the lateral aspects of the coccyx, or ablative or 
neuromodulatory techniques.  Piriformis syndrome 
pelvis, particularly those aff ecting retroperitoneal 
structures (pancreas, kidneys, ureters, and aorta), 
the uterus and adnexa, the prostate, and the recto-
sigmoid colon. Disorders of the hip can also mimic 
back disorders. A positive  Patrick’s sign (or Patrick’s 
test)—ie, the elicitation of pain in the hip or sacro-
iliac joint when the examiner places the ipsilateral 
heel of the supine patient on the contralateral knee 
and presses down on the ipsilateral knee—helps 
identify back pain due to hip or sacroiliac joint dis-
orders. Th is sign is also referred to by an acronym, 
FABERE (sign), because the movement of the leg 
involves  f  lexion,  ab duction,  e xternal  r otation, and 
 e xtension. 
 1. Applied Anatomy of the Back 
 Th e back can be described in terms of  anterior and 
 posterior elements. Th e anterior elements consist of 
cylindrical vertebral bodies interconnected by inter-
vertebral discs and supported by anterior and poste-
rior longitudinal ligaments. Th e posterior elements 
are bony arches extending from each vertebral body, 
consisting of two pedicles, two transverse processes, 
two laminae, and a spinous process. Th e transverse 
and spinous processes provide points of attachment 
for the muscles that move and protect the spinal col-
umn. Adjacent vertebrae also articulate posteriorly 
by two gliding facet joints. 
 Spinal structures are innervated by the sinu-
vertebral branches and posterior rami of spinal 
nerves. Th e sinuvertebral nerve arises before each 
spinal nerve divides into anterior and posterior 
rami, and reenters the intervertebral foramen to 
innervate the posterior longitudinal ligament, the 
posterior annulus fi brosus, periosteum, dura, and 
epidural vessels. Paraspinal structures are supplied 
by the posterior primary ramus. Each facet joint is 
innervated by the medial branch of the posterior 
primary rami of the spinal nerves above and below 
the joint. 
 As lumbar spinal nerve roots exit the dural 
sac, they travel down 1–2 cm laterally before exit-
ing through their respective intervertebral foramina; 
thus, for example, the L5 nerve root leaves the dural 
sac at the level of the L4–L5 disc (where it is more 
likely to be compressed) but leaves the spinal canal 
beneath the L5 pedicle opposite the L5–S1 disc. 
1044 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
concordant pain. If not, it is deemed  discordant . In 
some circumstances, the pressure in the disc fol-
lowing injection is not signifi cantly higher than the 
opening pressure. Th is may be due to the presence of 
a fi ssure in the disc that tracks to the epidural space. 
Risks of discography include infection and discitis, 
which may be diffi  cult to treat because the disc is 
relatively avascular. 
 Treatment options for discogenic pain include 
conservative therapy, steroid injections into the disc, 
 intradiscal biacplasty, involving heating the poste-
rior annulus of the disc by way of radiofrequency 
ablation, and surgical fusion with bone graft  or 
hardware placement; each has shown mixed degrees 
of success. Th e evaluation and treatment of disco-
genic pain is an area of signifi cant controversy and 
ongoing research. 
 Herniated (Prolapsed) 
Intervertebral Disc 
 Weakness and degeneration of the annulus fi brosus 
and posterior longitudinal ligament can cause her-
niation of the nucleus pulposus posteriorly into the 
spinal canal.  Ninety percent of disc hernia-
tions occur at L5–S1 or L4–L5. Symptoms 
usually develop following fl exion injuries or heavy 
lift ing and may be associated with bulging, protru-
sion, or extrusion of the disc. Disc herniations usu-
ally occur posterolaterally and oft en result in 
compression of adjacent nerve roots, producing pain 
that radiates along that dermatome ( radiculopathy ). 
Sciatica describes pain along the sciatic nerve due to 
compression of the lower lumbar nerve roots. When 
disc material is extruded through the annulus fi bro-
sus and posterior longitudinal ligament, free frag-
ments can become wedged in the spinal canal or the 
intervertebral foramina. Less commonly a large disc 
bulges or large fragments extrude posteriorly, 
 compressing the cauda equina in the dural sac; in 
these instances patients can experience bilateral 
pain, urinary retention, or, less commonly, fecal 
incontinence. 
 Pain associated with disc disease is aggravated 
by bending, lift ing, prolonged sitting, or anything 
that increases intraabdominal pressure, such as 
sneezing, coughing, or straining. It is usually relieved 
by lying down. Numbness or weakness is indicative 
12
presents as pain in the buttock, which can be accom-
panied by numbness and tingling in distribution 
of the sciatic nerve. Th e nerve may or may not be 
entrapped. Injection of local anesthetic into the belly 
of this muscle or into trigger points located at the 
origin and insertion of the muscle may help relieve 
the pain. 
 4. Degenerative Disc Disease 
 Intervertebral discs bear at least one third of the 
weight of the spinal column. Th eir central portion, 
the  nucleus pulposus , is composed of gelatinous 
material early in life. Th is material degenerates and 
becomes fi brotic with advancing age and follow-
ing trauma. Th e nucleus pulposus is ringed by the 
 annulus fi brosus , which is thinnest posteriorly and 
bounded superiorly and inferiorly by cartilaginous 
plates. Disc (discogenic) pain may be due to one of 
two major mechanisms: (1) protrusion or extru-
sion of the nucleus pulposus posteriorly or (2) loss 
of disc height, resulting in the reactive formation of 
bony spurs (osteophytes) from the rims of the ver-
tebral bodies above and below the disc. Degenera-
tive disc disease most commonly aff ects the lumbar 
spine because it is subjected to the greatest motion 
and because the posterior longitudinal ligament is 
thinnest at L2–L5. Factors such as increased body 
weight and cigarette smoking may play a role in the 
development of lumbar disc disease. Th e role of the 
disc in producing chronic back pain is not clearly 
understood. In patients with persistent axial low 
back pain, the history and physical examination may 
provide clues. If the patient has pain when sitting or 
standing, or maintaining a certain position for an 
extended period of time, there may be an element of 
discogenic pain. 
 Discography is a procedure that is oft en used to 
try to provide some objective evidence of the role 
of a given disc in producing a patient’s back pain. 
Aft er a needle is inserted into the disc, the opening 
pressure can be assessed; a subsequent injection of 
radiocontrast material produces increased pressure 
that may reproduce the patient’s pain and may pro-
vide radiographic identifi cation of anatomic abnor-
malities within the disc (eg, a rent or tear). It the 
pain produced with injection is similar to that which 
the patient experiences on a daily basis, it is deemed 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1045 
cause pain at the same level as the disc. For example, 
a centrally located disc herniation at L4–L5  may 
 compress the L5 nerve root whereas a laterally 
located disc herniation at this level may compress 
the L4 nerve root. 
 Th e natural course of herniated disc disor-
ders is generally benign and the duration of pain 
is usually less than 2 months. Over 75% of patients 
treated nonsurgically, even those with radiculopa-
thy, have complete or near-complete pain relief. 
Th e goals of treatment should therefore be to allevi-
ate the pain and rehabilitate the patient to return 
to a functional quality of life. Acute back pain due 
to a herniated disc can be initially managed with 
modifi cation of activity and with medications such 
as NSAIDs and acetaminophen. A short course of 
opioids may be considered for patients with severe 
pain. Aft er the acute symptoms subside, the patient 
can be referred to a physical therapist for instruc-
tion on exercises to improve lower back health. 
Patients who smoke tobacco should be advised to 
stop smoking, not only for the obvious health ben-
efi ts but also because nicotine further compromises 
blood fl ow to the relatively avascular intervertebral 
disc. Percutaneous disc decompression involving 
extraction of a small amount of nucleus pulposus 
may help to decompress the nerve root. For patients 
with acute-onset weakness correlating with the level 
of the disc herniation, surgical management should 
be considered. 
 When symptoms persist beyond 3 months, the 
pain may be considered chronic and may require 
a multidisciplinary approach. Physical therapy 
of radiculopathy ( Table 47–9 ). Bulging of the disc 
through the posterior longitudinal ligament can 
also produce low back pain that radiates to the hips 
or buttocks. Straight leg-raising tests may be used 
to assess nerve root compression. With the patient 
supine and the knee fully extended, the leg on the 
aff ected side is raised and the angle at which the pain 
develops is noted; dorsifl exion of the ankle with the 
leg raised typically exacerbates the pain by further 
stretching the lumbosacral plexus. Pain while raising 
the contralateral leg is an even more reliable sign of 
nerve compression. 
 Th e use of MRI has increased dramatically in 
the past decade in association with a two- to three-
fold increase in back surgeries, although this has 
not correlated with improved patient outcome. Th e 
 American Pain Society’s clinical practice guidelines 
for low back pain do not recommend routine imag-
ing or other diagnostic tests for patients with nonspe-
cifi c low back pain. Up to 30–40% of asymptomatic 
persons have abnormalities of spinal structures on 
CT or MRI. In addition, the patient’s awareness of 
his or her imaging abnormalities may infl uence self-
perception of health and functional ability. 
 Imaging studies and further tests should be 
acquired when severe or progressive neurological 
defi cits are present, or when serious underlying con-
ditions are suspected. CT myelography is the most 
sensitive test for evaluating subtle neural compres-
sion. Discography may be considered when the 
pain pattern does not match the clinical fi ndings. 
A centrally herniated disc will usually cause pain at 
the lower level, and a laterally protruded disc will 
 TABLE 479 Lumbar disc radiculopathies. 
Disk Level
L3–L4 (L4 Nerve)
L4–L5 (L5 Nerve)
L5–S1 (S1 Nerve)
Pain distribution
Anterolateral thigh, 
anteromedial calf to the ankle
Lateral thigh, anterolateral 
calf, medial dorsum of foot, 
especially between the first 
and second toes
Gluteal region, posterior thigh, 
posterolateral calf, lateral dorsum 
and undersurface of the foot, 
particularly between fourth 
and fifth toes
Weakness
Quadriceps femoris
Dorsiflexion of the foot
Plantar flexion of foot
Reflex affected
Knee
None
Ankle
1046 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
and knee; and may be associated with muscle spasm. 
Hyperextension and lateral rotation of the spine 
usually exacerbate the pain. Th e diagnosis may be 
confi rmed if pain relief is obtained following intraar-
ticular injection of local anesthetic solution into 
aff ected joints or by blockade of the medial branch 
of the posterior division (ramus) of the spinal nerves 
that innervate them. Long-term studies suggest that 
medial branch nerve blocks are more eff ective than 
facet joint injections. Medial branch rhizotomy may 
provide long-term analgesia for patients with facet 
joint disease. 
 6. Cervical Pain 
 Although most spine-related pain due to disc dis-
ease, spinal stenosis, or degenerative changes in the 
zygapophyseal joints is felt in the low back and lower 
extremities, patients may have cervical pain attrib-
uted to these processes. A key anatomic diff erence 
is that the cervical nerve roots, unlike those in the 
thoracic and lumbar spine, exit the foramina above 
the vertebral bodies for which they are named. Th is 
occurs until the level of C7, where the extra cervi-
cal nerve roots, C8, exit below the pedicles of C7, 
thus transitioning to the nomenclature of the tho-
racic- and lumbar-level vertebral bodies and nerve 
root denominations. Th e clinical examination may 
help to identify the nerve root that is aff ected with 
confi rmation by a  selective nerve root block . Risks 
inherent with percutaneous cervical procedures 
include accidental intravascular injection of local 
anesthetic or steroid. Particulate steroid injections 
in the neck have been associated with devastating 
outcomes such as spinal cord injury and death and 
should be avoided. 
 For primarily axial pain in the neck with 
extension into the head or to the shoulders, cervi-
cal medial branch blocks may clarify the diagnosis. 
Long-term analgesia may be obtained with radiofre-
quency ablation of the medial branches innervating 
the zygapophyseal joints. 
7 . Congenital Abnormalities 
 Congenital abnormalities of the back are oft en 
asymptomatic and remain occult for many years. 
Abnormal spinal mechanics can make the patient 
continues to be a very important component of 
rehabilitation. NSAIDs and antidepressants are also 
helpful, and percutaneous interventions may be con-
sidered. Of note, back supports should be discour-
aged because they may weaken paraspinal muscles. 
 Spinal Stenosis 
 Spinal stenosis is a disease of advancing age. Degen-
eration of the nucleus pulposus reduces disc height 
and leads to osteophyte formation ( spondylosis ) at 
the endplates of adjoining vertebral bodies. In con-
junction with facet joint hypertrophy and with liga-
mentum fl avum hypertrophy and calcifi cation, this 
process leads to progressive narrowing of the neural 
foramina and spinal canal. Neural compression may 
cause radiculopathy that mimics a herniated disc. 
Extensive osteophyte formation may compress mul-
tiple nerve roots and cause bilateral pain.  Th e 
back pain usually radiates into the buttocks, 
thighs, and legs. It is characteristically worse with 
exercise and relieved by rest, particularly sitting with 
the spine fl exed (the “shopping cart sign”). Th e terms 
 pseudoclaudication and  neurogenic claudication are 
used to describe such pain that develops with pro-
longed standing or ambulation. Th e diagnosis is sug-
gested by the clinical presentation and is confi rmed 
by MRI, CT, or myelography. Electromyography and 
nerve conduction studies may be useful in evaluat-
ing neurological compromise. 
 Patients with mild to moderate stenosis and 
radicular symptoms may obtain benefi t from epi-
dural steroid injections via a transforaminal, inter-
laminar, or caudal approach. Th is may help these 
individuals tolerate physical therapy. Th ose with 
moderate to severe stenosis may be amenable to 
more recently developed procedures, such as the 
minimally invasive lumbar decompression (MILD) 
procedure, which involves percutaneously sculpting 
the lamina and ligamentum fl avum to reduce central 
canal compression. Severe multilevel symptoms may 
warrant surgical decompression. 
 5. Facet Syndrome 
 Degenerative changes in the facet (zygapophyseal) 
joints may also produce back pain. Pain may be near 
the midline; may radiate to the gluteal region, thigh, 
13
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1047 
protein, warranting immediate initiation of antibiot-
ics. Urgent surgical intervention is indicated when 
the patient also suff ers from acute weakness. 
 10. Arthritides 
 Ankylosing spondylitis is a familial disorder that 
is associated with histocompatibility antigen HLA-
B27. It typically presents as low back pain associated 
with early morning stiff ness in a young patient, usu-
ally male. Th e pain has an insidious onset and may 
initially improve with activity. Aft er a few months to 
years, the pain gradually intensifi es and is associated 
with progressively restricted movement of the spine. 
Diagnosis may be diffi  cult early in the disease, but 
radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis is usually pres-
ent. As the disease progresses, the spine develops a 
characteristic “bamboo-like” radiographic appear-
ance. Some patients develop arthritis of the hips 
and shoulders, as well as extraarticular infl amma-
tory manifestations. Treatment is primarily directed 
at functional preservation of posture. NSAIDs, 
particularly indomethacin, are eff ective analge-
sics that reduce the early morning stiff ness. Anti–
tumor necrosis factor-α agents have been shown to 
decrease the progression of ankylosing spondylitis 
when administered early in the course of therapy. 
Th ese agents include infl iximab (Remicaid), etan-
ercept (Enbrel), adalimumab (Humira), and golim-
umab (Simponi). Although this treatment approach 
shows promise, patients may be at an increased risk 
for infection and the development of lymphoma. 
 Patients with Reiter’s syndrome, psoriatic 
arthritis, or infl ammatory bowel disease may also 
present with low back pain, but extraspinal mani-
festations are usually more prominent. Rheumatoid 
arthritis usually spares the spine except for the zyg-
apophyseal joints of the cervical spine. 
 NEUROPATHIC PAIN 
 Neuropathic pain includes pain associated with 
diabetic neuropathy, causalgia, phantom limbs, 
postherpetic neuralgia, stroke, spinal cord injury, 
and multiple sclerosis. Cancer pain and chronic low 
back pain may have prominent neuropathic compo-
nents. Neuropathic pain tends to be paroxysmal and 
prone to back pain, and in some instances, pro-
gressive deformities. Relatively common anomalies 
include sacralization of L5 (the vertebral body is 
fused to the sacrum), lumbarization of S1 (it func-
tions as a sixth lumbar vertebra),  spondylolysis (a 
disruption of the pars interarticularis),  spondylolis-
thesis (displacement anteriorly of one vertebral body 
on the next due to disruption of the posterior ele-
ments, usually the pars), and  spondyloptosis (sub-
luxation of one vertebral body on another resulting 
in one body in front of the next). Th e diagnosis is 
made radiographically. Spinal fusion may be nec-
essary in patients with progressive symptoms and 
 spinal instability. 
8 . Tumors 
 Benign primary tumors of the spine include hem-
angiomas, osteomas, aneurysmal bone cysts, and 
eosinophilic granulomas. Malignant spine tumors 
include osteosarcomas, Ewing’s sarcoma, and giant 
cell tumors. In addition, breast, lung, prostate, renal, 
gastrointestinal, and thyroid carcinomas, lympho-
mas, and multiple myelomas frequently metasta-
size to the lumbar spine. Pain is usually constant 
and may be associated with localized tenderness 
over involved vertebrae. Bony destruction, with or 
without neural or vascular compression, produces 
the pain. Intradural tumors such as meningiomas, 
schwannomas, ependymomas, and gliomas can 
present with a radiculopathy and may rapidly prog-
ress to fl accid paralysis. Th e primary site may be 
asymptomatic or diffi  cult to localize, thus requiring 
imaging studies for diagnosis. Treatment options 
usually involve surgical decompression, chemo-
therapy, radiation therapy, and palliative symptom 
relief. 
9 . Infection 
 Bacterial infections of the spine usually begin as dis-
citis before progressing to osteomyelitis, and can be 
due to pyogenic as well as tuberculous organisms. 
Patients may present with chronic back pain with-
out fever or leukocytosis (eg, spinal tuberculosis). 
Th ose with acute discitis, osteomyelitis, or epidural 
abscess present with acute pain, fever, leukocytosis, 
elevated sedimentation rate, and elevated C-reactive 
1048 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
gastric emptying, and esophageal motility disorders. 
Orthostatic hypotension and other forms of auto-
nomic dysfunction are common. 
 Treatment of diabetic neuropathy is symp-
tomatic and directed at optimal glycemic control 
to slow progression. Acetaminophen and NSAIDs 
are usually ineff ective for moderate to severe pain. 
Risks associated with opioids limit their use in the 
treatment of this condition. Adjuvant drugs play 
a major role. Th e combination of an antiepileptic 
drug and a tricyclic antidepressant may be particu-
larly eff ective. 
 Sympathetically Maintained & 
Sympathetically Independent Pain 
 Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is 
a neuropathic pain disorder with signifi cant 
autonomic features that is usually subdivided into 
two variants: CRPS 1, formerly known as  refl ex 
sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), and CRPS 2, formerly 
known as  causalgia. Th e major diff erence between 
the two is the absence or presence, respectively, of 
documented nerve injury. Signs, symptoms, patho-
physiology, and response to treatment are quite 
similar. Previously, this condition was thought to 
represent sympathetically maintained pain, but 
there is recent evidence that in some cases the pain 
may be sympathetically independent. 
 CRPS is a largely underdiagnosed condi-
tion aff ecting at least 50,000 patients a year in the 
United States alone. It aff ects individuals from 
childhood to late adulthood and may occur more 
commonly in females. Patients frequently present 
with burning neuropathic pain having components 
of hyperalgesia and allodynia. Th e autonomic ner-
vous system may be involved, exemplifi ed by alter-
ations in sweating (sudomotor changes), color, 
and skin temperature, and by trophic changes in 
the skin, hair, or nails. Decreases in strength and 
range of motion in the aff ected extremity may be 
present. CRPS may develop aft er minimal injury, 
although the most common initiating events are 
surgery, fractures, crush injuries, and sprains. 
 Th e pathophysiology of CRPS 1 and 2 is prob-
ably multifactorial, involving both the sympathetic 
nervous system and the central nervous system. 
Th ere may be changes in the cutaneous innervation 
15
sometimes lancinating with a burning quality, and is 
usually associated with hyperpathia. Mechanisms of 
neuropathic pain are reviewed earlier in this chapter. 
 Because neuropathic pain is oft en diffi  cult to 
treat, multiple therapeutic modalities may be nec-
essary. Treatment options include anticonvulsants 
(eg, gabapentin, pregabalin), antidepressants (tri-
cyclic antidepressants or serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors), antiarrhythmics (mexiletine), 
α 2 -adrenergic agonists (clonidine), topical agents 
(lidocaine or capsaicin), and analgesics (NSAIDs 
and opioids). Of note, tricyclic antidepressants may 
have signifi cant anticholinergic side eff ects that may 
limit their tolerability. Secondary amines, such as 
nortriptyline or desipramine, may have less severe 
or fewer anticholinergic side eff ects than tertiary 
amines such as amitriptyline or imipramine. Spi-
nal opioids may be very eff ective for some patients. 
Sympathetic blocks are eff ective in selected disor-
ders (see below). Spinal cord stimulation may be 
eff ective for patients who do not tolerate or respond 
to other treatments. 
 Diabetic Neuropathy 
 Diabetic neuropathy is the most common type 
of neuropathic pain encountered in practice 
and is a major cause of morbidity. Its pathophysi-
ology is poorly understood but may be related to 
microangiopathy and to abnormal activation of 
metabolic (polyol) pathways and glycation of pro-
teins as a consequence of chronic hyperglycemia. 
Diabetic neuropathy may be symmetric (general-
ized), focal, or multifocal, aff ecting peripheral (sen-
sory or motor), cranial, or autonomic nerves. 
 Th e most common syndrome is peripheral 
polyneuropathy, which results in symmetric numb-
ness (“stocking-and-glove” distribution), pares-
thesias, dysesthesias, and pain. Th e pain varies in 
intensity, may be severe, and is oft en worst at night. 
Loss of proprioception may lead to gait distur-
bances, and sensory defi cits can lead to traumatic 
injuries. Isolated mononeuropathies aff ecting indi-
vidual nerves may lead to wrist or foot drop or to 
cranial nerve palsy. Mononeuropathies typically 
have a sudden onset and are reversible, lasting a 
few weeks. Autonomic neuropathy typically aff ects 
the gastrointestinal tract, causing diarrhea, delayed 
14
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1049 
phenoxybenzamine or the α 1 -selective prazosin, 
may be benefi cial. Caution is advised because of the 
risk of orthostatic hypotension with these agents, 
and dosage should be increased gradually. Anticon-
vulsant and antidepressant medications may also be 
benefi cial. 
 Surgical sympathectomy in patients with 
chronic symptoms is frequently disappointing, 
resulting in only transient relief and in some cases 
a new, alternate pain syndrome. Recent research 
suggests that patients with pain refractory to prior 
medical or procedural therapies may respond to 
intravenous infusions of ketamine in a monitored 
setting. 
 ACUTE HERPES ZOSTER & 
POSTHERPETIC NEURALGIA 
 During an initial childhood infection (chickenpox), 
the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infects dorsal root 
ganglia, where it remains latent until reactivation. 
Acute herpes zoster, which represents VZV reac-
tivation, manifests as an erythematous vesicular 
rash in a dermatomal distribution that is usually 
associated with severe pain. Dermatomes T3–L3 
are most commonly aff ected. Th e pain oft en pre-
cedes the rash by 48–72 h, and the rash usually lasts 
1–2 weeks.  Herpes zoster is most common in elderly 
and immunocompromised patients but may occur 
at any age. It is typically a self-limited disorder in 
younger, healthy patients (<50 years old). Treat-
ment is primarily supportive, consisting of oral 
analgesics and oral acyclovir, famciclovir, ganciclo-
vir, or  valacyclovir. Antiviral therapy reduces the 
duration of the rash and speeds healing. Immuno-
compromised patients with disseminated infection 
(nondermatomal distribution of vesicles) require 
intravenous acyclovir therapy. Epidural steroid 
injections have not been proven to prevent posther-
petic neuralgia (PHN). 
 Older patients may continue to experience 
severe, radicular pain from PHN even aft er the rash 
resolves. Th e incidence of PHN following acute her-
pes zoster is estimated to be 50% in patients older 
than 50 years of age. Moreover, PHN is oft en very 
diffi  cult to treat. An oral course of corticosteroids 
during acute zoster may decrease the incidence of 
aft er a nerve injury, along with changes in central 
and peripheral sensitization. Genetic, infl ammatory, 
and psychological factors may all play roles. Causal-
gia (which means burning pain), fi rst identifi ed in 
injured veterans of the American Civil War, typically 
follows gunshot injuries or other major trauma to 
large nerves. Th e pain oft en has an immediate onset 
and is associated with allodynia, hyperpathia, and 
vasomotor and sudomotor dysfunction. It is exacer-
bated by factors that increase sympathetic tone, such 
as fear, anxiety, light, noise, or touch. Th e syndrome 
has a variable duration that can range from days to 
months or may be permanent. Causalgia commonly 
aff ects the brachial plexus, particularly the median 
nerve, and the tibial division of the sciatic nerve in 
the lower extremity. 
 Patients with CRPS oft en respond to sympa-
thetic blocks, but a multidisciplinary therapeutic 
approach must be utilized to avoid long-term func-
tional and psychological disability. Some patients 
recover spontaneously, but if left  untreated other 
patients can progress to severe and irreversible 
functional disability. Sympathetic blocks and intra-
venous regional sympatholytic blockade are equally 
eff ective; these blocks should be continued until 
either a cure is achieved or the response plateaus. 
Th e blocks facilitate physical therapy, which plays 
a central role and which typically consists of active 
movement without weights and of desensitization 
therapy. Many patients require a series of three to 
seven blocks. Th e likelihood of a cure is high (over 
90%) if treatment is initiated within 1 month of 
symptom onset and appears to decrease over time 
with therapeutic delay. 
 Some patients benefi t from transcutaneous 
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) therapy. Spi-
nal cord stimulation can be particularly eff ective in 
both acute and chronic settings. In the acute phase 
of treatment, there is increasing interest in placing 
tunneled epidural catheters for infusion therapy, or 
percutaneous electrodes for extended trials of spinal 
cord stimulation, in order to help patients tolerate 
physical therapy. Many patients benefi t from sur-
gical implantation of peripheral nerve stimulators 
placed directly on the larger injured nerves. 
 For sympathetically maintained pain, oral 
α-adrenergic blockers, such as the nonselective 
1050 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Tension Headache 
 Tension headaches are classically described as tight 
bandlike pain or discomfort that is oft en associated 
with tightness in the neck muscles. Th e headache 
may be frontal, temporal, or occipital, more oft en 
bilateral than unilateral. Intensity typically builds 
gradually and fl uctuates, lasting hours to days. Th ey 
may be associated with emotional stress or depres-
sion. Treatment is symptomatic and consists of 
NSAIDs. 
PHN but remains controversial and may increase 
the likelihood of viral dissemination in immuno-
compromised patients. Sympathetic blocks per-
formed during the acute episode of herpes zoster 
oft en produce excellent analgesia and may decrease 
the incidence of PHN, although this is controversial. 
Some studies suggest that when sympathetic blocks 
are initiated within 2 months of the rash, PHN 
resolves in up to 80% of patients. Once the neuralgia 
is well established, however, sympathetic blocks, like 
other treatments, are generally ineff ective. Antide-
pressants, anticonvulsants, opioids, and TENS may 
be useful in some patients. Tricyclic antidepressants 
may be particularly eff ective, though their use is 
oft en limited by anticholinergic side eff ects. Appli-
cation of a transdermal lidocaine 5% patch (Lido-
derm) over the most painful area may help relieve 
symptoms, presumably by decreasing peripheral 
sensitization of nerve endings and receptors. Appli-
cation of capsaicin cream or a transdermal capsa-
icin 8% patch (Qutenza) may be helpful; however, 
Qutenza must be administered in a monitored set-
ting. Administration of EMLA ( e uctectic  m ixture of 
 l ocal  a nesthetic) cream 1 h before application of the 
transdermal capsaicin patch may decrease the inci-
dence and severity of pain from the capsaicin in the 
patch. 
 HEADACHE 
 Headache is a common complaint that aff ects 
nearly everyone at some time in life. In the vast 
majority of cases, headaches do not refl ect a serious 
underlying disorder and are not of suffi  cient sever-
ity or frequency for the individual to seek medi-
cal attention. However, as with other complaints 
of pain, the possibility of a clinically signifi cant 
underlying disorder should always be considered. 
Th e practitioner should solicit other associated 
symptoms or clinical fi ndings that suggest serious 
underlying pathology.  Table 47–10 lists impor-
tant causes of headache. Disorders in which the 
primary complaint is headache are considered in 
the following discussion. As will become apparent, 
there is signifi cant variability in clinical presen-
tation and overlap in the symptoms of the major 
headache syndromes, particularly between tension 
and migraine headaches. 
 TABLE 4710 Classiﬁ cation of headaches. 
 Classic headache syndromes 
 Migraine 
 Tension 
 Cluster 
 Vascular disorders 
 Temporal arteritis 
 Stroke 
 Venous thrombosis 
 Neuralgias 
 Trigeminal 
 Glossopharyngeal 
 Occipital 
 Intracranial pathology 
 Tumor 
 Cerebrospinal fluid leak 
 Pseudomotor cerebri 
 Meningitis 
 Aneurysm 
 Eye disorders 
 Glaucoma 
 Optic neuritis 
 Sinus disease 
 Allergic 
 Bacterial 
 Temporomandibular joint disease 
 Dental disorders 
 Drug-induced 
 Acute ingestion 
 Withdrawal (eg, caffeine and alcohol) 
 Systemic disorders 
 Infections 
 Viral (eg, influenza) 
 Bacterial 
 Fungal 
 Metabolic 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Hypoxemia 
 Hypercarbia 
 Trauma 
 Miscellaneous 
 Cold stimulus (swallowing cold liquid) 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1051
 Temporal Arteritis 
 Temporal arteritis is an infl ammatory disorder of 
extracranial arteries. Th e headache can be bilateral 
or unilateral and is located in the temporal area in at 
least 50% of patients. Th e pain develops over a few 
hours, is usually dull in quality but may be lancinating 
at times and worse at night and in cold weather. Scalp 
tenderness is usually present. Temporal arteritis is 
oft en accompanied by polymyalgia rheumatica, fever, 
and weight loss. It is a relatively common disorder of 
older patients (>55 years), with an incidence of about 
1 in 10,000 per year and a slight female predomi-
nance. Early diagnosis and treatment with steroids is 
important because progression can lead to blindness 
through involvement of the ophthalmic artery. 
 Trigeminal Neuralgia 
 Trigeminal neuralgia (or  tic douloureux ) is 
classically unilateral and usually located in 
the V2 or V3 distribution of the trigeminal nerve. It 
has an electric shock quality lasting from seconds to 
minutes at a time and is oft en provoked by contact 
with a discrete trigger. Facial muscle spasm may be 
present. Patients are middle-aged and elderly, with 
a 2:1 female to male ratio. Common causes of tri-
geminal neuralgia include compression of the nerve 
by the superior cerebellar artery as it exits the brain-
stem, cerebellopontine angle tumor, or multiple 
sclerosis. Th e drug of choice for treatment is carbam-
azepine although it carries a risk of agranulocytosis. 
 Phenytoin or baclofen may be added, particularly if 
patients do not tolerate the required doses of car-
bamazepine. More invasive treatments for patients 
who do not respond to drug therapy include glycerol 
injection, radiofrequency ablation, balloon com-
pression of the gasserian ganglion, and microvascu-
lar decompression of the trigeminal nerve. 
 ABDOMINAL PAIN 
 Chronic abdominal pain can have a variety of causes, 
and it is useful to distinguish between somato-
sensory, visceral, and centralized pain symptoms. 
A diff erential epidural block may help in elucidat-
ing the primary source but is time consuming and 
may be diffi  cult to interpret. A transversus abdomi-
nis plane (TAP) blockade with ultrasound guidance 
16
 Migraine Headache 
 Migraine headaches are typically described as throb-
bing or pounding and are oft en associated with 
photophobia, scotoma, nausea and vomiting, and 
localized transient neurological dysfunction (aura). 
Th e latter may be sensory, motor, visual, or olfactory. 
 Classic migraines by defi nition are preceded by an 
aura, whereas  common migraines are not. Th e pain 
is usually unilateral but can be bilateral with a fron-
totemporal location and lasts 4–72 h. Migraines pri-
marily aff ect children (both sexes equally) and young 
adults (predominantly females). A family history is 
oft en present. Provocation by odors, certain foods 
(eg, red wine), menses, and sleep deprivation is com-
mon. Sleep characteristically relieves the headache. 
Th e mechanism is complex and may include vaso-
motor, autonomic (serotonergic brainstem systems), 
and trigeminal nucleus dysfunction. Treatment 
is both abortive and prophylactic. Rapid abortive 
treatment includes oxygen, sumatriptan (6 mg sub-
cutaneously), dihydroergotamine (1 mg intramus-
cularly or subcutaneously), intravenous lidocaine 
(100 mg), nasal butorphanol (1–2 mg), and sphe-
nopalatine ganglion block. Other abortive options 
include zolmitriptan nasal spray, dihydroergotamine 
nasal spray, or an oral serotonin 5-HT 1B/1D -receptor 
agonist (almotriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, riza-
triptan, eletriptan, or sumatriptan). Prophylactic 
treatment may include β-adrenergic blockers, cal-
cium channel blockers, valproic acid, amitriptyline, 
and onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) injections. 
 Cluster Headache 
 Cluster headaches are classically unilateral and 
periorbital, occurring in clusters of one to three 
attacks a day over a 4- to 8-week period. Th e pain 
is described as a burning or drilling sensation that 
may awaken the patient from sleep. Each episode 
lasts 30–120 min. Remissions lasting a year at a time 
are common. Red eye, tearing, nasal stuffi  ness, pto-
sis, and Horner’s syndrome are classic fi ndings. Th e 
headaches are typically episodic but can become 
chronic without remissions. Cluster headaches 
primarily aff ect males (90%). Abortive treatments 
includes oxygen and sphenopalatine block. Lithium, 
a short course of steroid medication, and verapamil 
may be used for prophylaxis. 
1052 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
have poor enteral absorption. Regardless of the 
agent selected, in most instances drug therapy 
should be provided on a fi xed time schedule rather 
than as needed. Adjuvant drug therapy, particularly 
antidepressants, and other modalities should also 
be used liberally in patients with cancer-related 
pain ( Table 47–13 ). Anticonvulsants may be use-
ful ( Table 47–14 ). Intrathecal drug delivery sys-
tems may improve analgesia and, via a drug-sparing 
eff ect, help decrease side eff ects associated with oral 
or intravenous agents. Numerous intrathecal agents 
have been studied, and opioids have been utilized 
both alone and in combination with other medica-
tions. Ziconotide is a direct-acting N-type calcium-
channel blocker that may be helpful for refractory 
pain or as a fi rst-line agent. It acts by decreasing the 
release of substance P from the presynaptic nerve 
terminal in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Side 
eff ects may be dose dependent and include audi-
tory hallucinations and worsening of depression or 
psychosis. It does not lead to signifi cant withdrawal 
conditions if abruptly discontinued. 
 Surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy 
may prolong survivorship for patients with cancer. 
However, survivorship may be accompanied by 
therapy-related acute or chronic pain, including 
may help treat somatosensory pain and thus may 
be potentially both diagnostic and therapeutic (see 
Chapter 46). Th e patient with pain of visceral origin 
may benefi t from a celiac or splanchnic block. 
 CANCERRELATED PAIN 
 Cancer-related pain may be due to the cancerous 
lesion itself, metastatic disease, complications such 
as neural compression or infection, or treatment 
such as chemotherapy or radiation therapy. In addi-
tion, the cancer patient may have acute or chronic 
pain that is entirely unrelated to the cancer. Th e pain 
manager must therefore have a thorough under-
standing of the nature of the cancer, its stage, the 
presence of metastatic disease, and treatments. 
 Cancer pain can be managed with oral analge-
sics in most patients. Th e World Health Organization 
recommends a progressive, three-step approach: (1) 
nonopioid analgesics such as aspirin, acetamino-
phen, or NSAID for mild pain, (2) “weak” oral opi-
oids (codeine and oxycodone) for moderate pain, 
and (3) stronger opioids (morphine and hydromor-
phone) for severe pain ( Tables 47–11 and  47–12 ). 
Parenteral therapy is necessary when patients have 
refractory pain, cannot take medication orally, or 
 TABLE 4711 Selected oral nonopioid analgesics. 
Analgesic
Onset (h)
Dose (mg)
Dosing 
Interval (h)
Maximum Daily 
Dosage (mg)
 Salicylates 
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin)
0.5–1.0
500–1000
4
3600–6000
Diflunisal (Dolobid)
1–2
500–1000
8–12
1500
Choline magnesium 
trisalicylate (Trilisate)
1–2
500–1000
12
2000–3000
 p-Aminophenols 
Acetaminophen (Tylenol, others)
0.5
500–1000
4
1200–4000
 Proprionic acids 
Ibuprofen (Motrin, others)
0.5
400
4–6
3200
Naproxen (Naprosyn)
1
250–500
12
1500
Naproxen sodium (Anaprox)
1–2
275–550
6–8
1375
 Indoles 
Indomethacin (Indocin)
0.5
25–50
8–12
150–200
Ketorolac (Toradol)
0.5–1
10
4–6
40
 COX-2 Inhibitors 
Celecoxib (Celebrex)
3
100–200
12
400
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1053 
 TABLE 4712 Oral opioids. 
Opioid
Onset (h)
Relative 
Potency
Initial 
Dose (mg)
Dosing 
Interval (h)
Codeine
0.25–1.0
20
30–60
4
Hydromorphone (Dilaudid)
0.3–0.5
0.6
2–4
4
Hydrocodone 1 
0.5–1.0
3
5–7.5
4–6
Oxycodone 2 (OxyFast, Roxicodone)
0.5
3
5–10
6
Levorphanol (Levo-Dromoran)
1–2
0.4
4
6–8
Methadone (Dolophine)
0.5–1.0
1
20
6–8
Propoxyphene (Darvon) 3 
1–2
30
100
6
Tramadol (Rybix, Ryzolt, Ultram)
1–2
30
50
4–6
Morphine solution 4 (Roxanol)
0.5–1
1
10
3–4
 Morphine sustained-release 4 
 (MS Contin, Oramorph SR) 
1
1
15
8–12
(Kadian)
1
1
10–20
12–24
(Avinza)
1
1
30
24
 1 Preparations also contain acetaminophen (Hycet, Lorcet, Lortab, Norco, Vicodin, others).
 2 Preparations may contain acetaminophen (Percocet) or aspirin (Percodan).
 3 Some preparations contain acetaminophen (Darvocet).
 4 Used primarily for cancer pain.
radiation fi brosis or chemotherapy-induced periph-
eral neuropathy. Treatment of these pain conditions 
is an area of ongoing research. 
 Interventional Therapies 
 Interventional pain therapy may take the form of 
pharmacological treatment, nerve blocks with local 
anesthetics and steroid or a neurolytic solution, 
radiofrequency ablation, neuromodulatory tech-
niques, or multidisciplinary treatment (psychologi-
cal interventions, physical or occupational therapy, 
or modalities such as acupuncture). 
 PHARMACOLOGICAL 
INTERVENTIONS 
 Pharmacological interventions in pain management 
include acetaminophen, cyclooxygenase (COX) 
inhibitors, opioids, antidepressants, neuroleptic 
agents, anticonvulsants, corticosteroids, and sys-
temic administration of local anesthetics. 
 Acetaminophen 
 Acetaminophen (paracetamol) is an oral analge-
sic and antipyretic agent that recently has become 
available in the United States as an intravenous 
preparation (Ofi rmev) for inpatient use. It inhibits 
prostaglandin synthesis but lacks signifi cant antiin-
fl ammatory activity. Acetaminophen has few side 
eff ects but is hepatotoxic at high doses. Th e recom-
mended adult maximum daily limit is 3000 mg/d, 
reduced from a previously recommended limit of 
4000 mg/d. Isoniazid, zidovudine, and barbiturates 
can potentiate acetaminophen toxicity. 
 Nonsteroidal Antiinﬂ ammatory 
Drugs (NSAIDs) 
 Nonopioid oral analgesics include salicylates, 
acetaminophen, and NSAIDs (see  Table 47–11 ). 
NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis (COX). 
1054 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
Prostaglandins sensitize and amplify nocicep-
tive input, and blockade of their synthesis results 
in the analgesic, antipyretic, and antiinfl amma-
tory properties characteristic of NSAIDs. At least 
two types of COX are recognized. COX-1 is con-
stitutive and widespread throughout the body, but 
COX-2 is expressed primarily with infl ammation. 
Some types of pain, particularly pain that follows 
orthopedic and gynecological surgery, respond very 
well to COX inhibitors. COX inhibitors likely have 
important peripheral and central nervous system 
actions. Th eir analgesic action is limited by side 
eff ects and toxicity at higher doses. Selective COX-2 
inhibitors, such as celecoxib, appear to have lower 
toxicity, particularly gastrointestinal side eff ects. 
Moreover, COX-2 inhibitors do not interfere with 
platelet aggregation. Th e COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib 
increases the risk of cardiovascular complications; 
as a result, it has been taken off  of the market in the 
United States. 
 All of the nonopioid oral analgesic agents are 
well absorbed enterally. Food delays absorption but 
otherwise has no eff ect on bioavailability. Because 
most of these agents are highly protein bound 
(>80%), they can displace other highly bound drugs 
such as warfarin. All undergo hepatic metabolism 
and are renally excreted. Dosages should therefore 
be reduced, or alternative medications selected, in 
patients with hepatic or renal impairment. 
 Th e most common side eff ects of aspirin (ace-
tylsalicylic acid, ASA) and other NSAIDs are stom-
ach upset, heartburn, nausea, and dyspepsia; some 
patients develop ulceration of the gastric mucosa, 
which appears to be due to inhibition of prosta-
glandin-mediated mucus and bicarbonate secretion. 
Diclofenac is available as both an oral preparation 
 TABLE 4713 Selected antidepressants. 
Drug
Norepinephrine 
Reuptake 
Inhibition
Serotonin 
Reuptake 
Inhibition
Sedation
Antimuscarinic 
Activity
Orthostatic 
Hypotension
Half-Life 
(h)
Daily 
Dose (mg)
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
++
++++
High
High
Moderate
30–40
25–300
Bupropion (Wellbutrin)
+
+
Low
Low
Low
11–14
300–450
Citalopram (Celexa)
0
+++
Low
Low
Low
35
20–40
Clomipramine (Anafranil)
+++
+++
High
Moderate
Moderate
20–80
75–300
Desipramine (Norpramin)
+++
0
Low
Low
Low
12–50
50–300
Doxepin (Sinequan)
+
++
High
High
Moderate
8–24
75–400
Escitalopram
0
+++
Low
Low
Low
27–32
10–20
Fluoxetine (Prozac)
0
+++
Low
Low
Low
160–200
20–80
Imipramine (Tofranil)
++
+++
Moderate Moderate
High
6–20
75–400
Nefazodone (Serzone)
0
+
Low
Low
Low
2–4
300–600
Nortriptyline (Pamelor)
++
+++
Moderate Moderate
Low
15–90
40–150
Paroxetine (Paxil)
0
+++
Low
Low
Low
31
20–40
Sertraline (Zoloft)
0
+++
Low
Low
Low
26
50–200
Trazodone (Desyrel)
0
++
High
Low
Moderate
3–9
150–400
Venlafaxine (Effexor)
+
+++
Low
Low
Low
5–11
75–375
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1055
and both of these actions are due to blockade of pre-
synaptic reuptake of serotonin, norepinephrine, or 
both. Older tricyclic agents appear to be more eff ec-
tive analgesics than selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs). Serotonin and norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) may provide the most 
favorable balance between analgesic effi  cacy and 
side eff ects. Antidepressants potentiate the action 
of opioids and frequently help normalize sleep 
patterns. 
 All antidepressant medications undergo exten-
sive fi rst-pass hepatic metabolism and are highly 
protein bound. Most are highly lipophilic and have 
large volumes of distribution. Elimination half-lives 
of most of these medications vary between 1 and 
4 days, and many have active metabolites. Available 
agents diff er in their side eff ects (see  Table 47–13 ), 
which include antimuscarinic eff ects (dry mouth, 
impaired visual accommodation, urinary retention, 
and constipation), antihistaminic eff ects (sedation 
and increased gastric pH), α-adrenergic blockade 
(orthostatic hypotension), and a quinidine-like 
eff ect (atrioventricular block, QT prolongation, tor-
sades de pointes). 
 Serotonin & Norepinephrine 
Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRIs) 
 Milnacipran, along with the SNRI duloxetine and the 
anticonvulsant pregabalin, has also been approved 
in the United States by the FDA for the treatment of 
fi bromyalgia. It has an elimination half-life of 8 h, is 
minimally metabolized by the liver, and is primarily 
excreted unchanged in the urine. 
 Duloxetine (Cymbalta) is useful in the treat-
ment of neuropathic pain, depression, and fi bromy-
algia. It has a half-life of 12 h, is metabolized by the 
liver, and most of its metabolites are excreted in the 
urine. 
 Absolute and relative contraindications for the 
use of SNRIs include known hypersensitivity, usage 
of other drugs that act on the central nervous system 
(including monoamine oxidase inhibitors), hepatic 
and renal impairment, uncontrolled narrow-angle 
glaucoma, and suicidal ideation. Common side 
eff ects include nausea, headache, dizziness, consti-
pation, insomnia, hyperhydrosis, hot fl ashes, vomit-
ing, palpitations, dry mouth, and hypertension. 
and a topical gel or patch that may be less likely to 
contribute to gastric distress. 
 Other side eff ects of NSAIDs include dizziness, 
headache, and drowsiness. With the exception of 
selective COX-2 inhibitors, all other COX inhibi-
tors induce platelet dysfunction. Aspirin irreversibly 
acetylates platelets, inhibiting platelet adhesiveness 
for 1–2 weeks, whereas the antiplatelet eff ect of 
other NSAIDs is reversible and lasts approximately 
fi ve elimination half-lives (24–96 h). Th is antiplate-
let eff ect does not appear to appreciably increase 
the incidence of postoperative hemorrhage follow-
ing most outpatient procedures. NSAIDs can exac-
erbate bronchospasm in patients with the triad of 
nasal polyps, rhinitis, and asthma. ASA should not 
be used in children with varicella or infl uenza infec-
tions because it may precipitate Reye’s syndrome. 
Lastly, NSAIDs can cause acute renal insuffi  ciency 
and renal papillary necrosis, particularly in patients 
with underlying renal dysfunction. 
 Antidepressants 
 Antidepressants are most useful for patients 
with neuropathic pain. Th ese medications 
demonstrate an analgesic eff ect that occurs at a dose 
lower than that needed for antidepressant activity, 
17
 TABLE 4714 Anticonvulsants possibly 
useful in pain management. 
Anticonvulsant
Half-
Life (h)
Daily 
Dose (mg)
Therapeutic 
Level 1 
(mcg/mL)
Carbamazepine 
(Tegretol)
10–20
200–1200
4–12
Clonazepam (Klonopin)
40–30
1–40
0.01–0.08
Gabapentin (Neurontin)
5–7
900–4000
>2
Lamotrigine (Lamictal)
24
25–400
2–20
Phenytoin (Dilantin)
22
200–600
10–20
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
6
150–600
2.8–8.2
Topiramate (Topamax)
20–30
25–200
Unknown
Valproic acid (Depakene)
6–16
750–1250
50–100
1 Eﬃ  cacy in pain management may not correlate with blood level.
1056 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
for these conditions. Its precise mechanism of action 
is unknown. 
 Baclofen (Gablofen, Lioresal), a GABA B ago-
nist, is particularly eff ective in the treatment of 
muscle spasm associated with multiple sclerosis or 
spinal cord injury when administered by continuous 
intrathecal drug infusion. Abrupt discontinuation 
of this medication has been associated with fever, 
altered mental status, pronounced muscle spasticity 
or rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, and death. 
 Corticosteroids 
 Glucocorticoids are extensively used in pain man-
agement for their antiinfl ammatory and possi-
bly analgesic actions. Th ey may be given topically, 
orally, or parenterally (intravenously, subcutane-
ously, intrabursally, intraarticularly, or epidurally). 
 Table 47–15 lists the most commonly used agents, 
which diff er in potency, relative glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid activities, and duration or action. 
Large doses or prolonged administration result 
in signifi cant side eff ects. Excess glucocorticoid 
activity can produce hypertension, hyperglycemia, 
increased susceptibility to infection, peptic ulcers, 
osteoporosis, aseptic necrosis of the femoral head, 
proximal myopathy, cataracts, and, rarely, psychosis. 
Patients with diabetes may have elevated blood glu-
cose levels aft er corticosteroid injections. Patients 
can also develop the physical features characteristic 
of Cushing’s syndrome. Excess mineralocorticoid 
 Neuroleptics 
 Neuroleptic medications may occasionally be use-
ful for patients with refractory neuropathic pain, 
and may be most helpful in patients with marked 
agitation or psychotic symptoms. Th e most com-
monly used agents are fl uphenazine, haloperi-
dol, chlorpromazine, and perphenazine. Th eir 
therapeutic action appears to be due to blockade 
of dopaminergic receptors in mesolimbic sites. 
Unfortunately, the same action in nigrostriatal 
pathways can produce undesirable extrapyramidal 
side eff ects, such as masklike facies, a festinating 
gait, cogwheel rigidity, and bradykinesia. Some 
patients also develop acute dystonic reactions such 
as oculogyric crisis and torticollis. Long-term side 
eff ects include akathisia (extreme restlessness) and 
tardive dyskinesia (involuntary choreoathetoid 
movements of the tongue, lip smacking, and trun-
cal instability). Like antidepressants, many of these 
drugs also have antihistaminic, antimuscarinic, 
and α-adrenergic–blocking eff ects. 
 Antispasmodics & Muscle Relaxants 
 Antispasmodics may be helpful for patients with 
musculoskeletal sprain and pain associated with 
spasm or contractures. Tizanidine (Zanafl ex) is a 
centrally acting α 2 -adrenergic agonist used in the 
treatment of muscle spasm in conditions such as 
multiple sclerosis, low back pain, and spastic diple-
gia. Cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) also may be eff ective 
 TABLE 4715 Selected corticosteroids. 1 
Drug
Routes 
Given 2 
Glucocorticoid 
Activity
Mineralocorticoid 
Activity
Equivalent 
Dose (mg)
Half-Life (h)
Hydrocortisone
O, I, T
1
1
20
8–12
Prednisone
O
4
0.8
5
12–36
Prednisolone
O, I
4
0.8
5
12–36
Methylprednisolone 
(Depo-Medrol, Solu-Medrol)
O, I, T
5
0.5
4
12–36
Triamcinolone (Aristocort)
O, I, T
5
0.5
4
12–36
Betamethasone (Celestone)
O, I, T
25
0
0.75
36–72
Dexamethasone (Decadron)
O, I, T
25
0
0.75
36–72
 1 Data from Goodman LS, Gilman AG:  The Pharmacologic Basis of Therapeutics , 8th ed. Pergamon, 1990.
 2 O, oral; I, injectable; T, topical.
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1057
are given either as a slow bolus or by continuous infu-
sion. Lidocaine is given by infusion over 5–30 min 
for a total of 1–5 mg/kg. Procaine, 200–400 mg, can 
be given intravenously over the course of 1–2 h, 
whereas chloroprocaine (1% solution) is infused at 
a rate of 1 mg/kg/min for a total of 10–20 mg/kg. 
Monitoring by qualifi ed medical personnel should 
include electrocardiographic data, blood pressure, 
respiration, pulse oximetry, and mental status, and 
full resuscitation equipment should be immediately 
available. Signs of toxicity, such as tinnitus, slurring 
of speech, excessive sedation, or nystagmus, neces-
sitate slowing or discontinuing the infusion to avoid 
the progression to seizures. 
 Patients who do not respond satisfactorily to 
anticonvulsants but respond to intravenous local 
anesthetics may benefi t from chronic oral antiar-
rhythmic therapy. Mexiletine (150–300 mg every 
6–8 h) is a class 1B antiarrhythmic that is commonly 
used and generally well tolerated. 
 A 5% lidocaine transdermal patch (Lidoderm) 
containing 700 mg of lidocaine has been approved 
for the treatment of PHN. One to three patches may 
be applied to dry, intact skin, alternating 12 h on, 
then 12 h off . Topical lidocaine preparations, in con-
centrations up to 5%, may be helpful in the treat-
ment of some neuropathic pain conditions. 
α 2 -Adrenergic Agonists 
 Th e primary eff ect of α 2 -adrenergic agonists is acti-
vation of descending inhibitory pathways in the 
dorsal horn. Epidural and intrathecal α 2 -adrenergic 
agonists are particularly eff ective in the treatment 
of neuropathic pain and opioid tolerance. Cloni-
dine (Catapres), a direct-acting α 2 -adrenergic ago-
nist, is eff ective as an adjunctive medication in the 
treatment of severe pain. When administered orally, 
the dosage is 0.1–0.3 mg twice daily; a transdermal 
patch (0.1–0.3 mg/d) is also available and is usually 
applied for 7 d. When used in combination with a 
local anesthetic or opioid in an epidural or intra-
thecal infusion, clonidine may contribute to a syn-
ergistic or prolonged analgesic eff ect, especially for 
neuropathic pain. 
 Opioids 
 Th e most commonly prescribed oral opioid agents 
are codeine, oxycodone, and hydrocodone. Th ey are 
activity causes sodium retention and hypokalemia, 
and can precipitate congestive heart failure. 
 Many corticosteroid preparations are suspen-
sions, rather than solutions, and the relative par-
ticulate size of a given glucocorticoid suspension 
may aff ect the risk of neural damage due to arterial 
occlusion when accidental arterial injection occurs. 
Because of the relatively small size of its suspension 
particles, dexamethasone is becoming the preferred 
corticosteroid for injection procedures involving 
relatively vascular areas, such as the head and neck 
region. 
 Anticonvulsants 
 Anticonvulsant medications are useful for 
patients with neuropathic pain, especially tri-
geminal neuralgia and diabetic neuropathy. Th ese 
agents block voltage-gated calcium or sodium chan-
nels and can suppress the spontaneous neural dis-
charges that play a major role in these disorders. 
Th e most commonly utilized agents are phenytoin 
( Dilantin), carbamazepine (Tegretol), valproic acid 
(Depakene, Stavzor), clonazepam (Klonopin), and 
gabapentin (Neurontin) ( Table 47–14 ). Pregabalin 
(Lyrica) is a newer agent that has been approved for 
the treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy and 
fi bromyalgia but is widely prescribed for all forms 
of neuropathic pain. Lamotrigine (Lamictal) and 
topiramate (Topamax) may also be eff ective. All are 
highly protein bound and have relatively long half-
lives. Carbamazepine (Carbatrol, Equetro, Tegretol) 
has a slow and unpredictable absorption, which 
requires monitoring of blood levels for optimal effi  -
cacy. Phenytoin may be eff ective, but there is a pos-
sible side eff ect of gum hyperplasia. Levetiracetam 
(Keppra) and oxcarbazepine (Trileptal) have been 
used as adjuvant pain therapies. Gabapentin and 
pregabalin may also be eff ective adjuvants for the 
treatment of acute postoperative pain. 
 Local Anesthetics 
 Systemic infusion of local anesthetic medication 
produces sedation and central analgesia and is occa-
sionally used in the treatment of patients with neuro-
pathic pain. Th e resultant analgesia may outlast the 
pharmacokinetic profi le of the local anesthetic and 
break the “pain cycle.” Lidocaine, procaine, and chlo-
roprocaine are the most commonly used agents. Th ey 
18
1058 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
is highly variable but results in some desirable 
eff ects such as decreased opioid-related sedation, 
nausea, and respiratory depression. Unfortunately, 
many patients continue to suff er from constipation. 
Physical dependence occurs in all patients receiving 
large doses of opioids for extended periods. Opioid 
withdrawal phenomena can be precipitated by the 
administration of opioid antagonists. Future con-
comitant use of peripheral opioid antagonists that 
do not cross the blood–brain barrier, such as meth-
ylnaltrexone (Relistor) and alvimopan (Entereg), 
may help reduce systemic side eff ects without sig-
nifi cantly aff ecting analgesia. 
 Tapentadol (Nucynta), a µ-opioid receptor ago-
nist that also has norepinephrine reuptake inhibi-
tion properties, has recently been introduced for the 
management of acute and chronic pain. Th is opioid 
may be associated with less nausea and vomiting and 
less constipation. It should not be used concomi-
tantly with monoamine oxidase inhibitors due to 
potentially elevated levels of norepinephrine. 
 Propoxyphene with and without acetamino-
phen (Darvocet and Darvon) was withdrawn from 
the U.S. market in 2010 due to the risk of cardiac 
toxicity. 
 A. Parenteral Opioid Administration 
 Intravenous, intraspinal (epidural or intrathecal), or 
transdermal routes of opioid administration must be 
utilized when the patient fails to adequately respond 
to, or is unable to tolerate, oral regimens. However, 
when the patient’s pain increases signifi cantly, or 
changes markedly in quality, it is equally impor-
tant to reevaluate the patient for adequacy of pain 
diagnosis and for the potential of disease progres-
sion. In patients with cancer, adjunctive treatments 
such as surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, hormonal 
therapy, and neurolysis may be helpful. Intramuscu-
lar opioid administration is rarely optimal because 
of variability in systemic absorption and resultant 
delay and variation in clinical eff ect. 
 B. Intravenous Opioid Therapy 
 Parenteral opioid therapy is usually best accom-
plished by intermittent or continuous intravenous 
infusion, or both, but can also be given subcuta-
neously. Modern portable infusion devices have 
easily absorbed, but hepatic fi rst-pass metabolism lim-
its systemic delivery. Like other opioids, they undergo 
hepatic biotransformation and conjugation before 
renal elimination. Codeine is transformed by the liver 
into morphine. Th e side eff ects of orally administered 
opioids are similar to those of systemic opioids. When 
prescribed on a fi xed schedule, stool soft eners or laxa-
tives are oft en indicated. Tramadol (Rybix, Ryzolt, 
Ultram) is a synthetic oral opioid that also blocks neu-
ronal reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin. It 
appears to have the same effi  cacy as the combination 
of codeine and acetaminophen but, unlike others, it 
is associated with signifi cantly less respiratory depres-
sion and has little eff ect on gastric emptying. 
 Moderate to severe cancer pain is usually treated 
with an immediate-release morphine preparation 
(eg, liquid morphine, Roxanol, 10–30 mg every 
1–4 h). Th ese preparations have an eff ective half-life 
of 2–4 h. Once the patient’s daily requirements are 
determined, the same dose can be given in the form 
of a sustained-release morphine preparation (MS 
Contin or Oramorph SR), which is dosed every 
8–12 h. Th e immediate-release preparation is then 
used only for breakthrough pain (PRN). Oral trans-
mucosal fentanyl lozenges (Actiq, 200–1600 mcg) 
can also be used for breakthrough pain. Excessive 
sedation can be treated with dextroamphetamine 
(Dexedrine, ProCentra) or methylphenidate (Rit-
alin), 5 mg in the morning and 5 mg the early aft er-
noon. Most patients require a stool soft ener. Nausea 
may be treated with transdermal scopolamine, oral 
meclizine, or metoclopramide. Hydromorphone 
(Dilaudid) is an excellent alternative to morphine, 
particularly in elderly patients (because of fewer side 
eff ects) and in patients with impaired renal function. 
Methadone (Dolophine) is reported to have a half-
life of 15–30 h, but clinical duration is shorter and 
quite variable (usually 6–8 h). 
 Patients who experience  opioid tolerance 
require escalating doses of opioid to main-
tain the same analgesic eff ect.  Physical dependence 
manifests in opioid withdrawal when the opioid 
medication is either abruptly discontinued or the 
dose is abruptly and signifi cantly decreased.  Psy-
chological dependence , characterized by behavioral 
changes focusing on drug craving, is rare in can-
cer patients. Th e development of opioid tolerance 
19
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1059 
refi lled percutaneously. Implantable systems are 
most appropriate for patients with a life expectancy 
of several months or longer, whereas tunneled epi-
dural catheters are appropriate for patients expected 
to live only weeks. Formation of an infl ammatory 
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) capability, allow-
ing the patient to self-treat for breakthrough pain. 
 C. Spinal Opioid Therapy 
 Th e use of intraspinal opioids is an excellent alter-
native for patients obtaining poor relief with other 
analgesic techniques or who experience unaccept-
able side eff ects. Epidural and intrathecal opioids 
off er pain relief with substantially lower total doses 
of opioid and fewer side eff ects. Continuous infusion 
techniques reduce drug requirements (compared 
with intermittent boluses), minimize side eff ects, 
and decrease the likelihood of catheter occlusion. 
Myoclonic activity may be occasionally observed 
with intrathecal morphine or hydromorphone. 
 Epidural or intrathecal catheters can be placed 
percutaneously or implanted to provide long-
term eff ective pain relief. Epidural catheters can 
be attached to lightweight external pumps that 
can be worn by ambulatory patients. A temporary 
catheter must be inserted fi rst to assess the poten-
tial effi  cacy of the technique. Correct placement 
of the permanent catheter should be confi rmed 
using fl uoroscopy with contrast dye. Completely 
implantable intrathecal catheters with externally 
programmable pumps can also be used for con-
tinuous infusion ( Figure 47–6 ). Th e reservoir of 
the implanted pump ( Figure 47–7 ) is periodically 
 FIGURE 477  Fluoroscopic image showing an 
intrathecal drug pump implanted in the anterolateral 
abdomen wall. The catheter connecting the pump to the 
intrathecal space is tunneled around the ﬂ ank. 
 FIGURE 476  Placement 
of an implanted intrathecal 
drug delivery system. With 
the patient in right lateral 
decubitus position, access to 
the intrathecal space and to 
the anterior abdominal wall is 
optimized. After the posterior 
incision is made, a needle is 
advanced through the incision 
into the intrathecal space, 
and a catheter is advanced 
through the needle into the 
posterior intrathecal space. 
After the proximal catheter end 
is anchored, the distal end of 
the catheter is tunneled around 
the ﬂ ank, beneath the costal 
margin to the anterolateral 
aspect of the abdominal wall. 
Intrathecal drug-delivery
system (anterior
abdominal wall)
Intrathecal
catheter
Lateral
decubitus
position
Skin incision
Spinal needle
1060 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Major disadvantages of the transdermal route 
are its slow rate of drug delivery onset and the inabil-
ity to rapidly change dosage in response to changing 
opioid requirements. Blood fentanyl levels rise and 
reach a plateau in 12–40 h, providing average con-
centrations of 1, 1.5, and 2 ng/mL for the 50, 75, and 
100 mcg/h patches, respectively. Large inter-patient 
variability results in actual delivery rates ranging 
from 50 to 200 mcg/h. Th is formulation is popu-
larly “diverted” for nonmedical uses and has been 
the cause of numerous deaths from “recreational” 
pharmacology. 
 Botulinum Toxin (Botox) 
 OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) injection has been 
increasingly utilized in the treatment of pain syn-
dromes. Studies support its use in the treatment of 
conditions associated with involuntary muscle con-
traction (eg, focal dystonia and spasticity), and it is 
approved by the FDA for prophylactic treatment of 
chronic migraine headache. Th is toxin blocks ace-
tylcholine released at the synapse in motor nerve 
endings but not sensory nerve fi bers. Proposed 
mechanisms of analgesia include improved local 
blood fl ow, relief of muscle spasms, and release of 
muscular compression of nerve fi bers 
 PROCEDURAL THERAPY 
 1. Diagnostic & Therapeutic Blocks 
 Local anesthetic nerve blocks are useful in delineat-
ing pain mechanisms, and they play a major role in 
the management of patients with acute or chronic 
pain. Pain relief following diagnostic nerve blockade 
oft en carries favorable prognostic implications for a 
subsequent therapeutic series of blocks. Although 
the utility of diff erential nerve blocks in distinguish-
ing between somatic and sympathetic mechanisms 
has been questioned, this technique can identify 
patients exhibiting a placebo response and those with 
psychogenic mechanisms. In selected patients, “per-
manent” neurolytic nerve blocks may be appropriate. 
 Th e effi  cacy of nerve blocks is presumably due 
to interruption of aff erent nociceptive activity. Th is 
is in addition to, or in combination with, blockade of 
aff erent and eff erent limbs of abnormal refl ex activ-
ity involving sympathetic nerve fi bers and skeletal 
mass (granuloma) at the tip of the intrathecal cath-
eter can occur and may reduce effi  cacy. 
 Th e most frequently encountered problem asso-
ciated with intrathecal opioids is tolerance. Gener-
ally a slow phenomenon, tolerance may develop 
rapidly in some patients. In such instances, adjuvant 
therapy must be used, including the intermittent use 
of local anesthetics or a mixture of opioids with local 
anesthetics (bupivacaine or ropivacaine 2–24 mg/d), 
clonidine (2–4 mcg/kg/h or 48–800 mcg/d, respec-
tively), or the GABA agonist baclofen. Clonidine 
is particularly useful for neuropathic pain. In high 
doses, it is more likely to be associated with hypo-
tension and bradycardia. 
 Complications of spinal opioid therapy include 
local skin infection, epidural abscess, meningitis, and 
death or permanent injury from pump programming 
or drug dilution errors. Superfi cial infections can be 
reduced by the use of a silver-impregnated cuff  close 
to the exit site. Other complications of spinal opi-
oid therapy include epidural hematoma, which may 
become clinically apparent either immediately fol-
lowing catheter placement or several days later, and 
respiratory depression. Respiratory depression sec-
ondary to spinal opioid overdose can be treated by 
decreasing the pump infusion rate to its lowest set-
ting and initiating a naloxone intravenous infusion. 
 D. Transdermal Fentanyl 
 Transdermal fentanyl (Duragesic patch) is an alter-
native to sustained-release oral morphine and 
oxycodone preparations, particularly when oral 
medication is not possible. Th e currently available 
patches are constructed as a drug reservoir that is 
separated from the skin by a microporous rate-
limiting membrane and an adhesive polymer. A 
very large quantity of fentanyl (10 mg) provides a 
large force for transdermal diff usion. Transder-
mal fentanyl patches are available in 25, 50, 75, and 
100 mcg/h sizes that provide drug for 2–3 days. Th e 
largest patch is equivalent to 60 mg/d of intravenous 
morphine. Th e major obstacle to fentanyl absorp-
tion through the skin is the stratum corneum. 
Because the dermis acts as a secondary reservoir, 
fentanyl absorption continues for several hours aft er 
the patch is removed. Th e transdermal route avoids 
hepatic fi rst-pass metabolism. 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1061 
blocks may be performed on the gasserian ganglion 
itself, on one of the major divisions (ophthalmic, 
maxillary, or mandibular), or on one of their smaller 
branches. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e rootlets of cranial nerve V arise from the brain-
stem and join one another to form a crescent-shaped 
sensory (gasserian) ganglion in Meckel’s cave. Most 
of the ganglion is invested with a dural sleeve. Th e 
three subdivisions of the trigeminal nerve arise 
from the ganglia and exit the cranium separately. 
( Figure 47–8A ). 
 C. Technique 
 1. Gasserian ganglion block —Fluoroscopic guid-
ance is mandatory for the performance of this pro-
cedure ( Figure 47–8B ). An 8- to 10-cm 22-gauge 
needle is inserted approximately 3 cm lateral to the 
angle of the mouth at the level of the upper second 
molar. Th e needle is then advanced posteromedial-
ly and angled superiorly to bring it into alignment 
with the pupil in the anterior plane and with the 
mid-zygomatic arch in the lateral plane. Without 
entering the mouth, the needle should pass be-
tween the mandibular ramus and the maxilla, and 
lateral to the  pterygoid process to enter the cra-
nium through the foramen ovale. Aft er a negative 
aspiration for cerebrospinal fl uid and blood, local 
anesthetic is  injected. 
 2. Blocks of the ophthalmic nerve and its 
 branches —In this procedure, to avoid denerva-
tion-related keratitis, only the supraorbital branch 
is blocked in most cases ( Figure 47–8C ); the oph-
thalmic division itself is not blocked. Th e nerve is 
easily located and blocked with local anesthetic at 
the  supraorbital notch , which is located on the su-
praorbital ridge above the pupil. Th e  supratrochlear 
branch can also be blocked with local anesthetic at 
the superior medial corner of the orbital ridge. 
 3. Blocks of the maxillary nerve and its  branches —
With the patient’s mouth slightly opened, an 8- to 
10-cm 22-gauge needle is inserted between the 
zygomatic arch and the notch of the mandible 
( Figure 47–8D ). Aft er contact with the lateral pter-
ygoid plate at about 4-cm depth (position 1 in fi g-
ure), the needle is partially withdrawn and angled 
slightly superiorly and anteriorly to pass into the 
muscle innervation. Th e pain relief frequently out-
lasts (by hours up to several weeks) the known 
pharmacological duration of the agent employed. 
Selection of the type of block depends on the loca-
tion of pain, its presumed mechanism, and the skills 
of the treating physician. Local anesthetic solutions 
may be applied locally (infi ltration), or at a specifi c 
peripheral nerve, somatic plexus, sympathetic gan-
glia, or nerve root. Th e local anesthetic may also be 
applied centrally in the neuraxis. 
 Ultrasound-Guided Procedures 
 Th e use of ultrasound in interventional pain medi-
cine has increased over the past decade due to its 
utility in visualizing vascular, neural, and other ana-
tomic structures; its role as an alternative to the use 
of fl uoroscopy and iodine-based contrast agents; 
and progressive improvements in technology lead-
ing to better visual images and greater simplicity 
of use. Most notably, ultrasound has become very 
useful for visualizing blood vessels and potentially 
decreasing the incidence of intravascular injection 
of particulate steroid medications. It may also be 
helpful in decreasing the risk of pneumothorax and 
of intraperitoneal injection. Procedures that may 
benefi t from ultrasound guidance include trigger 
point injections, nerve blocks, and joint injections. 
 Fluoroscopy 
 Fluoroscopy is frequently used for interventional pain 
procedures. It is highly eff ective for visualizing bony 
structures and observing the spread of radiopaque 
contrast agents. Live fl uoroscopy with contrast agent 
should be used to minimize the risk of intravascular 
injection of therapeutic agents. Care should be taken 
to avoid excessive use of fl uoroscopy and to employ 
appropriate radiation shielding, given the risks of 
ionizing radiation to the patient and to the health 
care team members in the fl uoroscopy suite. 
 2. Somatic Nerve Blocks 
 Trigeminal Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Th e two principal indications for trigeminal nerve 
block are trigeminal neuralgia and intractable facial 
cancer pain. Depending on the site of pain, these 
1062 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
A. Blocks of the trigeminal nerve
Maxillary block
Ophthalmic block
Supraorbital block
Infraorbital block
Mental block
Gasserian ganglion block
Mandibular block
Inferior alveolar and
lingual block
B. Gasserian ganglion block
Lateral view
Lateral view
Frontal view
Frontal view
Supraorbital nerve,
medial branch
Supraorbital nerve,
lateral branch
Supraorbital notch
C. Supraorbital nerve block
 FIGURE 478  Trigeminal nerve blocks. (continued) 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1063 
 Th e infraorbital branch of cranial nerve V 
passes through the  infraorbital foramen , where it 
can be blocked with local anesthetic. Th is foramen 
is approximately 1 cm below the orbit and is usu-
ally located with a needle inserted about 2 cm lateral 
to the nasal ala and directed superiorly, posteriorly, 
and slightly laterally. 
 4. Blocks of the mandibular nerve and its 
 branches —With the patient’s mouth slightly opened 
( Figure 47–8E ), an 8 to10-cm 22-gauge needle is 
inserted between the  zygomatic arch and the  man-
dibular notch . Aft er contact with the  lateral ptery-
goid plate (position 1 in fi gure), the needle is par-
tially withdrawn and angled slightly superiorly and 
pterygopalatine fossa (position 2). Local anesthetic 
is  injected once paresthesias are elicited. Both the 
maxillary nerve and the  sphenopalatine (pterygo-
palatine) ganglia are usually anesthetized by this 
technique. Th e sphenopalatine ganglion (and ante-
rior ethmoid nerves) can be anesthetized transmu-
cosally with topical anesthetic applied through the 
nose; several cotton applicators soaked with local 
anesthetic (cocaine or lidocaine) are inserted along 
the medial wall of the nasal cavity into the area of 
the sphenopalatine recess. Th e sphenopalatine gan-
glion blockade may be helpful for patients with 
chronic nasal pain, cluster headache, or Sluder’s 
neuralgia. 
D. Maxillary nerve block
E. Mandibular nerve block
Maxillary nerve
Lateral pterygoid
plate
Zygomatic arch
Mandible
Lateral view
Lateral view
1
2
1
2
Lateral pterygoid
plate
Maxillary nerve
Zygomatic arch
Mandibular
nerve
Mandible
Lingual and inferior alveolar nerves
Tongue
Ramus of the mandible
Transverse view
1
2
Frontal view
F. Lingual and inferior alveolar nerve block
FIGURE 478 (continued)
1064 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
external auditory meatus, soft  palate, and part of the 
pharynx. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e entry point is just anterior to the mastoid pro-
cess, beneath the external auditory meatus, and at 
the midpoint of the mandibular ramus. Th e nerve 
is approximately 1–2 cm deep and is blocked with 
local anesthetic just below the  stylomastoid process . 
 D. Complications 
 If the needle is inserted too deeply past the level of the 
styloid bone, the glossopharyngeal and vagal nerves 
may also be blocked. Careful aspiration is necessary 
because of the proximity of the facial nerve to the 
carotid artery and the internal jugular vein. 
 Glossopharyngeal Block 
 A. Indications 
 Glossopharyngeal nerve block may be used for 
patients with pain due to cancer involving the base 
of the tongue, the epiglottis, or the palatine tonsils. 
It can also be used to distinguish glossopharyngeal 
neuralgia from trigeminal and geniculate neuralgia. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e nerve exits from the cranium via the  jugular 
foramen medial to the styloid process and courses 
anteromedially to supply the posterior third of the 
tongue, pharyngeal muscles, and mucosa. Th e vagus 
and spinal accessory nerves also exit the cranium via 
the jugular foramen and descend alongside the glos-
sopharyngeal nerve in close proximity to the inter-
nal jugular vein. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e block is performed using a 5-cm 22-gauge nee-
dle inserted just posterior to the angle of the man-
dible ( Figure 47–9 ). Th e nerve is approximately 
3–4 cm deep; therefore, use of a nerve stimulator 
facilitates correct placement of the needle. An alter-
native approach is from a point over the styloid 
process, midway between the mastoid process and 
the angle of the mandible; the nerve is located just 
anteriorly. 
 D. Complications 
 Complications include dysphagia and vagal block-
ade resulting in ipsilateral vocal cord paralysis 
posteriorly toward the ear (position 2). Local anes-
thetic is injected once paresthesias are elicited. 
 Th e lingual and inferior mandibular branches 
of the mandibular nerve may be blocked intraorally 
utilizing a 10-cm 22-gauge needle ( Figure 47–8F ). 
Th e patient is asked to open the mouth maximally 
and the  coronoid notch is palpated with the index 
fi nger of the nonoperative hand. Th e needle is then 
introduced at the same level (approximately 1 cm 
above the surface of the last molar), medial to the 
fi nger but lateral to the  pterygomandibular plica 
(position 1 in fi gure). It is advanced posteriorly 
1.5–2 cm along the medial side of the mandibular 
ramus, making contact with the bone (position 2). 
Both nerves are usually blocked following injection 
of local anesthetic. 
 Th e terminal portion of the inferior alveolar 
nerve may be blocked as it emerges from the mental 
foramen at the mid-mandible just beneath the cor-
ner of the mouth. Local anesthetic is injected once 
paresthesias are elicited or the needle is felt to enter 
the foramen. 
 D. Complications 
 Complications of a gasserian ganglion block include 
accidental intravascular injection, subarachnoid 
injection, Horner’s syndrome, and motor block of 
the muscles of mastication. Th e potential for seri-
ous hemorrhage is greatest for blockade of the 
maxillary nerve. Th e facial nerve may be uninten-
tionally blocked during blocks of the mandibular 
division. 
 Facial Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Blockade of the facial nerve is occasionally indi-
cated to relieve spastic contraction of the facial 
muscles, to treat herpes zoster involving the facial 
nerve, and to facilitate certain surgical procedures 
involving the eye. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e facial nerve can be blocked where it exits the 
cranium through the  stylomastoid foramen . A 
small sensory component supplies special sensation 
(taste) to the anterior two thirds of the tongue and 
general sensation to the tympanic membrane, the 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1065 
guidance may be employed to help identify the 
nerves and minimize the risk of inadvertent intra-
venous or intraarterial injection. For patients who 
have responded well but temporarily to occipital 
and tachycardia. Block of the accessory nerve and 
hypoglossal nerves causes ipsilateral paralysis of the 
trapezius muscle and the tongue, respectively. Care-
ful aspiration is necessary to prevent intravascular 
injection. 
 Occipital Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Occipital nerve block is useful diagnostically and 
therapeutically in patients with occipital headaches 
and neuralgias. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e greater occipital nerve is derived from the dor-
sal primary rami of the C2 and C3 spinal nerves, 
whereas the lesser occipital nerve arises from the 
ventral rami of the same roots. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e greater occipital nerve is blocked approximately 
3 cm lateral to the occipital prominence at the level of 
the superior nuchal line ( Figure 47–10 ); the nerve is 
just medial to the occipital artery, which is oft en pal-
pable. Th e lesser occipital nerve is blocked 2–3 cm 
more laterally along the nuchal ridge. Ultrasound 
Mandible
Masseter muscle
Parotid gland
Internal carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Splenius and semispinalis
capitis muscles
Trapezius muscle
External carotid artery
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
 FIGURE 479  Glossopharyngeal nerve block. 
Occipital
nerve
Semispinalis
muscle
Lesser
occipital
nerve
Splenius muscle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
 FIGURE 4710  Occipital nerve blocks. 
1066 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 D. Complications 
 Pneumothorax is possible if the needle is advanced 
too far anteriorly. Paralysis of the supraspinatus and 
infraspinatus muscles will result in impaired shoul-
der abduction. 
 Cervical Paravertebral Nerve Blocks 
 A. Indications 
 Cervical paravertebral nerve blocks can be useful 
diagnostically and therapeutically for patients with 
cervical disc displacement, cervical foraminal steno-
sis, or cancer-related pain originating from the cer-
vical spine or shoulder. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e cervical spinal nerves lie in the sulcus of the 
transverse process of their respective vertebral lev-
els. As noted earlier in this chapter, unlike thoracic 
and lumbar nerve roots, those in the cervical spine 
exit the foramina  above the vertebral bodies for 
which they are named. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e lateral approach is most commonly used to block 
C2–C7 ( Figure 47–12 ). Patients are asked to turn the 
head to the opposite side while in a sitting or supine 
position. A line is then drawn between the mastoid 
process and  Chassaignac’s tubercle (the tubercle of 
the C6 transverse process). A series of injections are 
made with a 5-cm 22-gauge needle along a second 
parallel line 0.5 cm posterior to the fi rst line. In the 
case of diagnostic blocks, a smaller injectate volume 
may be helpful in order to minimize local anesthetic 
spread to adjacent structures and thereby increase 
block specifi city. Because the transverse process of 
C2 is usually diffi  cult to palpate, the injection for this 
level is placed 1.5 cm beneath the mastoid process. 
Th e other transverse processes are usually inter-
spaced 1.5 cm apart and are 2.5–3 cm deep. Fluoros-
copy is useful in identifying specifi c vertebral levels 
during diagnostic blocks. Th is procedure may also 
be performed with ultrasound guidance. 
 D. Complications 
 Unintentional intrathecal or epidural anesthe-
sia at this level rapidly causes respiratory paralysis 
and hypotension. Injection of even small volumes 
of local anesthetic into the vertebral artery causes 
nerve blocks, implantation of an occipital nerve 
stimulator may provide prolonged relief. 
 D. Complications 
 Rarely, intravascular injections may occur. 
 Suprascapular Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Th is block is useful for painful conditions arising from 
the shoulder (most commonly arthritis and bursitis). 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e suprascapular nerve is the major sensory nerve 
of the shoulder joint. It arises from the brachial 
plexus (C4–C6) and passes over the upper border of 
the scapula in the  suprascapular notch to enter the 
suprascapular fossa. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e nerve is blocked at the suprascapular notch, 
which is located at the junction of the lateral and 
middle thirds of the superior scapular border 
( Figure 47–11 ). Correct placement of the needle is 
determined by paresthesia, ultrasound, or the use of 
a nerve stimulator. 
Suprascapular nerve
 FIGURE 4711  Suprascapular nerve block. 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1067 
 C. Technique 
 Th is block may be performed with the patient prone, 
lateral, or seated position. A 5- to 8-cm 22-gauge spi-
nal needle with an adjustable marker (bead or rubber 
stopper) is used. With the classic technique, the nee-
dle is inserted 4–5 cm lateral to the midline at the spi-
nous process of the level above. Th e needle is directed 
anteriorly and medially using a 45° angle with the 
mid-sagittal plane, and advanced until it contacts the 
transverse process of the desired level. Th e needle is 
then partially withdrawn and redirected to pass just 
under the transverse process. Th e adjustable marker 
on the needle is used to mark the depth of the spinous 
process; when the needle is subsequently withdrawn 
and redirected, it should not be advanced more than 
2 cm beyond this mark. An alternative technique that 
may decrease the risk of pneumothorax uses a more 
medial insertion point and a loss-of-resistance tech-
nique very similar to epidural anesthesia. Th e needle 
is inserted in a sagittal plane 1.5 cm lateral to the 
midline at the level of the spinous process above and 
advanced until it contacts the lateral edge of the lam-
ina of the level to be blocked. It is then withdrawn to 
a subcutaneous position and reinserted 0.5 cm more 
laterally but still in a sagittal plane. As the needle is 
advanced, it engages the superior costotransverse 
ligament, just lateral to the lamina and inferior to 
the transverse process. Th e correct position may be 
identifi ed by loss of resistance to injection of saline 
unconsciousness and seizures. Other complications 
include Horner’s syndrome, as well as blockade of 
the recurrent laryngeal and phrenic nerves. 
 Embolic cerebrovascular and spinal cord com-
plications have resulted from injection of particulate 
steroid with this block. Particulate steroid should 
not be used with cervical paravertebral nerve blocks 
because of possible anomalous vertebral artery anat-
omy in this region. 
 Thoracic Paravertebral Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Th is technique may be used to block the upper tho-
racic segments, because the scapula interferes with 
the intercostal technique at these levels. Unlike an 
intercostal nerve block, a thoracic paravertebral 
nerve block anesthetizes both the dorsal and ven-
tral rami of spinal nerves. It is therefore useful in 
patients with pain originating from the thoracic 
spine, thoracic cage, or abdominal wall, including 
compression fractures, proximal rib fractures, and 
acute herpes zoster. Th is block is also frequently uti-
lized for intraoperative anesthesia and for postop-
erative pain management in breast surgery. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Each thoracic nerve root exits from the spinal canal 
just inferior to the transverse process of its corre-
sponding spinal segment. 
 FIGURE 4712  Cervical paravertebral nerve block. 
1068 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
anesthetic is injected at any one level, because larger 
volumes may block more than one level. Larger vol-
umes of local anesthetic are used for therapeutic 
blocks, or to produce complete somatic and sympa-
thetic block of the lumbar nerves. 
 D. Complications 
 Complications are primarily those of unintentional 
intrathecal or epidural anesthesia. Patients may 
experience paresthesias if inadvertent nerve injury 
occurs during needle placement. Some physicians 
advocate the use of a blunt-tipped needle to (theo-
retically) decrease the chance of accidental intraneu-
ral injection. Digital subtraction angiography with 
radiopaque contrast may lessen the risk of intravas-
cular injection of local anesthetic or steroid. 
 Cervical, Thoracic, 
& Lumbar Medial Branch Blocks 
 A. Indications 
 Th ese blocks may be utilized in patients with back 
pain to assess the contribution of lumbar facet (zyg-
apophyseal) joint disease. Corticosteroids are com-
monly injected with the local anesthetic when the 
intraarticular technique is chosen. Th e cervical, tho-
racic, or lumbar facet joints may be injected for diag-
nostic and potentially therapeutic purposes. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Each facet joint is innervated by the medial branches 
of the posterior primary division of the spinal nerves 
above and below the joint ( Figure 47–14 ). Th us, 
when the needle penetrates the costotransverse liga-
ment. Ultrasound guidance is helpful in performing 
this block (see Chapter 46). 
 D. Complications 
 Th e most common complication of paravertebral block 
is pneumothorax; accidental intrathecal, epidural, and 
intravascular injections may also occur. Sympathetic 
blockade and hypotension may be obtained if multi-
ple segments are blocked or a large volume is injected 
at one level. A chest radiograph is mandatory if the 
patient exhibits signs or symptoms of pneumothorax. 
 Lumbar Paravertebral Nerve Blocks 
 A. Indications 
 Lumbar paravertebral nerve blocks may be useful in 
evaluating pain due to disorders involving the lum-
bar spine or spinal nerves. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e lumbar spinal nerves enter the psoas compart-
ment as soon as they exit through the intervertebral 
foramina beneath the pedicles and transverse pro-
cesses. Th is compartment is formed by the psoas 
fascia anteriorly, the quadratus lumborum fascia 
posteriorly, and the vertebral bodies medially. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e approach to lumbar spinal nerves is essentially 
the same as for thoracic paravertebral blockade 
( Figure 47–13 ). An 8-cm 22-gauge needle is usually 
used. Radiographic confi rmation of the correct level 
is helpful. For diagnostic blocks, only 2 mL of local 
 FIGURE 4713  Lumbar 
paravertebral nerve blocks. 
Transverse
process
Spinal
nerves
Spinous
process
Posterior view
Lateral view
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1069 
every joint is supplied by two or more adjacent spi-
nal nerves. Each medial branch crosses the upper 
border of the lower transverse process running in 
a groove between the root of the transverse process 
and the superior articular process. 
 C. Technique 
 Th ese blocks are performed under fl uoroscopic 
guidance with the patient in a prone position, or in 
some cases, the lateral position for cervical proce-
dures. A posterior–anterior view facilitates visualiza-
tion of the spine for lumbar medial branch blocks. A 
10-cm 22-gauge needle is inserted 3–4 cm lateral to 
the spinous process at the desired level and directed 
anteriorly toward the junction of the transverse pro-
cess and the superior articular process to block the 
medial branch of the posterior division of the spinal 
nerve ( Figures 47–15 through  47–17 ). 
 Alternatively, local anesthetic with or without 
corticosteroid may be directly injected into the facet 
joint. Positioning the patient prone and using an 
oblique fl uoroscopic view facilitates identifi cation 
of the joint space. Correct placement of the needle 
may be confi rmed by injecting radiopaque contrast 
prior to injection of local anesthetic. Total injection 
volumes should ideally be limited to less than 1 mL 
in order to prevent rupture of the joint capsule. 
 D. Complications 
 Injection into a dural sleeve results in a subarach-
noid block, whereas injection near the spinal nerve 
 FIGURE 4714  Lumbar medical branch nerve 
and facet blocks.  A: Posterior view;  B: 30° oblique 
posterior view. 
B
Facet joints
Articular
branches
A
Target for
medial branch
block
Facet
joint
 FIGURE 4715  Anatomy of the lumbar facet joint and 
location for blocking the medial branch of the posterior 
primary division of the lumbar spinal nerves above and 
below the joint. 
1070 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
for radiofrequency ablation of the medial branch. 
Th ere is debate about whether a second, confi rma-
tory diagnostic block should be performed prior to 
radiofrequency ablation. Injection of steroid may 
be considered before or aft er radiofrequency abla-
tion to theoretically decrease the chance for post- 
procedural neuritis. 
 Trans-Sacral Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Th is technique is useful in the diagnosis and treat-
ment of pelvic and perineal pain. In addition, block-
ade of the S1 spinal root can help defi ne its role in 
back pain. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e fi ve paired sacral spinal nerves and one pair of 
coccygeal nerves descend in the sacral canal. Each 
nerve then travels through its respective interver-
tebral foramen. Th e S5 and coccygeal nerves exit 
through the sacral hiatus. 
 C. Technique 
 While the patient is prone, the sacral foramina are 
identifi ed with a needle along a line drawn 1.5 cm 
medial to the posterior superior iliac spine and 1.5 cm 
root results in sensory and motor block at that level. 
Because the joint normally has a small volume, larger 
injections can cause rupture of the joint capsule. 
 If a patient achieves improved pain control aft er 
a diagnostic block, he or she may be considered 
FIGURE 4717 Left lumbar medial branch blockade, 
oblique view.
 FIGURE 4716  Fluoroscopic image of a cervical 
medial branch blockade. A: Anteroposterior view; 
B: Lateral view. The lateral view reveals the needles at C4, 
C5, and C6 advanced toward the trapezoid of the articular 
pillar at each level. Note the “waist” of the vertebrae. Spinal 
needles may be advanced to come into contact with the 
medial branch of the nerve. 
B
A
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1071 
approach in the prone position. Injection of anes-
thetic is carried out percutaneously just posterior 
to the ischial spine at the attachment of the sacro-
spinous ligament. Th e ischial spine can be palpated 
transrectally or transvaginally. Alternatively, this 
procedure may be performed in the prone position 
with a 22-gauge needle directed toward the base of 
lateral to the ipsilateral sacral cornu ( Figure 47–18 ). 
Correct positioning requires entry of the needle into 
the posterior sacral foramen and usually produces 
paresthesias. Th e S1 nerve root is usually 1.5 cm 
above the level of the posterior superior iliac spine 
along this imaginary line. Blockade of the S5 and 
coccygeal nerves can be accomplished by injection 
at the sacral hiatus. 
 D. Complications 
 Complications are rare but include nerve damage 
and intravascular injection. 
 Pudendal Nerve Block 
 A. Indications 
 Pudendal nerve block is useful in evaluating patients 
with perineal somatosensory pain. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e pudendal nerve arises from S2–S4 and courses 
between the sacrospinous and the sacrotuberous 
ligaments to reach the perineum. 
 C. Technique 
 Th is block is usually performed transperineally with 
the patient in the lithotomy position ( Figure 47–19 ) 
although it may be performed via a posterior 
Posterior
Sagittal
 FIGURE 4718  Trans-sacral nerve block. 
Ischial
spine
 FIGURE 4719  Pudendal nerve block. 
1072 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
of the arm (T1) as well as innervation of all of the 
thoracic viscera derives from the fi ve upper thoracic 
ganglia. Th e sympathetic supply to the arm in some 
persons may also originate from T2–T3 via ana-
tomically distinct nerves ( Kuntz’s nerves ) that join 
the brachial plexus high in the axilla. Th ese nerves 
may be missed by a stellate block but not an axil-
lary block. Th e point of injection is at the level of 
the stellate, which lies posterior to the origin of the 
vertebral artery from the subclavian artery, anterior 
to the longus colli muscle and the fi rst rib, antero-
lateral to the prevertebral fascia, and medial to the 
scalene muscles. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e paratracheal technique is most commonly used 
( Figure 47–20 ), although an oblique or posterior 
approach may also be taken. With the patient’s head 
extended, a 4- to 5-cm 22-gauge needle is inserted 
at the medial edge of the sternocleidomastoid mus-
cle just below the level of the cricoid cartilage at the 
level of the transverse process of C6 ( Chassaignac’s 
tubercle ) or C7 (3–5 cm above the clavicle). Th e non-
operative hand should be used to retract the muscle 
together with the carotid sheath prior to needle 
insertion. Th e needle is advanced to the transverse 
process and withdrawn 2–3 mm prior to injection. 
Aspiration must be carried out in two planes before 
a 1-mL test dose is used to exclude unintentional 
intravascular injection into the vertebral or subcla-
vian arteries or subarachnoid injection into a dural 
sleeve. A total of 5–10 mL of local anesthetic may 
be injected. Although this procedure is oft en per-
formed under fl uoroscopy, ultrasound may also be 
used to visualize the anatomy and decrease the risk 
of inadvertent intravascular injection. 
 Correct placement of the needle is usually fol-
lowed promptly by an increase in the skin tempera-
ture of the ipsilateral arm and the onset of Horner’s 
syndrome. Th e latter consists of ipsilateral ptosis, 
meiosis, enophthalmos, nasal congestion, and anhy-
drosis of the neck and face. Th is may be considered 
a side eff ect of the block rather than a complication. 
 D. Complications 
 In addition to intravascular and subarach-
noid injection, other complications of stellate 
block include hematoma, pneumothorax, epidural 
20
the ischial spine. Patients should be advised that 
they may have numbness of the genitalia for hours 
aft er this procedure is performed. 
 D. Complications 
 Potential complications include unintentional sci-
atic blockade and intravascular injection. 
 3. Sympathetic Nerve Blocks 
 Sympathetic blockade can be accomplished by a 
variety of techniques, including intrathecal, epi-
dural, and paravertebral blocks. Unfortunately, 
these approaches usually block both somatic and 
sympathetic fi bers. Problems with diff erential spinal 
and epidural techniques are discussed below. Th e 
following techniques specifi cally block sympathetic 
fi bers and can be used to defi ne the role of the sym-
pathetic system in a patient’s pain and possibly also 
provide long-term pain relief. Th e most common 
indications for sympathetic nerve blocks include 
refl ex sympathetic dystrophy, visceral pain, acute 
herpetic neuralgia, postherpetic pain, and periph-
eral vascular disease. Isolated sympathetic blockade 
to a region is characterized by loss of sympathetic 
tone, as evidenced by increased cutaneous blood 
fl ow and cutaneous temperature, and by unaltered 
somatic sensation. Other tests include loss of the 
skin conductance (sympathogalvanic refl ex) and 
sweat response (ninhydrin, cobalt blue, or starch 
tests) following a painful stimulus. 
 Cervicothoracic (Stellate) Block 
 A. Indications 
 Th is block is oft en used for patients with head, neck, 
arm, and upper chest pain. It is commonly referred 
to as a  stellate block but usually blocks the upper 
thoracic as well as all cervical ganglia. Injection of 
larger volumes of anesthetic oft en extends the block 
to the T5 ganglia. Stellate blocks may also be used 
for vasospastic disorders of the upper extremity. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Sympathetic innervation of the head, neck, and 
most of the arm is derived from four cervical gan-
glia, the largest being the  stellate ganglion . Th e latter 
usually represents a fusion of the lower cervical and 
fi rst thoracic ganglia. Some sympathetic innervation 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1073 
to avoid a pneumothorax. Other complications may 
include hypotension and possible injury to the azy-
gos vein on the right or to the hemiazygos vein and 
the thoracic duct on the left . 
 If a patient’s pain lessens aft er a splanch-
nic nerve block, the procedure may be repeated 
to ensure that this result was not due to placebo 
eff ect. In addition, if the patient obtained pain 
relief from the initial block, he or she may subse-
quently benefi t from radiofrequency ablation of the 
splanchnic nerves at T11 and T12, with potentially 
longer duration of analgesia. Performing the proce-
dure on one side initially, and then the other side 
on a subsequent day, is advised due to the risk of 
pneumothorax. 
 Celiac Plexus Block 
 A. Indications 
 A celiac plexus block is indicated for patients with 
pain arising from the abdominal viscera, particu-
larly intraabdominal cancers. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e celiac ganglia vary in number (1–5), form, and 
position. Th ey are generally clustered at the level of 
the body of L1, posterior to the vena cava on the 
right, just lateral to the aorta on the left , and poste-
rior to the pancreas. 
anesthesia, brachial plexus block, hoarseness due 
to blockade of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, and, 
rarely, osteomyelitis or mediastinitis following 
esophageal puncture, particularly if a left -sided 
approach is taken. Th e posterior approach may have 
the highest incidence of pneumothorax. 
 Thoracic Sympathetic Chain Block 
 Th e thoracic sympathetic ganglia lie just lateral to 
the vertebral bodies and anterior to the spinal nerve 
roots, but this block is generally not used because of 
a signifi cant risk of pneumothorax. 
 Splanchnic Nerve Block 
 Th ree groups of splanchnic nerves (greater, lesser, 
and least) arise from the lower seven thoracic sym-
pathetic ganglia on each side and descend alongside 
the vertebral bodies to communicate with the celiac 
ganglia. Although similar to celiac plexus block, the 
splanchnic nerve block may be preferred because it 
is less likely to block the lumbar sympathetic chain 
and because it requires less anesthetic. 
 Th e needle is inserted 6–7 cm from the mid-
line at the lower end of the T11 spinous process, 
and advanced under fl uoroscopic guidance to the 
anterolateral surface of T12. Ten milliliters of local 
anesthetic is injected on each side. Th e needle should 
maintain contact with the vertebral body at all times 
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Carotid sheath
Vagus nerve
Esophagus
Scalene muscles
Carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Stellate ganglion
Vertebral artery
Transverse process
of vertebra
Trachea
 FIGURE 4720  Stellate block. 
1074 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
injection into the vena cava is more likely to produce 
a severe systemic reaction than accidental intraaor-
tic injection. Other, less common, complications 
include pneumothorax, retroperitoneal hemor-
rhage, injury to the kidneys or pancreas, sexual dys-
function, or, rarely, paraplegia (due to injury to the 
lumbar artery of Adamkiewicz). Blocking the sym-
pathetic chain may result in relatively unopposed 
parasympathetic activity that may lead to increased 
gastrointestinal motility and diarrhea. Back pain is 
another common side eff ect of a celiac plexus block. 
 Lumbar Sympathetic Block 
 A. Indications 
 Lumbar sympathetic block may be indicated for 
painful conditions involving the pelvis or the lower 
extremities, and possibly for some patients with 
peripheral vascular disease. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e lumbar sympathetic chain contains three to fi ve 
ganglia and is a continuation of the thoracic chain. It 
also supplies sympathetic fi bers to the pelvic plexus 
and ganglia. Th e lumbar sympathetic chain ganglia 
are in a more anteromedial position to the vertebral 
bodies than the thoracic ganglia, and are anterior 
to the psoas muscle and fascia. Th e lumbar chain is 
usually posterior to the vena cava on the right but is 
just lateral to the aorta on the left . 
 C. Technique 
 Th e patient is placed in a prone position and a 15-cm 
22-gauge needle is used to inject 15–20 mL of local 
anesthetic ( Figure 47–21 ). Under fl uoroscopic guid-
ance, each needle is inserted 7–8 cm from the mid-
line at the inferior edge of the spinous process of L1. 
It is advanced under radiographic guidance toward 
the midline, making an approximately 10–45° angle. 
Th e needle passes under the edge of the twelft h rib 
and should be positioned anterior to the body of L1 
in the lateral radiographic view and close to the mid-
line overlying the same vertebral body in the antero-
posterior view. When CT guidance is used, the tip 
of the needle should come to lie anterolateral to the 
aorta at a level between the celiac and superior mes-
enteric arteries. 
 Th e celiac plexus block may be performed from 
multiple approaches including a posterior retrocru-
ral approach, a posterior anterocrural approach, 
a posterior transaortic approach, and an anterior 
approach. Th ese blocks may be facilitated with the 
use of fl uoroscopy, CT, or ultrasound guidance. 
 D. Complications 
 Th e most common complication is postural hypo-
tension, from block of the visceral sympathetic 
innervation and resultant vasodilation. For this rea-
son, patients should be adequately hydrated intrave-
nously prior to this block. Accidental intravascular 
Inferior vena cava
Portal vein
Right celiac plexus
Aorta and celiac trunk
Spread of anesthetic
Erector spinae muscles
Psoas muscle
Crus of diaphragm
Kidney
Adrenal gland
Left celiac plexus
Pancreas
 FIGURE 4721  Celiac plexus block. 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1075
chain, but also visceral sensory fi bers from the cer-
vix, uterus, bladder, prostate, and rectum. Th e  supe-
rior hypogastric plexus usually lies just to the left  of 
the midline at the L5 vertebral body and beneath 
the bifurcation of the aorta. Th e fi bers of this plexus 
divide into left  and right branches and descend to 
the pelvic organs via the left  and right inferior hypo-
gastric and pelvic plexuses. Th e  inferior hypogastric 
plexus additionally receives preganglionic parasym-
pathetic fi bers from the S2–S4 spinal nerve roots. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e patient is positioned prone, and a 15-cm needle 
is inserted approximately 7 cm lateral to the L4–L5 
spinal interspace. Th e needle is directed medially 
and caudally under fl uoroscopic guidance so that 
it passes by the transverse process of L5. In its fi nal 
position, the needle should lie anterior to the inter-
vertebral disc between L5 and S1 and within 1 cm 
of the vertebral bodies in the anteroposterior view. 
Injection of radiopaque contrast confi rms correct 
position of the needle in the retroperitoneal space; 
8–10 mL of local anesthetic is then injected. Th e 
superior hypogastric plexus block may also be per-
formed using a transdiscal approach, though there is 
a risk of discitis associated with this procedure. 
 D. Complications 
 Complications include intravascular injection and 
transient bowel and bladder dysfunction. 
 Ganglion Impar Block 
 A. Indications 
 Ganglion impar block is eff ective for patients 
with visceral or sympathetically maintained 
pain in the perineal area. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e ganglion impar (ganglion of Walther) is the 
most caudal part of the sympathetic trunks. Th e two 
lowest pelvic sympathetic ganglia oft en fuse form-
ing one ganglion in the midline just anterior to the 
coccyx. 
 C. Technique 
 Th e patient may be positioned in the prone, lateral 
decubitus, or lithotomy position. A 22-gauge needle 
is advanced through the sacrococcygeal ligament 
and the rudimentary disc into a position just anterior 
21
 C. Technique 
 A single-needle technique at the L3 level on either 
side is most commonly employed with the patient 
either prone or in a lateral position ( Figure 47–22 ). 
Th e needle is inserted at the upper edge of the spi-
nous process and is directed above or just lateral to 
the transverse process of the vertebrae (depending 
on the distance from the midline). Fluoroscopic 
guidance with injection of radiopaque contrast prior 
to local anesthetic injection is oft en used. 
 D. Complications 
 Complications include intravascular injection into 
the vena cava, aorta, or lumbar vessels and somatic 
nerve block of the lumbar plexus. In particular, the 
genitofemoral nerve may be blocked. 
 Superior Hypogastric Plexus Block 
 A. Indications 
 Th is procedure is indicated for pain that originates 
from the pelvis and is unresponsive to lumbar or 
caudal epidural blocks. Th e  hypogastric plexus con-
tains visceral sensory fi bers that bypass the lower 
spinal cord. Th is block is usually appropriate for 
patients with cancer of the cervix, uterus, bladder, 
prostate, or rectum. It may also be eff ective in some 
women with chronic noncancer pelvic pain. 
 B. Anatomy 
 Th e hypogastric plexus contains not only postgan-
glionic fi bers derived from the lumbar sympathetic 
10 cm
7 cm
L2
Inferior vena cava
Aorta
Sympathetic
ganglia
Psoas major
muscle
Sympathetic
ganglia
 FIGURE 4722  Lumbar sympathetic block. 
1076 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
given within 2 weeks of pain onset but appear to be 
of little benefi t in the absence of neural compres-
sion or irritation. Long-term studies have failed to 
show any persistent benefi t aft er 3 months, and these 
injections may change the time course of pain relief 
without changing long-term outcomes. 
 Th e two most commonly used agents are meth-
ylprednisolone acetate (40–80 mg) and triamcino-
lone diacetate (40–80 mg). Dexamethasone is being 
used with increased frequency due to its smaller 
particulate size (smaller than an erythrocyte). 
Intravascular injection of steroid suspension with 
larger particulate size may lead to embolic compli-
cations. Th e steroid may be injected with diluent 
(saline) or local anesthetic in volumes of 6–10 mL or 
10–20 mL for lumbar and caudal injections, respec-
tively. Simultaneous injection of opioids off ers no 
added benefi t and may signifi cantly increase risks. 
Th e epidural needle should be cleared of the ste-
roid prior to its withdrawal to prevent formation 
of a fi stula tract or skin discoloration. Injection of 
local anesthetic along with the steroid can be help-
ful if the patient has signifi cant muscle spasm, but it 
is associated with risks of intrathecal, subdural, and 
intravascular injection. Th e presenting pain is oft en 
transiently intensifi ed following injection, and the 
local anesthetic provides immediate pain relief until 
the steroidal antiinfl ammatory eff ects take place, 
usually within 12–48 h. 
 Epidural steroid injections may be most eff ec-
tive when the injection is at the site of injury. Only 
a single injection is given if complete pain relief is 
achieved. If there is a good but temporary response, 
a second injection may be given 2–4 weeks later. 
Larger or more frequent doses increase the risk of 
adrenal suppression and systemic side eff ects. Most 
pain practitioners utilize fl uoroscopy for epidural 
injection and confi rm correct placement with injec-
tion of radiopaque contrast ( Figures 47–24 through 
 47–26 ). A  transforaminal epidural steroid injection 
may be more eff ective than the standard interlami-
nar epidural technique, especially for radicular pain. 
Th e needle is directed under fl uoroscopic guidance 
into the foramen of the aff ected nerve root; contrast 
is then injected to confi rm spread into the epidural 
space and absence of intravascular injection prior 
to steroid injection. Th is technique diff ers from a 
to the coccyx. Th is procedure can be facilitated with 
fl uoroscopy or ultrasound. Radiofrequency ablation, 
or in some cases a neurolytic injection, may provide 
longer duration of analgesia for this sympathetically 
mediated pain. 
 D. Complications 
 Intravascular injection and transient bowel or blad-
der dysfunction are possible. Alternative approaches 
involve placement of the needle through the ano-
coccygeal ligament, although these may have higher 
potential to perforate the rectum. 
 Intravenous Regional Block 
 A Bier block (see Chapter 46) utilizing local anes-
thetic solution with or without adjuvants can be 
used to interrupt sympathetic innervation to an 
extremity. A total volume of 50 mL of 0.5% lidocaine 
is typically injected, either alone or in combination 
with clonidine (150 mcg) and in some cases ketoro-
lac (15–30 mg). A tourniquet is placed proximally 
on the extremity, which is then elevated and exsan-
guinated using an Esmarch bandage. Th e tourniquet 
is infl ated to a pressure that is two times the systolic 
blood pressure, the Esmarch bandage is removed, 
and the limb is checked to be certain the pulse is 
absent and there is no evidence of blood fl ow. Th e 
solution is then injected and usually left  in place 
for at least 30 min, aft er which the tourniquet is 
released incrementally and the patient is observed 
for any signs or symptoms of local anesthetic toxic-
ity. Premature release of the tourniquet may result in 
seizure, hypotension, arrhythmia, edema, diarrhea, 
and nausea. Intravenous regional sympathetic block 
is a safe alternative to standard sympathetic blocks 
in patients with hemostatic defects. 
 4. Epidural Injections 
 Epidural steroid injections ( Figure 47–23 ) are used 
for symptomatic relief of pain associated with nerve 
root compression ( radiculopathy ). Pathological 
studies oft en demonstrate infl ammation following 
disc herniation. Clinical improvement appears to be 
correlated with the resolution of nerve root edema. 
Epidural steroid injections are clearly superior to 
local anesthetics alone. Th ey are most eff ective when 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1077 
 selective nerve root block (SNRB) in two important 
ways; with an SNRB, the needle does not enter the 
foramen and the injected solution tracks along the 
nerve but not into the epidural space. Th e SNRB may 
be helpful as a diagnostic procedure for the surgeon 
who is considering a foraminotomy at a particular 
aff ected level based upon imaging, clinical presenta-
tion, and the results of the SNRB. 
 Caudal injection may be used in patients with 
previous back surgery when scarring and anatomic 
distortion make lumbar epidural injections more 
diffi  cult. Unfortunately, migration of the steroid to 
the site of injury may not be optimal. Th e use of a 
catheter to direct the injection within the sacral and 
epidural canal may improve outcome. However, 
 FIGURE 4723  Epidural injection. 
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutaneous fat
Supraspinous
ligament
Interspinous
ligament
Ligamentum
flavum
Dura
Posterior
longitudinal
ligament
Anterior
longitudinal
ligament
Contrast in
epidural space
above the level of S2, there is a risk of thecal perfora-
tion with a stylet-guided catheter. Intrathecal steroid 
injections are not recommended because the ethyl-
ene glycol preservative in the suspension has been 
implicated in arachnoiditis following unintentional 
subarachnoid injections. 
 5. Radiofrequency 
Ablation & Cryoneurolysis 
 Percutaneous  radiofrequency ablation (RFA) relies 
on the heat produced by current fl ow from an active 
electrode that is incorporated at the tip of a special 
needle. Th e needle is positioned using fl uoroscopic 
guidance. Electrical stimulation (2 Hz for motor 
1078 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
responses, 50 Hz for sensory responses) and imped-
ance measurement via the electrode prior to abla-
tion also help confi rm correct electrode positioning. 
Depending on the location of the block, the heat-
ing temperature generated at the electrode is pre-
cisely controlled (60–90°C for 1–3 min) to ablate 
the nerve without causing excessive collateral tis-
sue damage. RFA is commonly used for trigeminal 
rhizotomy and medial branch (facet) rhizotomy. It 
has also been used for dorsal root rhizotomy and 
lumbar sympathectomy. Pain relief is usually lim-
ited to 3–12 months due to nerve regeneration aft er 
RFA. Th is may be eff ective for medial branches of 
the spinal nerves that innervate facet joints. Th e 
lesion from thermal RFA is typically ovoid in shape 
and dependent upon factors such as the gauge of 
the needle, the temperature of the needle tip, and 
the duration of the heating procedure. Cooling the 
RFA needle with a sterile water system may decrease 
the charring associated with thermal lesioning and 
extend the spread of the lesion while heating at 
lower temperatures. Pulsed radiofrequency at 42°C 
is also being evaluated for various pain conditions. 
 FIGURE 4724  Fluoroscopic image of a C7–T1 epidural 
steroid injection; anteroposterior view. Note the Tuohy 
needle advanced just to the right of midline for treatment 
of degenerative disc disease and right radicular pain. 
 FIGURE 4725  Fluoroscopic image of a C7–T1 
epidural steroid injection with contrast; lateral view. Note 
radiopaque contrast conﬁ rmation of the needle in the 
epidural space. Live ﬂ uoroscopy is used to minimize the 
risk of inadvertent intravascular injection. 
 FIGURE 4726  Lumbar epidural steroid injection, 
anteroposterior view. The epidural injection of contrast 
followed by local anesthetic and steroid solution results in 
spread at multiple levels of the epidural space and through 
the neuroforamen. 
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1079
 Temporary destruction of nerve fi bers or ganglia 
can be accomplished by injection of alcohol or phe-
nol. Th ese neurolytic agents are not selective, aff ect-
ing visceral, sensory, and motor fi bers equally. Ethyl 
alcohol (50–100%) causes extraction of membrane 
phospholipids and precipitation of lipoproteins in 
axons and Schwann cells, whereas phenol (6–12%) 
appears to coagulate proteins. Alcohol causes severe 
pain on injection, thus local anesthetic is usually 
administered fi rst. For peripheral nerve blocks, 
alcohol may be given undiluted, but for sympathetic 
blocks in which large volumes are injected, it is given 
in a 1:1 mixture with bupivacaine. Phenol is usually 
painless when injected either as an aqueous solution 
(6–8%) or in glycerol; a 12% phenol solution can be 
prepared in radiopaque contrast solution. 
 Neurolytic Techniques 
 Neurolytic celiac plexus or splanchnic nerve blocks 
may be eff ective for painful intraabdominal neo-
plasms, especially pancreatic cancer. Lumbar sym-
pathetic, hypogastric plexus, or ganglion impar 
neurolytic blocks can be used for pain secondary 
to pelvic neoplasms. Neurolytic saddle block can 
provide pain relief for patients with refractory pain 
from pelvic malignancy; however, bowel and blad-
der dysfunction should be expected. Neurolytic 
intercostal blocks can be helpful for patients with 
painful rib metastases. Additional neurodestructive 
procedures, such as pituitary adenolysis and cor-
dotomy, may be useful in end-of-life palliative care. 
 When considering any neurolytic technique, 
at least one diagnostic block with a local anesthetic 
solution alone should be used initially to confi rm the 
pain pathway(s) involved and to assess the potential 
effi  cacy of the planned neurolysis. Local anesthetic 
solution should again be injected immediately prior 
to the neurolytic agent under fl uoroscopic guidance. 
Following injection of any neurolytic agent, the nee-
dle must be cleared with air or saline prior to with-
drawal to prevent damage to superfi cial structures. 
 Many clinicians prefer alcohol for celiac plexus 
block and phenol for lumbar sympathetic block. 
For subarachnoid neurolytic techniques, very small 
amounts of neurolytic agent (0.1 mL) are injected. 
Alcohol is hypobaric, whereas phenol in glycerin is 
hyperbaric; the patient undergoing subarachnoid 
 Cryoanalgesia may produce temporary neu-
rolysis for weeks to months by freezing and thawing 
tissue. Th e temperature at the tip of a cryoprobe rap-
idly drops as gas (carbon dioxide or nitrous oxide) 
at a high pressure is allowed to expand. Th e probe 
tip, which can achieve temperatures of –50°C to 
–70°C, is introduced via a 12- to 16-gauge catheter. 
Electrical stimulation (2–5 Hz for motor responses 
and 50–100 Hz for sensory responses) helps confi rm 
correct positioning of the probe. Two or more 2-min 
cycles of freezing and thawing are usually admin-
istered. Cryoanalgesia is most commonly used to 
achieve long-term blockade of peripheral nerves. 
It may be particularly useful for post-thoracotomy 
pain. Patients oft en have neuropathic pain follow-
ing thoracotomy or similar surgery. Diagnostic 
intercostal nerve blocks may be helpful to identify 
the nerve(s) that may be contributing to chronic 
thoracic or abdominal pain, and intercostal nerve 
blocks may also be utilized for longer term analge-
sia. Th e principal risks of intercostal nerve blocks 
are pneumothorax and local anesthetic toxicity. RFA 
of the intercostal nerves may be helpful as a pallia-
tive therapy for intercostal neuralgia, although there 
is a risk of deaff erentation pain aft er this procedure. 
 6. Chemical Neurolysis 
 Neurolytic blocks are indicated for patients 
with severe, intractable cancer pain in whom 
more conventional therapy proves inadequate or 
conventional analgesic modalities are accompanied 
by unacceptable side eff ects. Th e most common 
chemical neurolytic techniques utilized for cancer 
patients are celiac plexus, lumbar sympathetic chain, 
hypogastric plexus, and ganglion impar blocks. 
Chemical neurolysis may also occasionally be used 
in patients with refractory benign neuralgia and, 
rarely, in patients with peripheral vascular disease. 
Th ese blocks can be associated with considerable 
morbidity (loss of motor and sensory function), so 
patients must be selected carefully, and only aft er 
thorough consideration of alternative analgesic 
modalities. Moreover, although the initial result 
may be excellent, the original pain may recur, or 
new (deaff erentation or central) pain will develop, 
in a majority of patients within weeks to months. 
22
1080 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Diff erential epidural blocks may be used for 
thoracic pain when the techniques for sympathetic 
blockade carry a signifi cant risk of pneumothorax 
( Table 47–16 ). Aft er each epidural injection, the 
patient is evaluated for pain relief, signs of sym-
pathetic blockade (a decrease in blood pressure), 
sensation to pinprick and light touch, and motor 
function. If the pain disappears aft er the saline 
injection, the patient either has psychogenic pain 
(usually a profound long-lasting eff ect) or is dis-
playing a placebo eff ect (usually short lasting). If 
pain relief coincides with isolated signs of sympa-
thetic blockade, it is likely mediated by sympathetic 
fi bers. If pain relief only follows somatosensory 
blockade, it is likely mediated by somatic fi bers. 
Lastly, if the pain persists even aft er signs of motor 
blockade, the pain is either central (supraspinal) or 
psychogenic. 
 Th e diff erential epidural block carries the risk 
of any neuraxial block, and the possibility of hypo-
tension and blocking cardiac accelerator fi bers at 
T1–T4. Th e level should not extend above the T5 
dermatome due to these risks. Following catheter 
insertion, injections should be administered with 
the patient in a monitored setting for the rest of this 
procedure. 
 Although diff erential epidural blockade has 
limitations, it may be helpful to identify primarily 
centralized pain when a patient continues to have a 
signifi cant level of pain despite multilevel dermato-
mal blockade over the painful region. It is unlikely 
that a subsequent nerve block would help to treat the 
painful condition. 
 When it is thought that a patient may have 
abdominal pain from the anterior abdominal wall, 
neurolysis is carefully positioned so that the solu-
tion travels to the appropriate level and is confi ned 
to the dorsal horn region following subarachnoid 
administration. 
 Cancer patients frequently receive anticoagula-
tion therapy if they are at elevated risk for venous 
thromboembolic phenomena. When such a patient 
has discontinued anticoagulant medication in prep-
aration for a diagnostic local anesthetic block, it may 
be more practical to obtain consent for a neurolytic 
procedure in advance and to follow the diagnostic 
block immediately with chemical neurolysis if the 
diagnostic procedure has resulted in pain relief. 
 7. Diﬀ erential Neural Blockade 
 Pharmacological or anatomic diff erential neural 
blockade has been advocated as a method of dis-
tinguishing somatic, sympathetic, and psychogenic 
pain mechanisms. Th e procedure is controversial 
owing to the challenges of interpreting the data and 
the inability to defi ne exactly which nerve fi bers or 
pathways are blocked. Th eoretically, the pharmaco-
logical approach relies on the diff erential sensitivity 
of nerve fi bers to local anesthetics. Preganglionic 
sympathetic (B) fi bers are reported to be most sen-
sitive, closely followed by pain (Aδ) fi bers, somato-
sensory (Aβ) fi bers, motor fi bers (Aα), and fi nally 
C fi bers. By using diff erent concentrations of local 
anesthetic, it may be possible to selectively block 
certain types of fi bers while preserving the func-
tion of others. Th e challenge is that the critical con-
centration needed to block sympathetic fi bers can 
vary considerably between patients, and conduction 
block by local anesthetics is dependent not only on 
fi ber size but also on the duration of contact and fre-
quency of impulses conducted. Many clinicians have 
therefore abandoned the use of pharmacological dif-
ferential neural blocks in favor of anatomic diff eren-
tial blockade. 
 Stellate ganglion blocks can be used to selec-
tively block sympathetic fi bers to the head, neck, and 
arm. Celiac plexus, hypogastric plexus, and lumbar 
paravertebral sympathetic blocks can be used for 
sympathetic blocks of the abdomen, pelvis, and leg, 
respectively. Selective nerve root, intercostal, cervi-
cal plexus, brachial plexus, or lumbosacral plexus 
blocks may be used for somatic nerve blockade. 
 TABLE 4716 Solutions for diﬀ erential 
epidural blockade. 
Solution
Epidural 1 
Placebo
Saline
Sympatholytic
0.5% lidocaine
Somatic
1% lidocaine
All fibers
2% lidocaine
 1 Chloroprocaine may be used instead.
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1081
thought to produce analgesia by directly stimulat-
ing large Aβ fi bers in the dorsal columns of the spi-
nal cord. Proposed mechanisms include activation 
of descending modulating systems and inhibition of 
sympathetic outfl ow. 
 Spinal Cord Stimulation 
 Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) may be eff ec-
tive for neuropathic pain; accepted indi-
cations include sympathetically mediated pain, 
spinal cord lesions with localized segmental pain, 
phantom limb pain, ischemic lower extremity pain 
due to peripheral vascular disease, adhesive arach-
noiditis, peripheral neuropathies, post-thoracotomy 
pain, intercostal neuralgia, postherpetic neuralgia, 
angina, visceral abdominal pain, and visceral pelvic 
pain. Patients with persisting pain aft er back surgery, 
which is typically a mixed nociceptive–neuropathic 
disorder, also appear to benefi t from SCS. 
 Temporary electrodes are initially placed in the 
posterior epidural space and connected to an exter-
nal generator to evaluate effi  cacy in a 5- to 7-day 
trial ( Figures 47–27 and  47–28 ). Th e trial may be 
extended, particularly if it allows a patient, such as 
one with CRPS, to tolerate more aggressive physical 
therapy. If a favorable response is obtained, a fully 
23
a  transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block may be 
performed using ultrasound guidance. Th is may 
off er potential short- or long-term relief and can be 
considered as an alternative to diff erential epidural 
blockade. If no relief is obtained, the pain may have 
a visceral origin or a central cause. Visceral pain may 
best respond to a celiac or splanchnic nerve block 
and possibly to subsequent splanchnic RFA. Patients 
with pain that is primarily of a central origin may 
respond to multidisciplinary therapy, including 
counseling and biofeedback training. 
 8. Neuromodulation 
 Electrical stimulation of the nervous system can 
produce analgesia in patients with acute and chronic 
pain. Current may be applied transcutaneously, epi-
durally, or by electrodes implanted into the central 
nervous system. 
 Transcutaneous Electrical 
Nerve Stimulation 
 Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) 
is thought to produce analgesia by stimulating 
large aff erent fi bers. It may have a role for patients 
with mild to moderate acute pain and those with 
chronic low back pain, arthritis, and neuropathic 
pain. Th e gate theory of pain processing suggests 
that the aff erent input from large epicritic fi bers 
competes with that from the smaller pain fi bers. 
An alternative theory proposes that at high rates 
of stimulation, TENS causes conduction block in 
small aff erent pain fi bers. With conventional TENS, 
electrodes are applied to the same dermatome as 
the pain and are stimulated periodically by direct 
current from a generator (usually for 30 min sev-
eral times a day). A current of 10–30 mA with a 
pulse width of 50–80 µs is applied at a frequency of 
80–100 Hz. Some patients whose pain is refractory 
to conventional TENS respond to low-frequency 
TENS (acupuncture-like TENS), which employs 
stimuli with a pulse width greater than 200 µs at 
frequencies less than 10 Hz (for 5–15 min). Unlike 
conventional TENS, low-frequency stimulation is 
at least partly reversed by naloxone, suggesting a 
role for endogenous opioids. Th is technique is also 
called  dorsal column stimulation because it was 
Two leads
advanced in
epidural space
Tuohy
epidural
needles
Patient in
prone position
Midline
incision
 FIGURE 4727  Patient positioning for insertion of a 
spinal cord stimulator. 
1082 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
FIGURE 4729 Occipital nerve stimulator placement, 
anteroposterior view. Following placement of right 
occipital nerve stimulator lead below the nuchal ridge, 
a left occipital nerve stimulator lead has been advanced 
through the introducer needle.
implantable system is inserted. Unfortunately, the 
eff ectiveness of the technique decreases with time in 
some patients. Complications include infection, lead 
migration, and lead breakage. 
 Peripheral Nerve Stimulation 
 Peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS) diff ers from 
SCS in that leads are placed in close anatomic prox-
imity to an injured peripheral nerve. Th e leads may 
be placed percutaneously, with or without ultra-
sound guidance, or surgically under direct vision of 
the nerve. Occipital nerve stimulators are one form 
of peripheral nerve stimulator that may be helpful 
in treating occipital neuralgia and migraine head-
ache ( Figure 47–29 ). 
 Deep Brain Stimulation 
 Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is used for intrac-
table cancer pain and for intractable nonmalig-
nant neuropathic pain. Electrodes are implanted 
stereotactically into the periaqueductal and peri-
ventricular gray areas for nociceptive pain, usually 
in patients with cancer or chronic low back pain. 
 FIGURE 4728  2-lead SCS placement. 
A: Anteroposterior view. The right contact lead has been 
advanced to its ﬁ nal position at the top of T10. The left 
lead is advanced through the Tuohy needle. B: Lateral 
view. The ﬁ rst lead is in position, with the left lead entering 
the epidural space. 
A
B
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management
1083
with the aid of family members and medical pro-
viders in order to nurture negative reinforcers and 
minimize positive reinforcers. 
 Relaxation techniques teach the patient to alter 
the arousal response and the increase in sympa-
thetic tone associated with pain. Th e most com-
monly employed technique is a progressive muscle 
relaxation exercise. Biofeedback and hypnosis are 
closely related interventions. All forms of biofeed-
back are based on the principle that patients can 
be taught to control involuntary physiological 
parameters. Once profi cient in the technique, the 
patient may be able induce a relaxation response 
and more eff ectively apply coping skills to con-
trol physiological factors (eg, muscle tension) that 
worsen pain. Th e most commonly utilized physi-
ological parameters in biofeedback are muscle 
tension (electromyographic biofeedback) and tem-
perature (thermal biofeedback). Th e eff ectiveness 
of hypnosis varies considerably among individuals. 
Hypnotic techniques teach patients to alter pain 
perception by having them focus on other sensa-
tions, localize the pain to another site, and dissoci-
ate themselves from a painful experience through 
imagery. Patients with chronic headaches and 
musculoskeletal disorders benefi t most from these 
relaxation techniques. 
 Physical Therapy 
 Heat and cold can provide pain relief by alleviat-
ing muscle spasm. In addition, heat decreases joint 
stiff ness and increases blood fl ow, and cold vaso-
constricts and can reduce tissue edema. Th e analge-
sic action of heat and cold may at least partially be 
explained by the gate theory of pain processing. 
 Superfi cial heating modalities include con-
ductive (hot packs, paraffi  n baths, fl uidotherapy), 
convective (hydrotherapy), and radiant (infrared) 
techniques. Techniques for application of deep heat 
include ultrasound as well as shortwave and micro-
wave diathermy. Th ese modalities are more eff ective 
for pain involving deep joints and muscles. Cold is 
most eff ective for pain associated with acute injuries 
and edema. When applied selectively, cold can also 
relieve muscle spasm. Application may take the form 
of cold packs, ice massage, or vapocoolant sprays 
(ethyl chloride or fl uoromethane). 
For neuropathic pain, the electrodes are frequently 
implanted into the ventral posterolateral and ven-
tral posteromedial thalamic nuclei. DBS may also 
be helpful for patients with movement disorders, 
headache, and neuropsychiatric disorders. Th e most 
serious complications are intracranial hemorrhage 
and infection. 
 9. Vertebral Augmentation 
 Patients with pathological or osteoporotic ver-
tebral compression fractures may benefi t from 
vertebral augmentation with polymethylmethac-
rylate cement.  Vertebroplasty involves injection of 
the cement through the trocar needle.  Kyphoplasty 
involves infl ation of a balloon inserted through a 
percutaneously placed trocar needle, with subse-
quent injection of cement. Anteroposterior and lat-
eral fl uoroscopic views facilitate optimal placement 
of the cement. For patients with a sacral insuffi  ciency 
fracture, cement  sacroplasty may help stabilize the 
fracture. Risks of vertebral augmentation include 
direct nerve injury (due to placement of the trocar 
needle), hemorrhage, cement extravasation, and 
embolic events. 
 MULTIDISCIPLINARY 
TREATMENT 
 Psychological Interventions 
 Psychological techniques, including cognitive ther-
apy, behavioral therapy, biofeedback, relaxation 
techniques, and hypnosis, are most eff ective when 
employed by psychologists or psychiatrists. Cogni-
tive interventions are based on the assumption that a 
patient’s attitude toward pain can infl uence the per-
ception of pain. Maladaptive attitudes contribute to 
suff ering and disability. Th e patient is taught skills 
for coping with pain either individually or in group 
therapy. Th e most common techniques include 
attention diversion and imagery.  Behavioral (oper-
ant) therapy is based on the premise that behavior in 
patients with chronic pain is determined by conse-
quences of the behavior.  Positive reinforcers (such as 
attention from a spouse) tend to enable or intensify 
the pain, whereas  negative reinforcers reduce pain. 
Th e therapist’s role is to guide behavior modifi cation 
24
1084 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management 
 Horlocker TT, Neal JM, Rathmell JP: 2011 Practice 
advisories by the American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine: Grading the evidence 
and making the grade. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2011;36:1. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Aeschbach A, Mekhail NA: Common nerve blocks in 
chronic pain management. Anesthesiol Clin N Am 
2000;18:429. 
 Christo PJ: Opioid eff ectiveness and side eff ects in 
chronic pain. Anesthesiol Clin N Am 2003;21:699. 
 Bridges D, Th ompson SWN, Rice ASC: Mechanisms of 
neuropathic pain. Br J Anaesth 2001;87:12. 
 Bruehl S: An update on the pathophysiology of 
complex regional pain syndrome. Anesthesiology 
2010;113:713. 
 Chopko B, Caraway DL: MiDAS I (Mild Decompression 
Alternative to Open Surgery): A preliminary report 
of a prospective, multi-center clinical study. Pain 
Physician 2010;13:369. 
 Cohen SP, Liao W, Gupta A, et al: Ketamine in pain 
management. Adv Psychosom Med 2011;30:139. 
 Cohen SP, Rathmell JP: Tackling the technical challenges 
that hinder the success of facet joint radiofrequency 
treatment for spinal pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2010;35:327. 
 Deer TR, Kapural L: New image-guided ultra-minimally 
invasive lumbar decompression method: Th e MILD 
procedure. Pain Physician 2010;13:35. 
 Frey ME, Manchikanti L, Benyamin RM, et al: Spinal 
cord stimulation for patients with failed back surgery 
syndrome: A systematic review. Pain Physician 
2009;12:379. 
 Guastella V, Mick G, Soriano C, et al: A prospective 
study of neuropathic pain induced by thoracotomy: 
Incidence, clinical description and diagnosis. Pain 
2011;152:74. 
 Hollmann MW, Durieux ME: Local anesthetics and the 
infl ammatory response: A new therapeutic indication? 
Anesthesiology 2000;93:858. 
 Huntoon MA, Burgherr AH: Ultrasound-guided 
permanent implantation of peripheral nerve 
stimulation (PNS) system for neuropathic pain of 
the extremities: Original cases and outcomes. Pain 
Medicine 2009;10:1369. 
 Kapural L, Narouze SN, Janicki TI, et al: Spinal cord 
stimulation is an eff ective treatment for the chronic 
intractable visceral pelvic pain. Pain Medicine 
2006;7:440. 
 Exercise should be part of any rehabilitation 
program for chronic pain. A graded exercise pro-
gram prevents joint stiff ness, muscle atrophy, and 
contractures, all of which can contribute to the 
patient’s pain and functional disabilities.  McKenzie 
exercises are particularly helpful for patients with 
lumbar disc displacement. Patients may state that 
physical therapy has not helped in the past. Th e effi  -
cacy of previous physical therapy techniques should 
be assessed, and the appropriateness of current 
physical therapy sessions and of the home exercise 
program should also be evaluated. By facilitating 
increased range of motion and providing constant 
resistance, aquatherapy may be particularly helpful 
for patients who may not be able to tolerate other 
forms of therapy. 
 Acupuncture 
 Acupuncture can be a useful adjunct for 
patients with chronic pain, particularly that 
associated with chronic musculoskeletal disorders 
and headaches. Th e technique involves insertion of 
needles into discrete anatomically defi ned points, 
called  meridians . Stimulation of the needle aft er 
insertion takes the form of twirling or of application 
of a mild electrical current. Insertion points appear 
to be unrelated to the conventional anatomy of the 
nervous system. Although the scientifi c literature 
concerning the mechanism of action and role of 
acupuncture in pain management is controversial, 
some studies suggest that acupuncture stimulates 
the release of endogenous opioids, as its eff ects can 
be antagonized by naloxone. 
 GUIDELINES 
 American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Chronic Pain Management; American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine: Practice 
guidelines for chronic pain management: An updated 
report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Chronic Pain Management and the 
American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Medicine. Anesthesiology 2010;112:810. 
 Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, et al: Diagnosis and treatment 
of low back pain: A joint clinical practice guideline 
from the American College of Physicians and the 
American Pain Society. Ann Intern Med 2007;147:478. 
25
 
CHAPTER 47 Chronic Pain Management 
1085 
 Soliman LM, Narouze SN: Ultrasound-guided 
transversus abdominis plane block for the 
management of abdominal pain: An alternative to 
the diff erential epidural block. Tech Reg Anesth Pain 
Manage 2009;13:117. 
 Tarver JM, Rathmell JP, Alsofrom GF: Lumbar 
discography. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2001;26:263. 
 Vad VB, Bhat AL, Lutz GE, et al: Transforaminal 
epidural steroid injections in lumbosacral 
radiculopathy—a prospective randomized study. 
Spine 2002;27:11. 
 van Eerd M, Patijn J, Lataster A, et al: 5. Cervical facet 
pain. Pain Pract 2010;10:113-123. 
 van Eijs F, Stanton-Hicks M, Van Zundert J, et al: 
Evidence-based interventional pain medicine 
according to clinical diagnoses. 16. Complex regional 
pain syndrome. Pain Practice 2011;11:70. 
 Wolfe F, Clauw DJ, Fitzcharles MA, et al: Th e 
American College of Rheumatology preliminary 
diagnostic criteria for fi bromyalgia and 
measurement of symptom severity. Arthritis Care 
Res 2010;62:600. 
 Manchikanti L, Singh V, Datta S, et al; American Society 
of Interventional Pain Physicians: Comprehensive 
review of epidemiology, scope, and impact of spinal 
pain. Pain Physician 2009;12:E35. 
 Mekhail NA, Cheng J, Narouze S, et al: Clinical 
applications of neurostimulation: Forty years later. 
Pain Pract 2010;10:103. 
 Narouze SN: Ultrasound-guided interventional 
procedures in pain management: Evidence-based 
medicine. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010;35:S55. 
 Nguyen H, Garber JE, Hassenbusch SJ: Spinal analgesics. 
Anesthesiol Clin North Am 2003;21:805. 
 Pluijms W, Huygen F, Cheng J, et al: Evidence-based 
interventional pain medicine according to clinical 
diagnoses. 18. Painful diabetic polyneuropathy. Pain 
Pract 2011;11:191. 
 Raja SN, Grabow TS: Complex regional pain syndrome 
I (refl ex sympathetic dystrophy). Anesthesiology 
2002;96:1254. 
 Rathmell JP, Aprill C, Bogduk N: Cervical transforaminal 
injection of steroids. Anesthesiology 2004;100:1595. 
 Rathmell JP, Michna E, Fitzgibbon DR, et al: Injury 
and liability associated with cervical procedures for 
chronic pain. Anesthesiology 2011;114:918. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1087
K E Y C O N C E P T S
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Perioperative Pain 
Management & 
Enhanced Outcomes 
 Francesco Carli, MD, MPhil and Gabriele Baldini, MD, MSc 48
A well-functioning enhanced recovery 
program (ERP) uses evidence-based 
practices to decrease variation in clinical 
management, minimize organ dysfunction, 
and accelerate convalescence; it requires 
adjustments in multiple aspects of care, 
including surgical and anesthetic techniques, 
nursing care, physiotherapy, and nutrition 
support. 
Persistent postsurgical pain—chronic 
pain that continues beyond the typical 
healing period of 1–2 months following 
surgery, or well past the normal period for 
postoperative follow-up—is increasingly 
acknowledged as a common and signiﬁ cant 
problem following surgery. 
The magnitude of the surgical stress 
response is related to the intensity of the 
surgical stimulus, can be ampliﬁ ed by 
other factors, including hypothermia and 
psychological stress, and can be moderated 
by perioperative interventions, including 
deeper planes of general anesthesia, neural 
blockade, and reduction in the degree of 
surgical invasiveness. 
Neuraxial blockade of nociceptive stimuli 
by epidural and spinal local anesthetics 
has been shown to blunt the metabolic 
and neuroendocrine stress response to 
1
2
3
4
surgery. In major open abdominal and 
thoracic procedures, thoracic epidural 
blockade with local anesthetic provides 
excellent analgesia, facilitates mobilization 
and physical therapy, and decreases the 
incidence and severity of ileus. 
By sparing opioid use and minimizing the 
incidence of systemic opioid-related side 
eﬀ ects, epidural analgesia facilitates earlier 
mobilization and earlier resumption of oral 
nutrition, expediting exercise activity and 
attenuating loss of body mass. 
Continuous peripheral nerve blocks with 
local anesthetics block aﬀ erent nociceptive 
pathways and are an excellent way to reduce 
the incidence of opioid-related side eﬀ ects 
and facilitate recovery. 
Lidocaine (intravenous bolus of 100 mg 
or 1.5–2 mg/kg, followed by continuous 
intravenous infusion of 1.5–3 mg/kg/h or
2–3 mg/h) has analgesic, antihyperalgesic, 
and antiinﬂ ammatory properties. 
Multimodal analgesia combines diﬀ erent 
classes of medications, having diﬀ erent 
(multimodal) pharmacological mechanisms 
of action and additive or synergistic 
eﬀ ects, to control multiple perioperative 
pathophysiological factors that lead to 
postoperative pain and its sequelae. 
5
6
7
8
—Continued next page
1088 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
benefi ts when used in isolation, into a tightly coor-
dinated eff ort that has a synergistic, benefi cial 
eff ect on surgical outcomes. 
 Such coordinated, multidisciplinary periopera-
tive care programs are termed  enhanced recovery pro-
grams (ERPs),  fast-track surgery , or  enhanced recovery 
aft er surgery (ERAS) ( Figure 48–1 ).  A well-
functioning ERP uses evidence-based prac-
tices to decrease variation in clinical management, 
minimize organ dysfunction, and accelerate conva-
lescence ( Figure 48–2 ). Although many 12s 
in the surgical literature have highlighted the positive 
impact of such programs on surgical outcomes, 
reports documenting the role of anesthesia and anal-
gesia in these programs are few. Another challenge is 
determining how to assess the impact of anesthetic 
management on outcomes in an ERP. Hospital length 
of stay is the most commonly used measure of suc-
cess, but in many systems timing of hospital dis-
charge is more directly related to administrative and 
1
 Evolution of Enhanced 
Recovery Programs 
 Despite increasing numbers of surgical patients 
who present with complex surgical problems and 
numerous medical comorbidities, major advances 
in surgical and anesthetic management have pro-
gressively decreased perioperative mortality and 
morbidity. Further improvement in perioperative 
outcomes, highlighted by accelerated postopera-
tive convalescence and decreasing occurrence of 
perioperative complications, will depend on con-
tinued evolution of an integrated, multidisciplinary 
team approach to perioperative care that requires 
adjustments in multiple aspects of care, including 
surgical and anesthetic techniques, nursing care, 
physiotherapy, and nutrition support. Th e goal is 
to combine individual evidence-based elements of 
perioperative care, each of which may have modest 
Continued—
recovery from surgery and improve 
analgesia and patient satisfaction. 
Postoperative ileus delays enteral feeding, 
causes patient discomfort, and is one of 
the most common causes of prolonged 
postoperative hospital stay. Nasogastric 
tubes should be discouraged whenever 
possible or used for only a very short 
period of time, even in gastric and hepatic 
surgery. Multimodal analgesia and 
nonopioid analgesia techniques shorten 
the duration of postoperative ileus. 
Because either excessive, or excessively 
restricted, perioperative ﬂ uid therapy may 
increase the incidence and severity of 
postoperative ileus, a goal-directed ﬂ uid 
strategy should be selected to decrease 
postoperative morbidities and enhance 
recovery. 
12
13
 The addition of nonsteroidal 
antiinﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to 
systemic opioids diminishes postoperative 
pain intensity, reduces the opioid 
requirement by approximately 30%, and 
decreases opioid-related side eﬀ ects such 
as postoperative nausea and vomiting and 
sedation. However, NSAIDs may increase the 
risk of gastrointestinal and postoperative 
bleeding, decrease kidney function, and 
impair wound healing. 
 Opioid administration by patient-controlled 
analgesia provides better pain control, 
greater patient satisfaction, and fewer opioid 
side eﬀ ects when compared with on-request 
parenteral opioid administration. 
 Single-shot and continuous peripheral 
nerve blockade is frequently utilized 
for fast-track ambulatory and inpatient 
orthopedic surgery, and can accelerate 
9
10
11
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes
1089
eff ects of the intraoperative neuroendocrine stress 
response, and by providing pain and symptom 
 control to facilitate the postoperative recovery. In 
endeavoring to do so, the anesthesiologist must 
become a perioperative physician and an active par-
ticipant in the surgical team. 
 Th e problem of  persistent postsurgical pain , 
defi ned as chronic pain that continues beyond 
the typical healing period of 1–2 months following 
surgery—or well past the normal period for post-
operative follow-up by anesthesia providers—is 
increasingly acknowledged as a common and sig-
nifi cant issue following surgery. Th e incidence of 
persistent postsurgical pain may exceed 30% aft er 
some operations, especially amputations, thora-
cotomy, mastectomy, and inguinal herniorrha-
phy. Although the cause is unclear, several risk 
factors  have been identifi ed ( Figure 48–3 ), and 
aggressive, multimodal perioperative pain control 
is oft en suggested as a fundamental preemptive 
strategy. 
2
organizational issues than to discrete milestones in 
the patient’s postoperative recovery. Little research 
has been undertaken to defi ne the process of postop-
erative recovery, and few outcome measures are 
currently available to confi rm that postoperative 
recovery has been accomplished for a given surgical 
disease. Other measures of successful implementa-
tion of ERPs are reduced readmission and complica-
tion rates. 
 It is logical to assume that more eff ective anes-
thetic interventions will reduce pain, facilitate ear-
lier postoperative mobilization, and allow earlier 
resumption of oral feeding. In this context, the 
role of the anesthesia provider must evolve from 
merely providing satisfactory anesthetic conditions 
throughout the operation to a focus on enhancing 
overall perioperative care through techniques that 
shorten postoperative convalescence and reduce the 
likelihood of perioperative complications. Th ese 
goals can be achieved by optimizing the patient’s 
preoperative condition, by ablating the adverse 
Preadmission
counseling
No bowel
preparation
Fluid and
CHO-loading/ no fasting
No premedication
No NG tubes
Mid-thoracic epidural
anesthesia/analgesia
Short-acting
anesthetic agent
Avoidance of
sodium/fluid
overload
Short incisions,
no drains
Warm air body
heating in
operating room
Routine
mobilization
care pathway
Nonopiate oral
analgesics/NSAIDs
Prevention of nausea
and vomiting
Stimulation
of gut motility
Early removal
of catheters
Perioperative
oral nutrition
Audit of
compliance/
outcomes
ERAS
 FIGURE 481  Perioperative elements contributing 
to enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS). CHO, 
carbohydrate; NG, nasogastric; NSAID, nonsteroidal 
antiinﬂ ammatory drug. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Fearon KC, Ljungqvist O, Von Meyenfeldt M, et al: Enhanced recovery 
after surgery: A consensus review of clinical care for patients 
undergoing colonic resection. Clin Nut 2005;24:466.) 
1090 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
 Preoperative Risk 
Assessment & Optimization 
of Functional Status 
 Identifi cation of patients at risk for intraopera-
tive and postoperative complications, along with 
preoperative eff orts focusing on any comorbidi-
ties, can improve surgical recovery. Preoperative 
assessment is discussed in detail in Chapter 18. 
Although international guidelines evaluating the 
risk for developing cardiovascular, respiratory, or 
metabolic complications have been extensively 
reviewed and published, little attention has been 
given to assessment and optimization of preopera-
tive functional and physiological status. Nonethe-
less, some recommendations can be made. For 
example, routine use of β blockers, especially in 
 Anesthetic Management–
Related Factors Contributing 
to Enhanced Recovery 
 PREOPERATIVE PERIOD 
 Patient Education 
 Cooperation from the patient and family is essential 
if an ERP is to be eff ectively implemented. Preop-
erative teaching must use plain language and avoid 
medical jargon. Well-designed printed materials, 
such as procedure-specifi c booklets can be given 
to patients and families with the advice to keep 
them at the bedside and utilize them during the 
hospitalization. 
Minimally invasive surgery
Other interventions
• Prevention of intraoperative 
hypothermia
• Pre- and intraoperative fluid 
optimization
• Preoperative carbohydrate
Surgical stress
Pain, catabolism, immuno-dysfunction, 
nausea/vomiting, ileus, impaired 
pulmonary function, increased cardiac 
demands, coagulatory-fibrinolytic 
dysfunction, cerebral dysfunction, fluid 
homeostasis alteration, sleep 
disturbances and fatigue
Afferent neural blockade
• Local infiltration 
anesthesia
• Peripheral nerve blocks, 
epidural/spinal 
anesthesia/analgesia
Pharmacological intervention
• Nonopioid, mulitmodal analgesia
• Antiemetics
• Glucocorticoids (antiinflammatory, 
antiemetic, analgesic) 
• Statins
• β blockade
• α2 agonists
• Insulin (glycemic 
control/antiinflammatory), anabolic 
agents (growth hormone, androgens)
• Nutrition
• Systemic local anesthetics
 FIGURE 482  Multimodal interventions to attenuate the surgical stress response.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Kehlet H, 
Wilmore DW: Evidence-based surgical care and the evolution of fast-track surgery. Ann Surg 2008;248:189.) 
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes 
1091 
Database, can be used to compare outcomes 
among institutions. 
 Smoking & Alcohol Cessation 
 Th e preoperative period provides not only a time to 
evaluate surgical risk and optimize medical condi-
tions, but also an opportunity to modify habits that 
can signifi cantly aff ect a patient’s short-term and 
long-term health and quality of life. Smoking, drug 
abuse, and excessive alcohol use are risk factors for 
the development of postoperative complications, 
and preoperative and postoperative interventions 
aimed at modifying these habits can improve sur-
gical recovery. A recent meta-analysis found that 
patients at low risk, has been associated with an 
increased risk of stroke; however, perioperative β 
blockers should be continued in patients already 
receiving this therapy. Perioperative statins appear 
to decrease postoperative cardiovascular compli-
cations and should not be abruptly discontinued 
perioperatively. Several procedure-specifi c scor-
ing systems based on patient comorbidity, type 
of surgery, and biochemical data are being used 
to predict postoperative mortality and morbidity. 
In addition, risk-adjusted scoring systems, such 
as the American College of Surgeons’ National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) 
and the Society of Th oracic Surgeons’ National 
Delayed
postoperative period
Delayed postoperative period
Pain
Patient
Postoperative
adjuvant
therapies
• Postoperative 
pain-hyperalgesia
• Chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy
• Repeat surgery
• Psychosocial factors
Preoperative
Patient
Comorbid
conditions
Environment
(trauma,
stress)
• Anxiety
• Catastrophising
• Depression
• Genes
• Impaired pain 
modulation
• Life trauma
• Other pain states
• Sleep deprivation
• Stress
Preoperative
Surgery
Patient
Anesthesia
Analgesia
Intraoperative and postoperative
healing period
Intraoperative and
postoperative
healing period
• Nerve injury
• Tissue ischemia
• Surgical technique
• Anesthetic technique
• Pain faciliation or 
amplification
• Proinflammatory state
Persistent postsurgical pain
 FIGURE 483  Risk factors for persistent postsurgical pain.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Wu CL, Raja SN: Treatment of acute 
postoperative pain. Lancet 2011;377:2215.) 
1092 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
risk of aspiration. Further studies of preopera-
tive oral fl uid and carbohydrate administration are 
needed to elaborate their role in improving short- 
and long-term perioperative outcomes. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE PERIOD 
 Antithrombotic Prophylaxis 
 Antithrombotic prophylaxis reduces perioperative 
venous thromboembolism and related morbidity 
and mortality. Both pneumatic compression devices 
and anticoagulant medications are now commonly 
used. Because neuraxial anesthesia techniques are 
commonly employed for many patients during 
major abdominal, vascular, thoracic and orthope-
dic surgery, appropriate timing and administration 
of antithrombotic agents in these cases is of critical 
importance in order to avoid the risk of epidural 
hematoma. International recommendations on the 
management of anticoagulated patients receiving 
regional anesthesia have been recently revised and 
published and are discussed in other chapters. 
 Antibiotic Prophylaxis 
 Appropriate selection and timing of preoperative 
antibiotic prophylaxis reduces the risk of surgi-
cal site infections. Antibiotics should be adminis-
tered within 1 h before skin incision and, based on 
their plasma half-life, should be repeated during 
prolonged surgeries to ensure adequate tissue con-
centrations. Antibiotic prophylaxis of surgical site 
infections should be discontinued within 24 h aft er 
surgery (current guidelines permit cardiothoracic 
patients to receive antibiotics for 48 h following 
surgery). 
 Strategies to Minimize the 
Surgical Stress Response 
 Th e surgical stress response is characterized by neu-
roendocrine, metabolic, and infl ammatory changes 
initiated by the surgical incision and subsequent 
procedures that can adversely aff ect organ function 
and perioperative outcomes, especially in elderly 
and physiologically compromised patients. Th ese 
responses include a transient but reversible state of 
insulin resistance, characterized by decreased 
preoperative smoking cessation, for any type of 
surgery, reduced postoperative complications by 
41%, especially those related to wound healing and 
the lungs. 
 Many psychological and pharmacological strat-
egies are available to help patients stop excessive 
alcohol consumption and reduce the risk of alco-
hol withdrawal. However, the optimal perioperative 
program has not been identifi ed. 
 Guidelines for Food & Fluid Intake 
 Preoperative fasting and surgical stress induce insu-
lin resistance. Furthermore, patients who are not 
allowed to drink fl uids aft er an overnight fast and 
patients who receive a bowel preparation experience 
dehydration, which may increase discomfort and 
cause drowsiness and orthostatic lightheadedness. 
Although fasting has been advocated as a preopera-
tive strategy to minimize the risk of pulmonary aspi-
ration during induction of anesthesia, this benefi t 
must be weighed against the detrimental aspects of 
this practice. 
 For instance, research suggests that avoiding 
preoperative fasting and ensuring adequate hydra-
tion and energy supply may moderate postoperative 
insulin resistance. All international fasting guide-
lines allow clear fl uids up to 2 h prior to induction 
of anesthesia in patients at low risk for pulmonary 
aspiration (see Chapter 18). Th is practice has proved 
to be safe even in morbidly obese patients. Further-
more, recent studies have shown that preoperative 
administration of carbohydrate drinks (one 100-g 
dose administered the night before surgery and a 
second 50-g dose 2–3 h before induction of anes-
thesia) is safe; can reduce insulin resistance, hun-
ger, fatigue, and postoperative nausea and vomiting 
(PONV); and positively infl uences immune status. 
Moreover, postoperative nitrogen loss and the loss 
of skeletal muscle mass are attenuated. 
 Magnetic resonance imaging studies in healthy 
volunteers have shown that the residual gastric vol-
ume 2 h aft er 400 mL of oral carbohydrate (12.5% 
maltodextrins) is minimal and similar to the resid-
ual volume aft er an overnight fast (mean volume of 
21 mL). Th e safety of this practice has been tested 
in patients with uncomplicated type 2 diabetes mel-
litus, none of whom showed evidence of worsened 
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes
1093
salutary impact is achieved when laparoscopic 
techniques are included in ERPs. A laparoscopic 
approach is also associated with less morbidity in 
elderly surgical patients. 
 B. Regional Anesthesia/
Analgesia Techniques 
 A variety of fast-track surgical procedures have taken 
advantage of the benefi cial clinical and metabolic 
eff ects of regional anesthesia/analgesia techniques 
( Table 48–1 ).  Neuraxial blockade of nocicep-
tive stimuli by epidural and spinal local anes-
thetics has been shown to blunt the metabolic and 
neuroendocrine stress response to surgery. To be 
eff ective, the blockade must be established before 
incision and continued postoperatively. In major 
open abdominal and thoracic procedures, thoracic 
epidural blockade with local anesthetic can be a rec-
ommended anesthetic component of a postoperative 
ERP, providing excellent analgesia, facilitating mobili-
zation and physical therapy, and decreasing the inci-
dence and severity of ileus. However, the advantages 
of neuraxial blockade are not as evident when mini-
mally invasive surgical techniques are used. Lumbar 
epidural anesthesia/analgesia should be discouraged 
for abdominal surgery because it oft en does not pro-
vide adequate segmental analgesia for an abdominal 
incision. In addition, it frequently causes urinary 
4
peripheral glucose uptake and increased endoge-
nous glucose production.  Th e magnitude of 
the surgical stress response is related to the 
intensity of the surgical stimulus; can be amplifi ed 
by other factors, including hypothermia and psy-
chological stress; and can be moderated by periop-
erative interventions, including deeper planes of 
general anesthesia, neural blockade, and reduction 
in the degree of surgical invasiveness. Much recent 
eff ort has focused on developing surgical and anes-
thetic techniques that reduce the surgical stress 
response, with the goal of lowering the risk of stress-
related organ dysfunction and perioperative compli-
cations. An overview of several techniques that have 
proved eff ective in ERP protocols follows. 
 A. Minimally Invasive Surgery 
 Laparoscopic procedures are associated with a 
reduced incidence of surgical complications, espe-
cially surgical site infections, compared with the 
same procedures performed in “open” fashion. 
Published data highlight the safety of minimally 
invasive procedures in the hands of adequately 
trained and experienced surgeons. Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy results in shorter length of hos-
pital stay and fewer complications compared with 
open cholecystectomy, and similar results have 
been reported for colorectal surgery. A longer term 
3
 TABLE 481 Fast-track surgery programs that incorporate regional anesthesia/
analgesia techniques.  1  
Type of Surgery
Incision
Regional Anesthesia /Analgesia Techniques
Length of Stay
Colorectal resection
Laparotomy, 
laparoscopy
TEA, wound infusion of ropivacaine, intraperitoneal 
local anesthetic, intravenous lidocaine
2–4 d
Hernia repair
Open
Local infiltration, INB, TAP
2-4 h
Thoracic surgery
Thoracotomy
TEA, ICB
1–4 d
Esophageal surgery
Laparotomy
TEA
3–5 d
Open aortic surgery
Laparotomy
TEA
3–5 d
Nephrectomy
Laparotomy, 
laparoscopy
TEA
2–4 d
Arthroplasty (hip, knee)
Open
CPNB (femoral and sciatic), periarticular infiltration
1–3 d
 1  TEA, thoracic epidural analgesia; ICB, intercostal block; INB, ilioinguinal nerve block; TAP, transversus abdominus plane block; CPNB, continuous 
peripheral nerve block.
1094 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
 If spinal anesthesia is used for fast-track (and 
especially ambulatory) surgery, attention must be 
paid to delayed recovery due to prolonged motor 
blockade. Th e use of smaller doses of intrathecal 
local anesthetics (lidocaine, 30–40 mg; bupivacaine, 
3–7 mg; or ropivacaine, 5–10 mg) with lipophilic 
intrathecal opioids (fentanyl, 10–25 mcg, or sufent-
anil, 5–10 mcg) can prolong postoperative analgesia 
and minimize the motor block without delaying 
recovery from anesthesia. Th e introduction of ultra-
short-acting intrathecal agents such as 2-chloropro-
caine (still controversial at present) may further 
speed the fast-track process. Spinal opioids are asso-
ciated with side eff ects such as nausea, pruritus, and 
postoperative urinary retention. Adjuvants such as 
clonidine are eff ective alternatives to intrathecal opi-
oids, with the goal of avoiding untoward side eff ects 
that may delay hospital discharge. For example, 
intrathecal clonidine added to spinal local anesthetic 
retention and lower limb sensory and motor block-
ade, increasing the need for urinary drainage cathe-
ters (with accompanying increased risk of urinary 
tract infection), delaying mobilization and recovery, 
and increasing the risk of falls. 
 Epidural blockade using a solution of local anes-
thetic and low-dose opioid provides better postopera-
tive analgesia at rest and with movement than 
systemic opioids ( Figure 48–4 and  Table 48–2 ). 
 By sparing opioid use and minimizing the inci-
dence of systemic opioid-related side eff ects, epidural 
analgesia facilitates earlier mobilization and earlier 
resumption of oral nutrition, expediting exercise 
activity and attenuating loss of body mass. Neural 
blockade minimizes postoperative insulin resistance, 
attenuating the postoperative hyperglycemic response 
and facilitating utilization of exogenous glucose, 
thereby preventing postoperative loss of amino acids 
and conserving lean body mass. 
5
Cervical
Thoracic surgery
Upper abdominal
surgery
Lower abdominal
surgery
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
• Thoracotomy
• Pectus repair
• Thoracic aortic 
aneurysm repair
• Esophagectomy
• Gastrectomy
• Pancreatectomy
• Hepatic resection
• Abdominal aortic 
aneurysm repair
• Colectomy
• Bowel resection
• Abdominal perineal 
resection
 FIGURE 484  Optimal regions for 
placing an epidural catheter in the adult 
spine when administering epidural 
anesthesia/analgesia for thoracic and 
abdominal procedures. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Manion SC, Brennan TJ: Thoracic 
epidural analgesia and acute pain management. 
Anesthesiology 2011;115:181.) 
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes
1095
block of the quadriceps, which can be responsible 
for accidental falls. Administering a lumbar plexus 
block along with a sciatic nerve block decreases 
hospital length of stay, postoperative urinary reten-
tion, and ileus associated with lower extremity total 
joint replacement when compared with general or 
neuraxial anesthesia followed by intravenous opi-
oids. Th e same benefi ts of fewer opioid side eff ects 
and accelerated discharge have been shown with 
regional anesthesia/analgesia for hand, shoulder, 
anorectal, and inguinal hernia repair surgery. 
 Advances in imaging techniques and periph-
eral catheter technology have generated interest in 
abdominal wall blockade, facilitating the selective 
localization of nerves and the direct deposition of 
local anesthetic in proximity to the compartments 
where the nerves are located. Transversus abdominis 
plane (TAP) block (see Chapter 46) has been used 
for abdominal surgery to facilitate postoperative 
analgesia and early return of bowel function. Rectus 
abdominis block can be used for midline incisions. 
Th ese techniques are alternatives to epidural block-
ade when the latter is contraindicated. 
 Th e potential role of wound infusion of local 
anesthetic solution in providing analgesia for ERAS 
provides eff ective analgesia with less urinary reten-
tion than intrathecal morphine. Further studies are 
needed to defi ne the safety and effi  cacy of regional 
anesthesia techniques in fast-track cardiac surgery 
(and many clinicians avoid them due to concerns 
about neuraxial hematomas). Although some stud-
ies have shown that spinal analgesia with intrathecal 
morphine decreases extubation time, decreases 
length of stay in the intensive care unit, reduces pul-
monary complications and arrhythmias, and pro-
vides analgesia with less respiratory depression, 
other studies have shown no benefi t to this approach. 
 Continuous peripheral nerve blocks (CPNBs) 
with local anesthetics block aff erent nocicep-
tive pathways and are an excellent way to reduce the 
incidence of opioid-related side eff ects and facilitate 
recovery (see Chapter 46). Th e choice of local anes-
thetic, dosage, and concentration should be made 
with the goal of avoiding prolonged motor blockade 
and delayed mobilization and discharge. Ropiva-
caine, because of its lower toxicity relative to bupiva-
caine, is oft en preferred when high volumes of local 
anesthetic solution are needed. CPNB aft er knee 
arthroplasty facilitates earlier discharge and rehabil-
itation. Eff orts must be made to minimize the motor 
6
 TABLE 482 Options for composition of thoracic epidural infusion analgesia solutions.  1  
Local Anesthetic
Opioid
Advantages
Disadvantages
Bupivacaine, 0.125%
None
 ↓ Nausea/Vomiting 
 ↓ Pruritus 
 ↓ Sedation 
 ↓ Respiratory depression 
↑ Hypotension 
↑ Motor blockage 
Bupivacaine, 0.1%
 Hydromorphone, 5–10 mcg/mL 
 or 
 Fentanyl, 2–5 mcg/mL 
↓ Both hemodynamic 
and opioid side effects
—
Bupivacaine, 0.05%
 Hydromorphone, 5–10 mcg/mL 
 or 
 Fentanyl, 2–5 mcg/mL 
↓ Both hemodynamic and 
opioid side effects
—
Bupivacaine, 0.05%
 Hydromorphone, 20 mcg/mL 
 or 
 Fentanyl, 5–10 mcg/mL 
↓ Both hemodynamic and 
opioid side effects
—
None
Hydromorphone, 20–40 mcg/mL
 ↓ Hypotension 
 ↓ Motor blockade 
↑ Nausea/Vomiting 
↑ Pruritus 
↑ Sedation 
↑ Respiratory depression 
 1  Reproduced, with permission, from Manion SC, Brennan TJ. Thoracic epidural analgesia and acute pain management. Anesthesiology 2011;115:181.
1096 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
 E. Intravenous α 2 -Agonist Therapy 
 Both clonidine and dexmedetomidine have anes-
thetic and analgesic properties. Clonidine decreases 
postoperative pain, reduces opioid consumption 
and opioid-related side eff ects, and prolongs neur-
axial and peripheral nerve local anesthetic blockade. 
In patients undergoing cardiovascular fast-track 
surgery, spinal morphine with clonidine decreases 
extubation time, provides eff ective analgesia, and 
improves quality of recovery. Dexmedetomidine has 
not been extensively studied in ERP pathways. 
 Use of Short-Acting Intravenous 
& Inhalation Agents 
 A. Intravenous Anesthetics 
 Intravenous propofol is the deep sedation and general 
anesthesia induction agent of choice for many surgi-
cal procedures, and may reduce the risk of PONV. 
 B. Inhalational Anesthetics 
 Compared with other volatile anesthetic agents, 
desfl urane and sevofl urane can shorten anesthesia 
emergence, reduce length of stay in the postanesthe-
sia care unit, and decrease recovery-associated costs. 
When compared with propofol, all inhalation agents 
increase the risk of PONV. Nitrous oxide, because 
of its anesthetic- and analgesic-sparing eff ects, rapid 
pharmacokinetic profi le, and low cost, is frequently 
administered with other inhalation agents. However, 
its use may increase the risk of PONV, and nitrous 
oxide is frequently avoided in patients with risk fac-
tors for PONV. Moreover, the use of nitrous oxide 
during laparoscopic surgery may distend the bowel 
and impair the surgeon’s view of anatomic structures 
(see Chapter 8). 
 C. Opioids 
 Short-acting opioids such as fentanyl, alfentanil, and 
remifentanil are commonly used during fast-track 
surgery in combination with inhalation agents or 
propofol, and with regional analgesia techniques. 
However, intraoperative administration of remi-
fentanil to patients who will experience extensive 
postoperative pain has been associated with opioid-
induced hyperalgesia, acute opioid tolerance, and 
increased analgesic requirements during the post-
operative period. 
has not been determined; nevertheless, local anes-
thetic wound infusions are widely used to improve 
postoperative pain control and reduce the necessity 
for opioids. 
 C. Intravenous Lidocaine Infusion 
 Lidocaine (intravenous bolus of 100 mg or 
1.5–2 mg/kg, followed by continuous intrave-
nous infusion of 1.5–3 mg/kg/h or 2–3 mg/h) has 
analgesic, antihyperalgesic, and antiinfl ammatory 
properties. In patients undergoing colorectal and 
radical retropubic prostate surgeries, intravenous 
lidocaine has been shown to reduce requirements 
for opioids and general anesthetic agents, to provide 
satisfactory analgesia, to facilitate early return of 
bowel function, and to accelerate hospital discharge. 
Although lidocaine infusion potentially may replace 
neuraxial blockade and regional anesthesia in some 
circumstances, more studies are needed to confi rm 
the advantage of this technique in the context of 
ERPs. Th e most eff ective dose and duration of infu-
sion for various surgical procedures remains to be 
determined; even short duration of lidocaine infu-
sion may have benefi t. 
 D. β-Blockade Therapy 
 β Blockers have been used to blunt the sympathetic 
response during laryngoscopy and intubation and to 
attenuate the surgical stress-induced increase in cir-
culating catecholamines. Th ey also have been shown 
to prevent perioperative cardiovascular events in 
at-risk patients undergoing noncardiac surgery and 
to help maintain hemodynamic stability during the 
intraoperative period and during emergence from 
anesthesia. β Blockers reduce the requirement of 
volatile anesthetic agents and decrease minimum 
alveolar concentration values; they may also have 
an opioid-sparing eff ect. Th ey possess anticatabolic 
properties, which may be explained by reduced 
energy requirements associated with decreased 
adrenergic stimulation. A positive protein balance 
has been reported in critically ill patients when 
β blockade is combined with parenteral nutrition. In 
the context of ERPs, the anesthetic- and analgesic-
sparing eff ects of β blockers may facilitate recovery 
by accelerating emergence from anesthesia and by 
reducing anesthetic- and analgesic-related postop-
erative side eff ects, including PONV. 
7
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes 
1097 
oxygen tension, decreased rate of wound infection, 
and lower incidence of PONV, but without increas-
ing potential complications associated with high 
oxygen fraction, such as atelectasis and hypercapnia. 
However, these advantages have not been confi rmed 
in a large, randomized, multicenter trial of patients 
undergoing elective and emergent laparotomy. Th e 
use of regional anesthesia techniques, by decreas-
ing systemic vascular resistance, can also improve 
superfi cial and deep peripheral tissue perfusion 
and oxygenation. Finally avoidance of bedrest, and 
encouraging early mobilization and physiotherapy, 
can also improve postoperative central and periph-
eral tissue oxygenation. 
 PONV Prophylaxis 
 Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is a fre-
quent complication associated with anesthetic drugs 
that delay early feeding and recovery from surgery. 
Perioperative strategies for minimizing PONV are 
strongly advocated for any type of surgery, and con-
sensus guidelines for prevention and management of 
PONV are available in the current literature. Th ese 
issues are discussed in Chapters 17 and 56. 
 Goal-Directed Fluid & 
Hemodynamic Therapy 
 Intraoperative and postoperative fl uids are com-
monly infused in excess of perioperative loss. 
Despite numerous studies seeking to defi ne fl uid 
strategy (amount and type of fl uid administered, 
crystalloid versus colloid, etc), “liberal,” “standard,” 
or “restrictive” fl uid regimens have failed to con-
sistently improve postoperative outcomes. Liberal 
fl uid administration and sodium excess lead to 
fl uid overload, increase postoperative morbidity, 
and prolong hospitalization. Fluid overload, espe-
cially of crystalloid, has been associated with anas-
tomotic leakage, pulmonary edema, pneumonia, 
wound infection, postoperative ileus, and reduced 
tissue oxygenation. Furthermore, excess fl uids com-
monly increase body weight by 3–6 kg and may 
impair postoperative mobilization. On the other 
hand, restrictive fl uid management does not off er 
any substantial, clinically relevant advantage, except 
possibly improving pulmonary function and reduc-
ing postoperative hypoxia. However, compared with 
 D. Muscle Relaxants 
 Th e short-acting muscle relaxant succinylcholine 
and intermediate-acting muscle relaxants such as 
rocuronium, atracurium, and cisatracurium are 
commonly used to minimize the risk of unplanned 
and prolonged muscle relaxation. Th ey are chosen 
to facilitate tracheal extubation while decreasing the 
risk of residual blockade during anesthesia recovery. 
 Maintenance of Normothermia 
 Th e inhibitory eff ect of anesthetic agents on ther-
moregulation, exposure to the relatively cool sur-
gical environment, and intraoperative loss of heat 
through the surgical fi eld can lead to intraoperative 
hypothermia in all patients undergoing surgical 
procedures under general or regional anesthesia. 
Th e duration and extent of the surgical procedure 
directly correlate with hypothermia risk. Periop-
erative hypothermia, by increasing sympathetic 
discharge and inhibiting immune cellular response, 
increases cardiovascular morbidity and wound 
infection risk. A decrease in core body tempera-
ture of 1.9°C triples the incidence of surgical wound 
infection. Th e risk of bleeding and blood transfusion 
requirement are also increased with hypothermia. 
Furthermore, by impairing the metabolism of many 
anesthetic agents, hypothermia signifi cantly pro-
longs anesthesia recovery. Th ese issues are discussed 
in Chapter 52. 
 Maintenance of Adequate 
Tissue Oxygenation 
 Surgical stress leads to impaired pulmonary function 
and peripheral vasoconstriction, resulting in arterial 
and local tissue hypoxemia. Perioperative hypoxia 
can increase cardiovascular and cerebral complica-
tions, and many strategies should be adopted during 
the perioperative period to prevent its development. 
 Maintenance of adequate perioperative oxygen-
ation by oxygen supplementation has been associated 
with the improvement of some clinically relevant out-
comes without increasing the risk of postoperative 
complications. Ensuring complete recovery of neu-
romuscular blockade can reduce early postoperative 
hypoxemia. Intraoperative and postoperative (for 
2 h) inspired oxygen concentration of 80% has been 
associated with increased arterial and subcutaneous 
1098 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
 POSTOPERATIVE PERIOD 
 Immediate Postoperative Care 
 A. Strategies to Minimize 
Postoperative Shivering 
 Th e primary cause of postoperative shivering is 
perioperative hypothermia, although other, non-
thermoregulatory, mechanisms may be involved. 
Postoperative shivering can greatly increase oxygen 
consumption, catecholamine release, cardiac out-
put, heart rate and blood pressure, and intracerebral 
and intraocular pressure. It increases cardiovas-
cular morbidity, especially in elderly patients, and 
increases length of stay in the postanesthesia care 
unit. Shivering is uncommon in elderly and hypoxic 
patients: the effi  cacy of thermoregulation decreases 
with aging, and hypoxia can directly inhibit shiver-
ing. Many drugs, notably meperidine, clonidine, and 
tramadol, can be used to reduce postoperative shiv-
ering; however, prevention of hypothermia is the 
most effi  cient strategy. 
 B. PONV Treatment 
 Pharmacological treatment of PONV should be 
promptly initiated once medical or surgical causes 
of PONV have been ruled out. PONV and its treat-
ment are reviewed in Chapter 17. 
 C. Multimodal Analgesia 
 Th e scientifi c rationale for multimodal 
 analgesia is to combine diff erent classes of 
medications, having diff erent (multimodal) phar-
macological mechanisms of action and additive or 
synergistic eff ects, to control multiple periopera-
tive pathophysiological factors that lead to postop-
erative pain and its sequelae. Such an approach 
may achieve desired analgesic eff ects while reduc-
ing analgesic dosage and associated side eff ects, 
and oft en includes utilization of regional analgesic 
techniques such as local anesthetic wound infu-
sion, epidural or intrathecal analgesia, or single-
shot or continuous peripheral nerve blockade. 
Multimodal analgesia is routinely utilized in 
ERPs to improve postoperative outcomes. Discus-
sion here focuses on the principal analgesic 
8
liberal fl uid management, restrictive fl uid manage-
ment increases the release of stress-related hor-
mones such as aldosterone, renin, and angiotensin 
II. Th e amount of perioperative extracellular fl uid 
losses can be minimized with limited preoperative 
fasting, avoidance of mechanical bowel preparation, 
minimally invasive surgical techniques such as lapa-
roscopic and video-assisted thoracoscopic (VAT) 
surgery, and early postoperative enteral nutrition. 
 Th e concept of goal-directed fl uid therapy is 
based on the optimization of hemodynamic mea-
sures such as heart rate, blood pressure, stroke vol-
ume, pulse pressure variation, and stroke volume 
variation obtained by noninvasive cardiac output 
devices such as pulse-contour arterial waveform 
analysis, transesophageal echocardiography, or 
esophageal Doppler (see Chapter 5). Th e type of 
fl uid infused is also important: isotonic crystal-
loid should be used to replace extracellular losses, 
whereas iso-oncotic colloids are needed to replace 
intravascular volume ( Table 48–3 ). 
 TABLE 483 Physiologically based ﬁ rst-line 
ﬂ uid replacement for goal-directed therapy.  1  
Physiological 
Requirement
Replace with
Amount
 Extracellular 
Insensible 
perspiration
Crystalloids  2  
Closed abdomen
0.5 mL/kg/h
Open abdomen
1 mL/kg/h
Urine production
Crystalloids
Measured output  4  
 Intravascular 
Blood loss
Colloids  3  
Estimated losses
Further preload 
deficit
Colloids
According to clinical 
estimation  5  
  1  Reproduced, with permission, from Chappell D, Jacob M: Inﬂ uence of 
non-ventilatory options on postoperative outcome. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol 2010;24:267.
  2  Crystalloids should be given in an isotonic balanced form.
  3  Colloids should be given in an iso-oncotic form in balanced solutions.
  4  First-line approach in healthy kidneys.
  5  If possible use extended monitoring (eg, PICCO system, esophageal 
Doppler, etc).
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes
1099
 3. Opioids —Despite the increasing use of new, nono-
pioid analgesic medications and adjuvants and of 
regional anesthesia and analgesia techniques intended 
to minimize opioid requirements and opioid-related 
side eff ects ( Table 48–4 ), the use of systemic opioids 
remains a cornerstone in the management of surgical 
pain. Parenteral opioids are frequently prescribed in 
the postoperative period during the transitional phase 
to oral analgesia.  Opioid administration by 
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) provides 
better pain control, greater patient satisfaction, and 
fewer opioid side eff ects when compared with on-
request parenteral opioid administration. Oral admin-
istration of opioids, such as immediate-release and 
controlled-release oxycodone or hydromorphone, in 
combination with NSAIDs or acetaminophen, or 
both, is commonly used in the perioperative period. 
Preoperative administration of extended-release oxy-
codone in patients undergoing surgery of short dura-
tion provides adequate plasma concentration and 
analgesia following discontinuance of remifentanil 
infusion. Tramadol, a partial opioid agonist, has been 
associated with an increased incidence of PONV. 
 4. Epidural analgesia —In addition to providing 
excellent analgesia, epidural blockade blunts the 
stress response associated with surgery, decreases 
postoperative morbidity, attenuates catabolism, and 
accelerates postoperative functional recovery. Com-
pared with systemic opioid analgesia, thoracic epi-
dural analgesia provides better static and dynamic 
pain relief. Long-acting local anesthetics such as 
ropivacaine (0.2%), bupivacaine (0.1–0.125%), 
and levobupivacaine (0.1–0.125%) are commonly 
administered together with lipophilic opioids by 
continuous epidural infusion or by patient-con-
trolled epidural analgesia (PCEA). Administering 
low doses of local anesthetic via thoracic epidural 
infusion avoids lower extremity motor blockade that 
may delay postoperative mobilization and recovery. 
Adding fentanyl or sufentanil to epidural local anes-
thetics improves the quality of postoperative anal-
gesia without delaying recovery of bowel function. 
 High thoracic epidural analgesia has been intro-
duced in patients undergoing cardiac surgery based 
on data from small randomized clinical trials 
that  suggested benefi cial eff ects on postoperative 
10
interventions that can be used in perioperative 
multimodal analgesia regimens. 
 1. NSAIDs —Th e addition of nonsteroidal 
antiinfl ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to systemic 
opioids diminishes postoperative pain intensity, 
reduces the opioid requirement by approximately 
30%, and decreases opioid-related side eff ects such 
as PONV and sedation. However, NSAIDs may 
increase the risk of gastrointestinal and postopera-
tive bleeding, decrease kidney function, increase the 
risk of anastomotic leakage aft er colorectal surgery, 
and impair wound healing. 
 Perioperative administration of cyclooxygen-
ase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors likewise reduces postop-
erative pain and decreases both opioid consumption 
and opioid-related side eff ects, and while their use 
has reduced the incidence of NSAID-related plate-
let dysfunction and gastrointestinal bleeding, the 
adverse eff ects of COX-2 inhibitors on kidney func-
tion remain controversial. Concerns have also been 
raised regarding their safety for patients undergoing 
cardiovascular surgery; these have centered on rofe-
coxib and valdecoxib, specifi cally. Increased cardio-
vascular risk associated with the perioperative use 
of celecoxib or valdecoxib in patients with minimal 
cardiovascular risk factors and undergoing nonvas-
cular surgery has not been proven. Further studies 
are needed to establish the analgesic effi  cacy and 
safety of COX-2 inhibitors and their clinical eff ect 
on postoperative outcomes. 
 2. Acetaminophen (paracetamol) —Oral, rectal, 
and parenteral acetaminophen is a common com-
ponent of multimodal analgesia. Acetaminophen’s 
analgesic eff ect is 20–30% less than that of NSAIDs, 
but its pharmacological profi le is safer. Analgesic 
effi  cacy improves when the drug is administered 
together with NSAIDs, and it signifi cantly reduces 
pain intensity and spares opioid consumption aft er 
orthopedic and abdominal surgery. However, acet-
aminophen may not reduce opioid-related side 
eff ects. Routine administration of acetaminophen in 
combination with regional anesthesia and analgesia 
techniques may allow NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibi-
tors to be reserved for control of breakthrough pain, 
thus limiting the incidence of NSAID-related side 
eff ects. 
9
1100 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
TABLE 484 Analgesic adjuvants in the perioperative period.1,2
Adjuvant
Type of Surgery 
or Clinical Setting
Analgesic 
Eﬃ  cacy as 
Adjuvant
Dosages Used (Boluses, CI)
Administration
Monitoring
Route
Timing
Postoperative 
Duration
Lidocaine 
Tonsillectomy
Cardiac
Abdominal 
(laparotomy, 
laparoscopic)
Thoracotomy
Hysterectomy
Laparoscopic 
prostatectomy
Orthopedic 
–
+
+
+
+
+
–
1.5 mg/kg, 
followed by
1.5–2 mg/kg/h CI 
(Inra, until skin closure), 
and then 
1 mg/kg/h CI (Post)
IV
Pre,3 Intra, Peri
30 min–48 h 
Signs of local 
anesthetic toxicity 
(CNS cardiovascular)
Ketamine 
Cardiac
Thoracotomy
Abdominal
Gynecological
Orthopedic
Spine 
Chronic use of 
opioids
Preventing chronic 
pain
OIH
+
+
+
–
–
+/–
+
+/–
+/–
0.5–1 mg/kg, 
followed by 
2–10 mcg/kg/min CI
IV
Pre, Post (PCA4), 
Peri 
4–72 h 
CNS5 (level of sedation, 
nystagmus 
hallucinations), 
cardiovascular
Gabapentinoids 
Gabapentin
Cholecystectomy
Hysterectomy
Spine
Hip arthroplasty 
Preventing chronic 
pain
–
+
+
–
+/–
300–1200 mg
PO
Pre,6 Post
CNS5 (level of sedation, 
somnolence, 
dizziness), leg edema 
Pregabalin 
Hysterectomy
Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy 
Preventing chronic 
pain
+
–
+/–
75–300 mg
PO
Pre, Post 
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes 
1101 
MgSO4
Cardiac
Cholecystectomy
Lower limb 
orthopedic
Gynecological
Ambulatory
+
+
+
+
+
30–50 mg/kg,
followed by 
8–15 mg/kg/h CI
IV
Pre, Intra
CNS (somnolence), 
neuromuscular 
function, respiratory 
depression, 
cardiovascular 
(bradycardia)
Steroids
Hip arthroplasty
Breast
Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy
+
+
+
Dexamethasone: 8–16 mg 
Methylprednisolone: 125 mg
IV
Pre
Glycemia, GI bleeding, 
wound healing
α2-Agonist 
Clonidine
PO
Abdominal
Total knee 
 arthroplasty
Hysterectomy
Prostatectomy
IV
Cholecystectomy
Abdominal
Spine
–
+
+
–
–
+
+
PO 3–5 mcg/kg
IV 150 mcg
PO, IV
Pre,7 Intra, Post 
(PCA8)
CNS5 (level of 
sedation), 
cardiovascular 
(hypotension, 
bradycardia)
Dexmedetomidine
Thoracotomy
Abdominal
Hysterectomy
Bariatric
+
+
+
+
Loading dose 0.5–1 mcg/kg, 
followed by
0.2–0.4 mcg/kg/h CI
IV
Pre, Intra, Post 
(PCA9)
1Eﬃ  cacy of these agents as adjuvant analgesics has been demonstrated by a reduction of pain or opioid consumption, or both; or opioid side eﬀ ects; or all three.
2CI, continuous infusion; Intra, Intraoperative period; Post, postoperative period; Pre, preoperative period during induction; Peri, preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods; CNS, 
central nervous system; PCA, patient-controlled analgesia; OIH, opioid-induced hyperalgesia; GI, gastrointestinal.
3Bolus, or 30 min before induction of anesthesia.
4As a 1-mg demand dose, lockout time 7 min.
5Psychotomimetic side eﬀ ects are dose-dependent.
6Single dose, 1–2.5 h before surgery.
7Given PO 60–90 min before surgery.
8As a 20-mcg demand dose, lockout time 5 min.
9As a 5-mcg demand dose, lockout time 5 min.
1102 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
anesthesiologist, the nutritionist, and the physio-
therapist in an eff ort to customize individual patient 
care based on standardized, procedure-specifi c 
protocols. Comfortable chairs and walkers need to 
be made readily available near each patient bed to 
encourage patients to sit, stand, and walk. Th e ben-
efi ts of mobilization for cardiovascular homeostasis 
and bowel function have been shown repeatedly. 
Patients should be encouraged to sit the evening fol-
lowing surgery, with ambulation starting the next 
day for a minimum of 4–6 h each day. If patients 
cannot get out of bed, they should be encouraged to 
perform physical and deep breathing exercises. 
 B. Optimization of Analgesia to 
Facilitate Functional Recovery 
 A well-organized, well-trained, highly motivated 
acute pain service (APS) and surgical nursing work-
force, utilizing procedure-specifi c clinical proto-
cols to optimally manage analgesia and related side 
eff ects, is critically important for fast-track surgery. 
Th e quality of pain relief and symptom control heav-
ily infl uences postoperative recovery; optimal mobi-
lization and dietary intake depend upon adequate 
analgesia. Th e anesthesiologist, in coordination 
with the APS, must identify and employ the optimal 
analgesic techniques tailored to the specifi c surgical 
procedure, and the quality of analgesia and possible 
presence of side eff ects must be closely and con-
tinuously assessed. Th e patient must be comfortable 
ambulating and performing physiotherapy, with 
minimal side eff ects such as lightheadedness, seda-
tion, nausea and vomiting, and leg weakness. 
 C. Strategies to Minimize 
Postoperative Ileus 
 Postoperative ileus delays enteral feeding, 
causes patient discomfort, and is one of the 
most common causes of prolonged postopera-
tive hospital stay. Because early enteral nutrition is 
associated with decreased postoperative morbidity, 
interventions and strategies aimed at decreasing 
postoperative ileus are required for patients in an 
ERP. Th ree main mechanisms contribute to ileus: 
sympathetic inhibitory refl exes, local infl amma-
tion caused by surgery, and postoperative opioid 
analgesia. Th e nasogastric tube, frequently inserted 
12
outcomes. A recent meta-analysis of more than 2700 
patients who underwent cardiac surgery and 
received high thoracic epidural analgesia showed an 
overall reduction of pulmonary complications (rela-
tive risk = 0.53) and supraventricular arrhythmias 
(relative risk = 0.68), but no reduction in incidence 
of myocardial infarction, stroke, or postoperative 
mortality. Due to concerns about the risk of epidural 
hematoma and its devastating neurological conse-
quences in patients fully heparinized during cardio-
pulmonary bypass, the use of high thoracic epidural 
analgesia is understandably limited.  
 5. Peripheral nerve block —Single-shot and 
continuous peripheral nerve blockade is 
frequently utilized for fast-track ambulatory and 
inpatient orthopedic surgery, and can accelerate 
recovery from surgery and improve analgesia and 
patient satisfaction (see Chapter 46). Th e opioid-
sparing eff ect of nerve blocks minimizes the risk 
of opioid-related side eff ects. Appropriate patient 
selection and strict adherence to institutional clini-
cal pathways helps ensure the success of peripheral 
nerve blockade as a fast-track orthopedic analge-
sia technique. Peripheral nerve blockade has also 
been used as a component of multimodal analgesia 
for abdominal surgery; for example, transverseus 
abdominis plane (TAP) block in patients undergo-
ing total abdominal hysterectomy provides eff ective 
analgesia and decreases morphine consumption 
and sedation when compared with patients receiv-
ing morphine alone via PCA. 
 6. Local anesthetic wound infusion —Th e analgesic 
effi  cacy of local anesthetic wound infusion has been 
established for multiple surgical procedures. Incon-
sistent results may be due to factors that include type, 
concentration, and dose of local anesthetic, catheter 
placement technique and type of catheter, mode of 
local anesthetic delivery, incision location, and dis-
lodgment of the catheter during patient mobilization. 
 Strategies to Facilitate 
Recovery on the Surgical Unit 
 A. Organization of 
Multidisciplinary Surgical Care 
 Th e multidisciplinary aspect of postoperative care 
should bring together the surgeon, the nurse, the 
11
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes
1103
opioid μ-receptor antagonists methylnaltrexone and 
alvimopan have been introduced to minimize the 
adverse eff ects of opioids on bowel function without 
antagonizing opioid analgesia. In patients receiving 
large-dose intravenous morphine analgesia, alvimo-
pan decreases the duration of postoperative ileus by 
16–18 h, the incidence of nasogastric tube reinser-
tion, postoperative morbidity, and hospital length 
of stay and readmission rates, especially in patients 
undergoing bowel resection. Nevertheless, the recov-
ery of bowel function is slower when compared with 
patients receiving multimodal strategies in an ERP. 
 Issues in the Implementation 
of Enhanced Recovery 
Programs 
 Th e success of ERPs depends upon the capacity of 
multiple stakeholders to reach interdisciplinary con-
sensus. Several aspects of perioperative care, such as 
use of drains, dietary and activity restrictions, fl uid 
management, and bedrest, have been part of surgi-
cal “traditions” and must be signifi cantly revised in 
ERPs. Patient involvement and patient and family 
expectations are critically important, but frequently 
overlooked, aspects of these programs. New surgical 
techniques, like transverse incisions or minimally 
invasive surgery, may require surgeons to acquire 
and perfect new skills. Similarly, the emphasis on 
thoracic epidural blockade or peripheral nerve 
blocks, pharmacological modulation of the neuro-
endocrine stress response to surgery, goal-directed 
fl uid and hemodynamic therapy, and integral 
involvement of a well-organized and managed APS 
requires an expansion of the traditional role of anes-
thesia providers. Aggressive analgesia and symptom 
management, early ambulation and physiotherapy, 
early nutrition protocols, and early removal or total 
avoidance of urinary drainage catheters signifi cantly 
change the way patients are cared for in the post-
anesthesia recovery unit and on the surgical unit 
and require a well-organized, highly trained, highly 
motivated nursing staff . 
 Although there are published studies of suc-
cessful ERPs, there are no “off -the-shelf” protocols, 
aft er abdominal surgery, does not speed the recov-
ery of bowel function and may increase pulmonary 
morbidity by increasing the incidence of aspiration. 
Th erefore, nasogastric tubes should be discouraged 
whenever possible or used for only a very short 
period of time, even in gastric and hepatic surgery. 
 Multimodal analgesia and nonopioid analgesia 
techniques shorten the duration of postoperative 
ileus. Continuous epidural local anesthetic infu-
sion improves the recovery of bowel function by 
suppressing the inhibitory sympathetic spinal cord 
refl exes. Th oracic epidural analgesia with local 
anesthetics and small doses of opioids reduces the 
incidence of ileus and improves postoperative pain 
relief. Minimally invasive surgery decreases surgical 
stress and infl ammation, resulting in a faster return 
of bowel function. Any role of epidural analgesia 
in accelerating the recovery of bowel function aft er 
laparoscopic surgery remains controversial, at best. 
Laxatives, such as milk of magnesia and bisacodyl, 
reduce postoperative ileus duration. Prokinetic 
medications such as metoclopramide are ineff ec-
tive. Neostigmine increases peristalsis but may also 
increase the incidence of PONV. 
 Excessive perioperative fl uid administration 
commonly causes bowel mucosal edema and delays 
postoperative return of bowel function. However, 
results from a randomized double-blind study of lib-
eral versus restricted fl uid administration showed 
no diff erences with regard to recovery of bowel 
function in patients undergoing fast-track abdomi-
nal surgery. No studies have compared crystalloid 
versus colloid administration in terms of their eff ect 
on the return of bowel function.  Because 
either excessive, or excessively restricted, peri-
operative fl uid therapy may increase the incidence 
and severity of postoperative ileus, a goal-directed 
fl uid strategy (discussed earlier) should be selected 
to decrease postoperative morbidities and enhance 
recovery and should be utilized according to the 
type of surgery and patient comorbidities. 
 Postoperative chewing gum, by stimulating gas-
trointestinal refl exes, may decrease ileus duration. 
Although its eff ect has not been evaluated in ERP 
patients, postoperative chewing gum may be included 
in multimodal interventions to decrease postopera-
tive ileus because of its safety and low cost. Peripheral 
13
1104 
SECTION IV Regional Anesthesia & Pain Management  
of ERPs and have potential benefi ts for surgical 
care delivery on a global basis, from preoperative 
evaluation and presurgical preparation to recovery 
and fi nal dismissal from care. Th is opportunity 
must be seized. 
GUIDELINES
 Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W, et al: Guidelines 
for perioperative care in elective colonic surgery: 
Enhanced Recovery Aft er Surgery (ERAS) Society 
recommendations. Clin Nutr 2012;31:783. 
 Lassen K, Coolsen MM, Slim K, et al: Guidelines for 
perioperative care for pancreaticoduodenectomy: 
Enhanced Recovery Aft er Surgery (ERAS) Society 
recommendations. Clin Nutr 2012;31:817. 
 Nygren J, Th acker J, Carli F, et al: Guidelines for 
perioperative care in elective rectal/pelvic surgery: 
Enhanced Recovery Aft er Surgery (ERAS) Society 
recommendations. Clin Nutr 2012;31:801. 
and local diff erences in expertise, experience, and 
resources infl uence the development of such pro-
tocols for each institution. Each family of similar 
surgical procedures requires a standardized interdis-
ciplinary clinical protocol or pathway, with special-
ized input from a team with experience in caring for 
those patients. Such an interdisciplinary team should 
include representatives from surgery, anesthesiol-
ogy, nursing, pharmacy, physiotherapy, nutrition, 
and administration, and it should be responsible not 
only for the clinical protocol’s creation, but also for 
continuously monitoring its effi  cacy and for insti-
tuting performance improvement-related protocol 
modifi cations and provider feedback as indicated by 
outcomes data ( Figure 48–5 ). 
 Th e current era is one in which optimal sur-
gical care requires the anesthesia provider to be 
part of the perioperative medicine team. Th e anes-
thesiologist’s skill sets are essential for the success 
Interest in program
Interest gathering from
   literature/own data
Organize team members
Site visit and training
Team meetings, write protocols,
   and develop care plans
Initiate program for a specific procedure
Patient evaluation, optimization, and education
Stress “reduced” operation with
   appropriate perioperative care
Effecient pain treatment
Nutrition and physiotherapy
Discharge with specific
   patient instruction (incl. analgesics)
Patient follow-up
Team meetings and program evaluation
Plan for new procedures to be
   introduced into program
 FIGURE 485  Stepwise process for initiating and implementing an enhanced recovery program. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Kehlet et al: Ann Surg 2008;248:189.) 
 
CHAPTER 48 Perioperative Pain Management & Enhanced Outcomes 
1105 
 Kehlet H, Wilmore DW: Evidence-based surgical care 
and the evolution of fast-track surgery. Ann Surg 
2008;248:189. 
 Kelin J: Multimodal multidisciplinary standardization of 
perioperative care: Still a long way to go? Curr Opin 
Crit Care 2008;21:187. 
 Liu SS, Richman JM, Th irlby RC, et al: Effi  cacy of 
continuous wound catheters delivering local 
anesthetic for postoperative analgesia: A quantitative 
and qualitative systematic review of randomized 
controlled trials. J Am Coll Surg 2006;203:914. 
 Ljungqvist O: Preoperative fasting. Br J Surg 2003;90:400. 
 Lui F, Ng KF: Adjuvant analgesics in acute pain. Expert 
Opin Pharmacother 2011;12:363. 
 Manion, SC, Brennan TJ: Th oracic epidural anesthesia 
and acute pain management. Anesthesiology 
2011;115:181. 
 Neugebaure EAM, Wilkinson RC, Kehlet H, et al: 
PROSPECT: A practical method for formulating 
evidence-based expert recommendations for the 
management of postoperative pain. Surg Endosc 
2007;21:1047. 
 Pöpping DM, Elia N, Marret E, et al: Protective eff ects of 
epidural analgesia on pulmonary complications aft er 
abdominal and thoracic surgery: A meta-analysis. 
Arch Surg 2008;143:990. 
 Powell AE, Davies HTO, Bannister J, et al: Challenge 
of improving postoperative pain management: Case 
studies of three acute pain services in the UK National 
Health Service. Br J Anaesth 2009;102:824. 
 Tonnesen H, Nielsen PR, Lauritzen JB, et al: Smoking 
and alcohol intervention before surgery: Evidence for 
best practice. Br J Anaesth 2009;102:297. 
 Vigneault L, Turgeon AF, Côté D, et al: Perioperative 
intravenous lidocaine infusion for postoperative pain 
control: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Can J Anaesth 2011;58:22. 
 White PF, Kehlet H, Neal JM, et al: Th e role of the 
anesthesiologist in fast-track surgery: From 
multimodal analgesia to perioperative medical care. 
Anesth Analg 2007;104:1380. 
 Wu CI, Raja SN: Treatment of postoperative pain. Lancet 
2011;377:2215. 
 Yardeni IZ, Beilin B, Mayburd E, et al: Th e eff ect of 
perioperative intravenous lidocaine on postoperative 
pain and immune function. Anesth Analg 
2009,109:1464. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Aarts M-A, Okrainec A, Glicksman A, et al: Adoption of 
enhanced recovery aft er surgery (ERAS) strategies for 
colorectal surgery at academic teaching hospitals and 
impact on total length of hospital stay. Surg Endosc 
2012;26:442. 
 Adamina M, Kehlet H, Tomlinson GA, et al: Enhanced 
recovery pathways optimize health outcomes and 
resource utilization: A meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials in colorectal surgery. Surgery 
2011;149:830. 
 Baldini G, F Carli: Anesthetic adjunctive drugs for fast-
track surgery. Curr Drug Targets 2009;10:667. 
 Carli F, Kehlet H, Baldini G, et al: Evidence basis for 
regional anesthesia in multidisciplinary fast-track 
surgical care pathways. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2011;36:63. 
 Chappell D, Jacob M: Infl uence of non-ventilatory 
options on postoperative outcome. Best Pract Res 
Clin Anaesthesiol 2010;24:267. 
 Chappell D, Jacob M, Hofmann-Kiefer K, et al: Rational 
approach to perioperative fl uid management. 
Anesthesiology 2008;109:723. 
 Collard V, Mistraletti G, Taqi A, et al: Intraoperative 
esmolol infusion in the absence of opioids spares 
postoperative fentanyl in patients undergoing 
ambulatory laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Anesth 
Analg 2007;105:1255. 
 Coulter A, Ellins J: Eff ectiveness of strategies for 
informing, educating, and involving patients. 
Br Med J 2007;335:24. 
 Dunkelgrun M, Boersma E, Schouten O, et al: Dutch 
Echocardiographic Cardiac Risk Evaluation Applying 
Stress Echocardiography Study Group. Bisoprolol and 
fl uvastatin for the reduction of perioperative cardiac 
mortality and myocardial infarction in intermediate-
risk patients undergoing noncardiovascular surgery: 
A randomized controlled trial (DECREASE-IV). 
Ann Surg 2009;249:921. 
 Harvey KP, Adair JD, Mayyas I, et al: Can 
intravenous lidocaine decrease postsurgical ileus 
and shorten hospital stay in elective bowel surgery? 
A pilot study and literature review. Am J Surg 
2009;198:231. 
 Kehlet H: Multimodal approach to postoperative 
recovery. Curr Opin Crit Care 2009;15:355. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1107
 Osmotic pressure is generally dependent 
only on the number of nondiﬀ usible solute 
particles. This is because the average kinetic 
energy of particles in solution is similar 
regardless of their mass. 
 Potassium is the most important determinant 
of intracellular osmotic pressure, whereas 
sodium is the most important determinant of 
extracellular osmotic pressure. 
 Fluid exchange between the intracellular 
and interstitial spaces is governed by the 
osmotic forces created by diﬀ erences in 
nondiﬀ usible solute concentrations. 
 Serious manifestations of hyponatremia 
are generally associated with plasma 
sodium concentrations <120 mEq/L. 
 Very rapid correction of hyponatremia 
has been associated with demyelinating 
lesions in the pons (central pontine 
myelinolysis), resulting in serious 
permanent neurological sequelae. 
 The major hazard of increases in extracellular 
volume is impaired gas exchange due to 
pulmonary interstitial edema, alveolar edema, 
or large collections of pleural or ascitic ﬂ uid. 
 Intravenous replacement of potassium 
chloride is usually reserved for patients 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
with, or at risk for, signiﬁ cant cardiac 
manifestations or severe muscle weakness. 
 Because of its lethal potential, hyperkalemia 
exceeding 6 mEq/L should always be 
corrected. 
 Symptomatic hypercalcemia requires 
rapid treatment. The most eﬀ ective initial 
treatment is rehydration followed by a brisk 
diuresis (urinary output 200–300 mL/h) 
utilizing administration of intravenous saline 
infusion and a loop diuretic to accelerate 
calcium excretion. 
 Symptomatic hypocalcemia is a medical 
emergency and should be treated 
immediately with intravenous calcium 
chloride (3–5 mL of a 10% solution) or calcium 
gluconate (10–20 mL of a 10% solution). 
 Some patients with severe 
hypophosphatemia may require mechanical 
ventilation postoperatively because of 
muscle weakness. 
 Marked hypermagnesemia can lead to 
respiratory and cardiac arrest. 
 Isolated hypomagnesemia should be 
corrected prior to elective procedures 
because of its potential for causing cardiac 
arrhythmias. 
8
9
10
11
12
13
 Management of Patients 
with Fluid & Electrolyte 
Disturbances 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
49
S E C T I O N V
Perioperative 
& Critical Care Medicine
1108 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Fluid and electrolyte disturbances are extremely 
common in the perioperative period. Large vol-
umes of intravenous fl uids are frequently required 
to correct fl uid defi cits and compensate for blood 
loss during surgery. Major disturbances in fl uid and 
electrolyte balance can rapidly alter cardiovascular, 
neurological, and neuromuscular functions, and 
anesthesia providers must have a clear understand-
ing of normal water and electrolyte physiology. Th is 
chapter examines the body’s fl uid compartments 
and common water and electrolyte derangements, 
their treatment, and anesthetic implications. Acid–
base disorders and intravenous fl uid therapy are dis-
cussed in other chapters. 
 Nomenclature of Solutions 
 Th e system of international units (SI) has still 
not gained universal acceptance in clinical prac-
tice, and many older expressions of concentration 
remain in common use. Th us, for example, the 
quantity of a solute in a solution may be expressed 
in grams, moles, or equivalents. To complicate 
matters further, the concentration of a solution 
may be expressed either as quantity of solute per 
volume of solution or quantity of solute per weight 
of solvent. 
 MOLARITY, MOLALITY, 
& EQUIVALENCY 
 One mole of a substance represents 6.02 × 10 23
molecules. Th e weight of this quantity in grams is 
commonly referred to as gram-molecular weight. 
Molarity is the standard SI unit of concentration 
that expresses the number of moles of solute per 
liter of solution. Molality is an alternative term that 
expresses moles of solute per  kilogram of solvent. 
Equivalency is also commonly used for substances 
that ionize: the number of equivalents of an ion in 
solution is the number of moles multiplied by its 
charge (valence). Th us, a 1 M solution of MgCl 2 
yields 2 equivalents of magnesium per liter and 
2 equivalents of chloride per liter. 
 OSMOLARITY, OSMOLALITY, 
& TONICITY 
Osmosis is the net movement of water across a semi-
permeable membrane as a result of a diff erence in 
nondiff usible solute concentrations between the two 
sides.  Osmotic pressure is the pressure that must be 
applied to the side with more solute to prevent a net 
movement of water across the membrane to dilute 
the solute. 
 Osmotic pressure is generally dependent only 
on the number of nondiff usible solute par-
ticles. Th is is because the average kinetic energy of 
particles in solution is similar regardless of their 
mass. One osmole equals 1 mol of nondissociable 
substances. For substances that ionize, however, 
each mole results in  n Osm, where  n is the number 
of ionic species produced. Th us, 1 mol of a highly 
ionized substance such as NaCl dissolved in solu-
tion should produce 2 Osm; in reality ionic inter-
action between the cation and anion reduces the 
eff ective activity of each such that NaCl behaves as 
if it is only 75% ionized. A diff erence of 1 mOsm/L 
between two solutions results in an osmotic pres-
sure of 19.3 mm Hg. Th e osmolarity of a solution is 
equal to the number of osmoles per  liter of solution, 
whereas its osmolality equals the number of osmoles 
per  kilogram of solvent.  Tonicity, a term that is oft en 
used interchangeably with osmolarity and osmolal-
ity, refers to the eff ect a solution has on cell volume. 
An  isotonic solution has no eff ect on cell volume, 
whereas  hypotonic and  hypertonic solutions increase 
and decrease cell volume, respectively. 
 Fluid Compartments 
 Body water is distributed between two major fl uid 
compartments separated by cell membranes: intra-
cellular fl uid (ICF) and extracellular fl uid (ECF). 
Th e latter can be further subdivided into intra-
vascular and interstitial compartments. Th e inter-
stitium includes all fl uid that is both outside cells 
and outside the vascular endothelium. Th e relative 
contributions of each compartment to total body 
water (TBW) and body weight are delineated in 
Table 49–1 . 
1
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1109
 Th e volume of fl uid (water) within a compart-
ment is determined by its solute composition and 
concentrations ( Table 49–2 ). Diff erences in solute 
concentrations are largely due to the characteristics 
of the physical barriers that separate compartments 
(see below). Th e osmotic forces created by “trapped” 
solutes govern the distribution of water between com-
partments and ultimately each compartment’s volume. 
 INTRACELLULAR FLUID 
 Th e outer membrane of cells plays an important 
role in regulating intracellular volume and compo-
sition. A membrane-bound adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)–dependent pump exchanges Na + for K + in a 
3:2 ratio. Because cell membranes are relatively 
impermeable to sodium and (to a lesser extent) 
potassium ions, potassium is concentrated intracel-
lularly, whereas sodium is concentrated extra-
cellularly.  As a result, potassium is the most 
important determinant of intracellular osmotic 
pressure, whereas sodium is the most important 
determinant of extracellular osmotic pressure. 
 Th e impermeability of cell membranes to most 
proteins results in a high intracellular protein con-
centration. Because proteins act as nondiff usible sol-
utes (anions), the unequal exchange ratio of 3 Na +
for 2 K +  by the cell membrane pump is critical in 
preventing relative intracellular hyperosmolality. 
Interference with Na + –K + -ATPase activity, as occurs 
during ischemia or hypoxia, results in progressive 
swelling of cells. 
 EXTRACELLULAR FLUID 
 Th e principal function of ECF is to provide a 
medium for delivery of cell nutrients and electro-
lytes and for removal of cellular waste products. 
Maintenance of a normal extracellular volume—
particularly the circulating component (intravascu-
lar volume)—is critical. For the reasons described 
2
 TABLE 491 Body ﬂ uid compartments 
(based on average 70-kg male). 
Compartment
Fluid as 
Percent Body 
Weight (%)
Total Body 
Water (%)
Fluid 
Volume (L)
Intracellular
40
67
28
Extracellular
Interstitial
15
25
10.5
Intravascular
5
8
3.5
Total
60
100
42
 TABLE 492 The composition of ﬂ uid compartments. 
Gram-Molecular 
Weight
Intracellular 
(mEq/L)
Extracellular
 Intravascular 
(mEq/L) 
 Interstitial 
(mEq/L) 
Sodium
23.0
10
145
142
Potassium
39.1
140
4
4
Calcium
40.1
<1
3
3
Magnesium
24.3
50
2
2
Chloride
35.5
4
105
110
Bicarbonate
61.0
10
24
28
Phosphorus
31.0  1  
75
2
2
Protein (g/dL)
16
7
2
 1  PO 4
3− is 95 g.
1110 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
above, sodium is quantitatively the most important 
extracellular cation and the major determinant of 
extracellular osmotic pressure and volume. Changes 
in ECF volume are therefore related to changes in 
total body sodium content. Th e latter is a function of 
sodium intake, renal sodium excretion, and extrare-
nal sodium losses (see below). 
 Interstitial Fluid 
 Very little interstitial fl uid is normally in the form of 
free fl uid. Most interstitial water is in chemical asso-
ciation with extracellular proteoglycans, forming a 
gel. Interstitial fl uid pressure is generally thought to 
be negative (about −5 mm Hg). As interstitial fl uid 
volume increases, interstitial pressure also rises and 
eventually becomes positive. When the latter occurs, 
the free fl uid in the gel increases rapidly and appears 
clinically as edema. 
 Because only small quantities of plasma pro-
teins can normally cross capillary cleft s, the pro-
tein content of interstitial fl uid is relatively low 
(2 g/dL). Protein entering the interstitial space is 
returned to the vascular system via the lymphatic 
system. 
 Intravascular Fluid 
 Intravascular fl uid, commonly referred to as plasma, 
is restricted to the intravascular space by the vas-
cular endothelium. Most electrolytes (small ions) 
freely pass between plasma and the interstitium, 
resulting in nearly identical electrolyte composi-
tion. However, the tight intercellular junctions 
between adjacent endothelial cells impede the pas-
sage of plasma proteins to outside the intravascular 
compartment. As a result, plasma proteins (mainly 
albumin) are the only osmotically active solutes in 
fl uid not normally exchanged between plasma and 
interstitial fl uid. 
 Increases in extracellular volume are normally 
proportionately refl ected in intravascular and inter-
stitial volume. However, when interstitial pressure 
becomes positive, continued increases in ECF result 
in expansion of only the interstitial fl uid compart-
ment ( Figure 49–1 ). In this way, the interstitial 
compartment acts as an overfl ow reservoir for the 
intravascular compartment. Th is is seen clinically in 
the form of tissue edema. 
 EXCHANGE BETWEEN 
FLUID COMPARTMENTS 
 Diff usion is the random movement of molecules 
due to their kinetic energy and is responsible for the 
majority of fl uid and solute exchange between com-
partments. Th e rate of diff usion of a substance across 
a membrane depends upon (1) the permeability of 
that substance through that membrane, (2) the con-
centration diff erence for that substance between the 
two sides, (3) the pressure diff erence between either 
side because pressure imparts greater kinetic energy, 
and (4) the electrical potential across the membrane 
for charged substances. 
 Diﬀ usion Through Cell Membranes 
 Diff usion between interstitial fl uid and ICF may 
take place by one of several mechanisms: (1) 
directly through the lipid bilayer of the cell mem-
brane, (2) through protein channels within the 
membrane, or (3) by reversible binding to a carrier 
protein that can traverse the membrane (facilitated 
diff usion). Oxygen, CO 2 , water, and lipid-soluble 
molecules penetrate the cell membrane directly. 
Cations such as Na + , K + , and Ca 2+ penetrate the 
membrane poorly because of the cell transmem-
brane voltage potential (which is positive to the 
outside) created by the Na + –K + pump. Th erefore, 
these cations can diff use only through specifi c pro-
tein channels. Passage through these channels is 
10
15
30
45
Extracellular fluid volume (L)
Blood volume (L)
5
 FIGURE 491  The relationship between blood volume 
and extracellular ﬂ uid volume.  (Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with 
permission, from Guyton AC:  Textbook of Medical Physiology, 7th ed. 
W.B. Saunders, 1986.) 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1111
dependent on membrane voltage and the binding 
of ligands (such as acetylcholine) to the membrane 
receptors. Glucose and amino acids diff use with 
the help of membrane-bound carrier proteins. 
 Fluid exchange between the intracellular and 
interstitial spaces is governed by the osmotic 
forces created by diff erences in nondiff usible sol-
ute concentrations. Relative changes in osmolality 
between the intracellular and interstitial compart-
ments result in a net water movement from the 
hypoosmolar to the hyperosmolar compartment. 
 Diﬀ usion Through 
Capillary Endothelium 
 Capillary walls are typically 0.5 µm thick, consist-
ing of a single layer of endothelial cells with their 
basement membrane. Intercellular cleft s, 6–7 nm 
wide, separate each cell from its neighbors. Oxygen, 
CO 2 , water, and lipid-soluble substances can pen-
etrate directly through both sides of the endothelial 
cell membrane. Only low-molecular-weight water-
soluble substances such as sodium, chloride, potas-
sium, and glucose readily cross intercellular cleft s. 
High-molecular-weight substances such as plasma 
proteins penetrate the endothelial cleft s poorly 
(except in the liver and the lungs, where the cleft s 
are larger). 
 Fluid exchange across capillaries diff ers from 
that across cell membranes in that it is governed 
by signifi cant diff erences in hydrostatic pressures 
in addition to osmotic forces ( Figure 49–2 ). Th ese 
forces are operative on both arterial and venous 
ends of capillaries, with a tendency for fl uid to 
move out of capillaries at the arterial end and 
back into capillaries at the venous end. Moreover, 
the magnitude of these forces diff ers between the 
various tissue beds. Arterial capillary pressure is 
determined by precapillary sphincter tone. Th us 
capillaries that require a high pressure such as 
glomeruli have low precapillary sphincter tone, 
whereas the normally low-pressure capillaries of 
muscle have high precapillary sphincter tone. Nor-
mally, all but 10% of the fl uid fi ltered is reabsorbed 
back into capillaries. What is not reabsorbed 
(about 2 mL/min) enters the interstitial fl uid and 
is then returned by lymphatic fl ow to the intravas-
cular compartment. 
3
 Disorders of Water Balance 
 Th e human body at birth is approximately 75% 
water by weight. By 1 month this value decreases to 
65%, and by adulthood to 60% for males and 50% for 
females. Th e higher fat content in females decreases 
water content. For the same reason, obesity and 
advanced age further decrease water content. 
 NORMAL WATER BALANCE 
 Th e normal adult daily water intake averages 
2500 mL, which includes approximately 300 mL as 
a byproduct of the metabolism of energy substrates. 
Daily water loss averages 2500 mL and is typically 
accounted for by 1500 mL in urine, 400 mL in respi-
ratory tract evaporation, 400 mL in skin evaporation, 
100 mL in sweat, and 100 mL in feces. Evaporative 
loss is very important in thermoregulation because 
this mechanism normally accounts for 20–25% of 
heat loss. 
 Both ICF and ECF osmolalities are tightly 
regulated to maintain normal water content in tis-
sues. Changes in water content and cell volume can 
induce serious impairment of function, particularly 
in the brain (see below). 
 RELATIONSHIP OF PLASMA 
SODIUM CONCENTRATION, 
EXTRACELLULAR OSMOLALITY, 
& INTRACELLULAR 
OSMOLALITY 
 Th e osmolality of ECF is equal to the sum of the 
 concentrations of all dissolved solutes. Because Na +
and its anions account for nearly 90% of these sol-
utes, the following approximation is valid: 
 Plasma osmolality = 2 ×  Plasma sodium 
concentration 
 Moreover, because ICF and ECF are in 
osmotic equilibrium, plasma sodium concentration 
[Na + ] plasma generally refl ects total body osmolality: 
= Extracellular solutes + intracellular solutes
TBW
Total body osmolality
 
1112 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
ARTERIAL END
VENOUS END
Red cell
30
30
5
6
TISSUE
Interstitial
oncotic
pressure
Interstitial
hydrostatic
pressure
Capillary
hydrostatic
pressure
Plasma
oncotic
pressure
Plasma
oncotic
pressure
13
28
Net
Net
10
28
7
5
6
Interstitial
oncotic
pressure
Interstitial
hydrostatic
pressure
Capillary
hydrostatic
pressure
Cell
 FIGURE 492  Capillary ﬂ uid exchange. The numbers 
in this ﬁ gure are in mm Hg and indicate the pressure 
gradient for the respective pressures. “Net” refers to the 
net pressure at either end of the capillary, ie, 13 mm Hg 
at the arterial and 7 mm Hg at the venous end of the 
capillary. 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1113 
 Because sodium and potassium are the major 
intra- and extracellular solutes, respectively: 
Total body osmolality
=
(Na+
extracellular × 2) + (K+
intracellular solutes × 2)
TBW
 
 Combining the two approximations: 
≈
[Na+]plasma
Na+
extracellular + K+
intracellular
TBW
 
 Using these principles, the eff ect of isotonic, 
hypotonic, and hypertonic fl uid loads on compart-
mental water content and plasma osmolality can be 
calculated ( Table 49–3 ). Th e potential importance 
of intracellular potassium concentration is readily 
apparent from this equation. Th us signifi cant potas-
sium losses may contribute to hyponatremia. 
 In pathological states, glucose and—to a much 
lesser extent—urea can contribute signifi cantly to 
extracellular osmolality. A more accurate approxi-
mation of plasma osmolality is therefore given by 
the following equation: 
Plasma osmolality (mOsm/kg) 
+
= [Na+] × 2 + BUN
2.8
glucose
18
 
 where [Na + ] is expressed as mEq/L and blood urea 
nitrogen (BUN) and glucose as mg/dL. Urea is an 
ineff ective osmole because it readily permeates cell 
membranes and is therefore frequently omitted 
from this calculation: 
 Effective plasma osmolality = [Na+] × 2 + glucose
18
 
 Plasma osmolality normally varies between 
280  and 290 mOsm/L. Plasma sodium concentra-
tion decreases approximately 1 mEq/L for every 
62 mg/dL increase in glucose concentration. A 
discrepancy between the measured and calculated 
osmolality is referred to as an  osmolal gap . Signifi -
cant osmolal gaps indicate a high concentration of 
an abnormal osmotically active molecule in plasma 
such as ethanol, mannitol, methanol, ethylene gly-
col, or isopropyl alcohol. Osmolal gaps may also be 
seen in patients with chronic kidney failure (attrib-
uted to retention of small solutes), patients with 
ketoacidosis (as a result of a high concentration of 
ketone bodies), and those receiving large amounts 
of glycine (as during transurethral resection of the 
prostate). Lastly, osmolal gaps may also be present 
in patients with marked hyperlipidemia or hyper-
proteinemia. In such instances, the protein or lipid 
 TABLE 493 Eﬀ ect of diﬀ erent ﬂ uid loads on 
extracellular and intracellular water contents.  1  
 A. Normal 
Total body solute = 280 mOsm/kg × 42 kg = 11,760 mOsm
Intracellular solute = 280 mOsm/kg × 25 kg = 7000 mOsm
Extracellular solute = 280 mOsm/kg × 17 kg = 4760 mOsm
Extracellular sodium concentration = 280 ÷ 2 = 140 mEq/L
Osmolality
Volume (L)
Net water gain
 Intracellular 
 
280
 
25
 
0
 Extracellular 
 
280
 
17
 
0
 B. Isotonic load: 2 L of Isotonic saline (NaCl) 
Total body solute = 280 mOsm/kg × 44 kg = 12,320 mOsm
Intracellular solute = 280 mOsm/kg × 25 kg = 7000 mOsm
Extracellular solute = 280 mOsm/kg × 19 kg = 5320 mOsm
Osmolality
Volume (L)
Net water gain
 Intracellular 
280
25
0
 Extracellular 
280
19
2
Net effect: Fluid remains in extracellular compartment.
 C. Free water (hypotonic) load: 2 L water 
New body water = 42 + 2 = 44 kg
New body osmolality = 11,760 mOsm ÷ 44 kg = 267 mOsm/kg
New intracellular volume  = 7000 mOsm ÷ 267 mOsm/kg 
= 26.2 kg
New extracellular sodium concentration = 267 ÷ 2 = 133 mEq/L
Osmolality
Volume (L)
Net water gain
 Intracellular 
267.0
 
26.2
 
+1.2
 Extracellular 
267.0
 
17.8
 
+0.8
Net effect: Fluid distributes between both compartments.
 D. Hypertonic load: 600 mEq NaCl (no water) 
Total body solute = 11,760 + 600 = 12,360 mOsm/kg
New body osmolality  = 12,360 mOsm/kg ÷ 42 kg 
= 294 mOsm
New extracellular solute = 600 + 4760 = 5360 mOsm
New extracellular volume  = 5360 mOsm ÷ 294 mOsm/kg 
= 18.2 kg
New intracellular volume = 42 – 18.2 = 23.8 kg
New extracellular sodium concentration = 294 ÷ 2 = 147 mEq/L
Osmolality
Volume (L)
Net water gain
 Intracellular 
294.0
23.8
–1.2
 Extracellular 
294.0
18.2
+1.2
Net effect: An intracellular to extracellular movement of water.
  1  Based on a 70-kg adult male.
1114 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
part of plasma contributes signifi cantly to plasma 
volume; although plasma [Na + ] is decreased, [Na + ] 
in the water phase of plasma (true plasma osmolal-
ity) remains normal. Th e water phase of plasma is 
normally only 93% of its volume; the remaining 7% 
consists of plasma lipids and proteins. 
 CONTROL OF PLASMA 
OSMOLALITY 
 Plasma osmolality is closely regulated by osmo-
receptors in the hypothalamus. Th ese specialized 
neurons control both the secretion of antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH) and the thirst mechanism. Plasma 
osmolality is therefore maintained within relatively 
narrow limits by varying both water intake and 
water excretion. 
 Secretion of Antidiuretic Hormone 
 Specialized neurons in the supraoptic and paraven-
tricular nuclei of the hypothalamus are very sensi-
tive to changes in extracellular osmolality. When 
ECF osmolality increases, these cells shrink and 
release ADH from the posterior pituitary. ADH 
markedly increases water reabsorption in renal 
collecting tubules (see Chapter 29), which tends 
to reduce plasma osmolality back to normal. Con-
versely, a decrease in extracellular osmolality causes 
osmoreceptors to swell and suppresses the release 
of ADH. Decreased ADH secretion allows a water 
diuresis, which tends to increase osmolality to nor-
mal. Peak diuresis occurs once circulating ADH is 
metabolized (90–120 min). With complete suppres-
sion of ADH secretion, the kidneys can excrete up to 
10–20 L of water per day. 
 Nonosmotic Release 
of Antidiuretic Hormone 
 Th e carotid baroreceptors and probably atrial 
stretch receptors can also stimulate ADH release 
following a 5–10% decrease in blood volume. Other 
nonosmotic stimuli include pain, emotional stress, 
and hypoxia. 
 Thirst 
 Osmoreceptors in the lateral preoptic area of the 
hypothalamus are also very sensitive to changes in 
extracellular osmolality. Activation of these neurons 
by increases in ECF osmolality induces thirst and 
causes the individual to drink water. Conversely, 
hypoosmolality suppresses thirst. Th irst is the major 
defense mechanism against hyperosmolality and 
hypernatremia, because it is the only mechanism 
that increases water intake. 
 HYPEROSMOLALITY 
& HYPERNATREMIA 
 Hyperosmolality occurs whenever total body solute 
content increases relative to TBW and is usually, but 
not always, associated with hypernatremia ([Na + ] 
> 145 mEq/L). Hyperosmolality without hyperna-
tremia may be seen during marked hyperglycemia 
or following the accumulation of abnormal osmoti-
cally active substances in plasma (see above). In the 
latter two instances, plasma sodium concentration 
may actually decrease as water is drawn from the 
intracellular to the extracellular compartment. For 
every 100 mg/dL increase in plasma glucose con-
centration, plasma sodium decreases approximately 
1.6 mEq/L. 
 Hypernatremia is nearly always the result of 
either a relative loss of water in excess of sodium 
(hypotonic fl uid loss) or the retention of large quan-
tities of sodium. Even when renal concentrating 
ability is impaired, thirst is normally highly eff ec-
tive in preventing hypernatremia. Hypernatremia 
is therefore most commonly seen in debilitated 
patients who are unable to drink, the very aged, 
the very young, and patients with altered con-
sciousness. Patients with hypernatremia may have 
a low, normal, or high total body sodium content 
( Table 49–4 ). 
 Hypernatremia & 
Low Total Body Sodium Content 
 Th ese patients have lost both sodium and water, 
but the water loss is in relative excess to that of the 
sodium loss. Hypotonic losses can be renal (osmotic 
diuresis) or extrarenal (diarrhea or sweat). In either 
case, patients usually manifest signs of hypovolemia 
(see Chapter 51). Urinary sodium concentration is 
generally greater than 20 mEq/L with renal losses 
and less than 10 mEq/L with extrarenal losses. 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1115 
 Hypernatremia & Normal 
Total Body Sodium Content 
 Th is group of patients generally manifests signs of 
water loss without overt hypovolemia unless the 
water loss is massive. Total body sodium content 
is generally normal. Nearly pure water losses can 
occur via the skin, respiratory tract, or kidneys. 
Occasionally transient hypernatremia is observed 
with movement of water into cells following exer-
cise, seizures, or rhabdomyolysis. Th e most com-
mon cause of hypernatremia in conscious patients 
with normal total body sodium content is  diabetes 
insipidus . Diabetes insipidus is characterized by 
marked impairment in renal concentrating ability 
that is due either to decreased ADH secretion (cen-
tral diabetes insipidus) or failure of the renal tubules 
to respond normally to circulating ADH (nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus). Rarely, “essential hyperna-
tremia” may be encountered in patients with central 
nervous system disorders. Th ese patients appear to 
have “reset” osmoreceptors that function at a higher 
baseline osmolality. 
 A. Central Diabetes Insipidus 
 Lesions in or around the hypothalamus and the 
pituitary stalk frequently produce diabetes insipi-
dus. Diabetes insipidus oft en develops with brain 
death. Transient diabetes insipidus is also com-
monly seen following neurosurgical procedures and 
head trauma. Th e diagnosis is suggested by a his-
tory of polydipsia, polyuria (oft en >6 L/d), and the 
absence of hyperglycemia. In the perioperative set-
ting, the diagnosis of diabetes insipidus is suggested 
by marked polyuria without glycosuria and a uri-
nary osmolality lower than plasma osmolality. Th e 
absence of thirst in unconscious individuals leads to 
marked water losses and can rapidly produce hypo-
volemia. Th e diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus 
is confi rmed by an increase in urinary osmolality 
following the administration of exogenous ADH. 
Aqueous vasopressin (5–10  units subcutaneously 
or intramuscularly every 4–6 h) is the treatment of 
choice for acute central diabetes insipidus. Vaso-
pressin in oil (0.3 mL intramuscularly every day) 
is longer lasting but is more likely to cause water 
intoxication. Desmopressin (DDAVP), a synthetic 
analogue of ADH with a 12- to 24-h duration of 
action, is available as an intranasal preparation 
(10–40 mcg/d either as a single daily dose or divided 
into two doses) that can be used in both ambulatory 
and perioperative settings. 
 B. Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus 
 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can be congenital 
but is more commonly secondary to other dis-
orders, including chronic kidney disease, hypo-
kalemia and hypercalcemia, sickle cell disease, 
and hyperproteinemias. Nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus can also be secondary to the side effects 
of some drugs (amphotericin B, lithium, dem-
eclocycline, ifosfamide, mannitol). ADH secre-
tion in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is normal, 
but the kidneys fail to respond to ADH; urinary 
concentrating ability is therefore impaired. The 
mechanism may be either a decreased response 
to circulating ADH or interference with the renal 
countercurrent mechanism. The diagnosis is 
confirmed by failure of the kidneys to produce 
hypertonic urine following the administration of 
exogenous ADH. Treatment is generally directed 
at the underlying illness and ensuring an ade-
quate fluid intake. Volume depletion by a thia-
zide diuretic can paradoxically decrease urinary 
output by reducing water delivery to collecting 
tubules. Sodium and protein restriction can simi-
larly reduce urinary output. 
 TABLE 494 Major causes of hypernatremia. 
 Impaired thirst 
 Coma 
 Essential hypernatremia 
 Solute diuresis 
 Osmotic diuresis: diabetic ketoacidosis, nonketotic 
 hyperosmolar coma, mannitol administration 
 Excessive water losses 
 Renal
 Neurogenic diabetes insipidus 
 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
 Extrarenal
 Sweating 
 Combined disorders 
 Coma plus hypertonic nasogastric feeding 
1116 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Hypernatremia & Increased 
Total Body Sodium Content 
 Th is condition most commonly results from the 
administration of large quantities of hypertonic 
saline solutions (3% NaCl or 7.5% NaHCO 3 ). 
Patients with primary hyperaldosteronism and 
Cushing’s syndrome may also have elevations in 
serum sodium concentration along with signs of 
increased sodium retention. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hypernatremia 
 Neurological manifestations predominate in patients 
with hypernatremia and are generally thought to 
result from cellular dehydration. Restlessness, leth-
argy, and hyperrefl exia can progress to seizures, 
coma, and ultimately death. Symptoms correlate 
more closely with the rate of movement of water out 
of brain cells than with the absolute level of hyper-
natremia. Rapid decreases in brain volume can rup-
ture cerebral veins and result in focal intracerebral 
or subarachnoid hemorrhage. Seizures and serious 
neurological damage are common, particularly in 
children with acute hypernatremia when plasma 
[Na + ] exceeds 158 mEq/L. Chronic hypernatremia 
is usually better tolerated than the acute form. Aft er 
24–48 h, intracellular osmolality begins to rise as a 
result of increases in intracellular inositol and amino 
acid (glutamine and taurine) concentrations. As 
intracellular solute concentration increases, neuro-
nal water content slowly returns to normal. 
 Treatment of Hypernatremia 
 Th e treatment of hypernatremia is aimed at restor-
ing plasma osmolality to normal as well as cor-
recting the underlying cause. Water defi cits should 
generally be corrected over 48 h with a hypotonic 
solution such as 5% dextrose in water (see below). 
Abnormalities in extracellular volume must also be 
corrected ( Figure 49–3 ). Hypernatremic patients 
with decreased total body sodium should be given 
isotonic fl uids to restore plasma volume to normal 
 prior to treatment with a hypotonic solution. Hyper-
natremic patients with increased total body sodium 
should be treated with a loop diuretic along with 
intravenous 5% dextrose in water. Th e treatment of 
diabetes insipidus is discussed above. 
 Rapid correction of hypernatremia can result 
in seizures, brain edema, permanent neurological 
damage, and even death. Serial Na + osmolalities 
should be obtained during treatment. In general, 
decreases in plasma sodium concentration should 
not proceed at a rate faster than 0.5 mEq/L/h. 
 Example 
 A 70-kg man is found to have a plasma [Na + ] of 
160 mEq/L. What is his water defi cit? 
 FIGURE 493  Algorithm for 
treatment of hypernatremia. 
Hypernatremia
Water and Na+ loss
Increased Na+ content
Replace isotonic loss
Replace water deficit
Replace water deficit
Replace any water deficit
Loop diuretic
Water loss
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1117 
 If one assumes that hypernatremia in this cases 
represents water loss only, then total body osmoles 
are unchanged. Th us, assuming a normal [Na + ] of 
140 mEq/L and TBW content that is 60% of body 
weight: 
 Normal TBW × 140 = present TBW × [Na+]plasma or 
(70 × 0.6) × 140 = present TBW × 160 
 Solving the equation: 
 Present TBW = 36.7 L
Water defi cit =  normal TBW − present TBW or 
(70 × 0.6) − 36.7 = 5.3 L 
 To replace this defi cit over 48 h, it is necessary 
to give 5% dextrose in water intravenously, 5300 mL 
over 48 h, or 110 mL/h. 
 Note that this method ignores any coexisting 
isotonic fl uid defi cits, which if present should be 
replaced with an isotonic solution. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Hypernatremia has been demonstrated to increase 
the minimum alveolar concentration for inhalation 
anesthetics in animal studies, but its clinical signifi -
cance is more closely related to the associated fl uid 
defi cits. Hypovolemia accentuates any vasodilation 
or cardiac depression from anesthetic agents and 
predisposes to hypotension and hypoperfusion of 
tissues. Decreases in the volume of distribution for 
drugs necessitate dose reductions for most intrave-
nous agents, whereas decreases in cardiac output 
enhance the uptake of inhalation anesthetics. 
 Elective surgery should be postponed in patients 
with signifi cant hypernatremia (>150 mEq/L) until 
the cause is established and fl uid defi cits are cor-
rected. Both water and isotonic fl uid defi cits should 
be corrected prior to elective surgery. 
 HYPOOSMOLALITY & 
HYPONATREMIA 
 Hypoosmolality is nearly always  associated with 
 hyponatremia ([Na + ] < 135 mEq/L).  Table  49–5 
lists  rare instances in which hyponatremia does 
not necessarily refl ect hypoosmolality ( pseudo-
hyponatremia ). Routine measurement of plasma 
osmolality in hyponatremic patients rapidly excludes 
pseudohyponatremia. 
 Hyponatremia invariably refl ects water reten-
tion from either an absolute increase in TBW or a 
loss of sodium in relative excess to loss of water. Th e 
kidneys’ normal capacity to produce dilute urine 
with an osmolality as low as 40 mOsm/kg (specifi c 
gravity 1.001) allows them to excrete over 10 L of 
free water per day if necessary. Because of this tre-
mendous reserve, hyponatremia is nearly always 
the result of a defect in urinary diluting  capacity 
( urinary osmolality > 100 mOsm/kg or specifi c 
gravity > 1.003). Rare instances of hyponatremia 
without an abnormality in renal diluting capacity 
(urinary osmolality < 100 mOsm/kg) are generally 
attributed to primary polydipsia or reset osmorecep-
tors; the latter two conditions can be diff erentiated 
by water restriction. 
 Clinically, hyponatremia is best  classifi ed accord-
ing to total body sodium content ( Table 49–6 ). 
 Hyponatremia associated with transurethral resec-
tion of the prostate is discussed in Chapter 31. 
 Hyponatremia & 
Low Total Body Sodium 
 Progressive losses of both sodium and water even-
tually lead to extracellular volume depletion. As the 
intravascular volume defi cit reaches 5–10%, non-
osmotic ADH secretion is activated (see above). 
With further volume depletion, the stimuli for 
nonosmotic ADH release overcome any hypona-
tremia-induced suppression of ADH. Preservation 
of circulatory volume takes place at the expense of 
plasma osmolality. 
 TABLE 495 Causes of pseudohyponatremia.  1  
 Hyponatremia with a normal plasma osmolality 
 Asymptomatic
 Marked hyperlipidemia 
 Marked hyperproteinemia 
 Symptomatic 
 Marked glycine absorption during transurethral surgery 
 Hyponatremia with an elevated plasma osmolality 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Administration of mannitol 
  1  Adapted from Rose RD:  Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte 
Disorders , 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, 1989.
1118 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Fluid losses resulting in hyponatremia may be 
renal or extrarenal in origin. Renal losses are most 
commonly related to thiazide diuretics and result 
in a urinary [Na + ] greater than 20 mEq/L. Extrare-
nal losses are typically gastrointestinal and usually 
produce a urinary [Na + ] of less than 10 mEq/L. A 
major exception to the latter is hyponatremia due 
to vomiting, which can result in a urinary [Na + ] 
greater than 20 mEq/L. In those instances, bicar-
bonaturia from the associated metabolic alkalosis 
obligates concomitant excretion of Na + with HCO 3 
to maintain electrical neutrality in the urine; urinary 
chloride concentration, however, is usually less than 
10 mEq/L. 
 Hyponatremia & Increased 
Total Body Sodium 
 Edematous disorders are characterized by an 
increase in both total body sodium and TBW. When 
the increase in water exceeds that in sodium, hypo-
natremia occurs. Edematous disorders include con-
gestive heart failure, cirrhosis, kidney failure, and 
nephrotic syndrome. Hyponatremia in these set-
tings results from progressive impairment of renal 
free water excretion and generally parallels underly-
ing disease severity. Pathophysiological mechanisms 
include nonosmotic ADH release and decreased 
delivery of fl uid to the distal diluting segment in 
nephrons (see Chapter 29). Th e “eff ective” circulat-
ing blood volume is reduced. 
 Hyponatremia with 
Normal Total Body Sodium 
 Hyponatremia in the absence of edema or hypovo-
lemia may be seen with glucocorticoid insuffi  ciency, 
hypothyroidism, drug therapy (chlorpropamide 
and cyclophosphamide), and the syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). 
Th e hyponatremia associated with adrenal hypo-
function may be due to cosecretion of ADH with 
 corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF). Diagnosis of 
SIADH requires exclusion of other causes of hypo-
natremia and the absence of hypovolemia, edema, 
and adrenal, renal, or thyroid disease. Various 
malignant tumors, pulmonary diseases, and central 
nervous system disorders are commonly associated 
with SIADH. In most such instances, plasma ADH 
concentration is not elevated but is inadequately 
suppressed relative to the degree of hypoosmolality 
in plasma; urine osmolality is usually greater than 
100  mOsm/kg and urine sodium concentration is 
greater than 40 mEq/L. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hyponatremia 
 Symptoms of hyponatremia are primarily neuro-
logical and result from an increase in intracellular 
water. Th eir severity is generally related to the rapid-
ity with which extracellular hypoosmolality devel-
ops. Patients with mild to moderate hyponatremia 
([Na + ] > 125 mEq/L) are frequently asymptomatic. 
Early symptoms are typically nonspecifi c and 
may include anorexia, nausea, and weakness. Pro-
gressive cerebral edema, however, results in leth-
argy, confusion, seizures, coma, and fi nally death. 
 Serious manifestations of hyponatremia are 
generally associated with plasma sodium con-
centrations less than 120 mEq/L. Compared with 
4
 TABLE 496 Classiﬁ cation of hypoosmolal 
hyponatremia. 
 Decreased total sodium content 
 Renal
 Diuretics 
 Mineralocorticoid deficiency 
 Salt-losing nephropathies 
 Osmotic diuresis (glucose, mannitol) 
 Renal tubular acidosis 
 Extrarenal
 Vomiting 
 Diarrhea 
 Integumentary loss (sweating, burns) 
 “Third-spacing” 
 Normal total sodium content 
 Primary polydipsia 
 Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
 Glucocorticoid deficiency 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Drug-induced 
 Increased total sodium content 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Cirrhosis 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1119 
men, premenopausal women appear to be at greater 
risk of neurological impairment and damage from 
hyponatremia. 
 Patients with slowly developing or chronic 
hyponatremia are generally less symptomatic, prob-
ably because the gradual compensatory loss of intra-
cellular solutes (primarily Na + , K + , and amino acids) 
restores cell volume to near normal. Neurological 
symptoms in patients with chronic hyponatremia 
may be related more closely to changes in cell mem-
brane potential (due to a low extracellular [Na + ]) 
than to changes in cell volume. 
 Treatment of Hyponatremia 
 As with hypernatremia, the treatment of hypona-
tremia ( Figure 49–4 ) is directed at correcting both 
the underlying disorder as well as the plasma [Na + ]. 
 Isotonic saline is generally the treatment of choice 
for hyponatremic patients with decreased total 
body sodium content.  Once the ECF defi cit is cor-
rected, spontaneous water diuresis returns plasma 
[Na + ] to normal. Conversely, water restriction is 
the primary treatment for hyponatremic patients 
with normal or increased total body sodium. More 
Hyponatremia
Normal
extracellular
volume
Decreased
extracellular
volume
Increased
extracellular
volume
Renal
Extrarenal
Replace isotonic deficit
Replace sodium deficit
Adrenal or
thyroid hypofunction
Cortisol or
thyroid hormone
Heart failure
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Renal failure
UNa
> 20 mEq/L
UNa
< 20 mEq/L
Restrict water
UNa
> 20 mEq/L
UNa
< 10 mEq/L
UNa = Urinary sodium concentration
UNa
> 20 mEq/L
Restrict water
Restrict water
Loop diuretic
 FIGURE 494  Algorithm for treatment of hyponatremia. 
1120 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
specifi c treatments such as hormone replacement 
in patients with adrenal or thyroid hypofunction 
and measures aimed at improving cardiac output 
in patients with heart failure may also be indicated. 
Demeclocycline, a drug that antagonizes ADH 
activity at the renal tubules, has proved to be a use-
ful adjunct to water restriction in the treatment of 
patients with SIADH. 
 Acute symptomatic hyponatremia requires 
prompt treatment. In such instances, correction 
of plasma [Na + ] to greater than 125 mEq/L is usu-
ally suffi  cient to alleviate symptoms.  Th e amount of 
NaCl necessary to raise plasma [Na + ] to the desired 
value, the Na + defi cit, can be estimated by the follow-
ing formula: 
 Na + defi cit = TBW × (desired [Na + ] − present [Na + ]) 
 Excessively rapid correction of hyponatre-
mia has been associated with demyelinating 
lesions in the pons ( central pontine myelinolysis ), 
resulting in permanent neurological sequelae. Th e 
rapidity with which hyponatremia is corrected 
should be tailored to the severity of symptoms. Th e 
following correction rates have been suggested: for 
mild symptoms, 0.5 mEq/L/h or less; for moderate 
symptoms, 1 mEq/L/h or less; and for severe symp-
toms, 1.5 mEq/L/h or less. 
 Example 
 An 80-kg woman is lethargic and is found to have 
plasma [Na + ] of 118 mEq/L. How much NaCl must 
be given to raise her plasma [Na + ] to 130 mEq/L? 
 Na+ defi cit = TBW × (130 − 118) 
 TBW is approximately 50% of body weight in 
females: 
 Na+ defi cit = 80 × 0.5 × (130 − 118) = 480 mEq 
 Because normal (isotonic) saline contains 
154 mEq/L, the patient should receive 480 mEq ÷
154 mEq/L, or 3.12 L of normal saline. For a cor-
rection rate of 0.5 mEq/L/h, this amount of saline 
should be given over 24 h (130 mL/h). 
 Note that this calculation does not take into 
account any coexisting isotonic fl uid defi cits, which, 
if present, should also be replaced. More rapid cor-
rection of hyponatremia can be achieved by giving a 
5
loop diuretic to induce water diuresis while replacing 
urinary Na + losses with isotonic saline. Even more 
rapid corrections can be achieved with intravenous 
hypertonic saline (3% NaCl). Hypertonic saline may 
be indicated in markedly symptomatic patients with 
plasma [Na + ] less than 110 mEq/L. Th ree percent 
NaCl should be given cautiously as it can precipi-
tate pulmonary edema, hypokalemia, hyperchlore-
mic metabolic acidosis, and transient hypotension; 
bleeding has been associated with prolongation of 
the prothrombin time and activated partial throm-
boplastin time. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Hyponatremia is oft en a manifestation of a serious 
underlying disorder and requires careful preop-
erative evaluation. A plasma sodium concentration 
greater than 130 mEq/L is usually considered safe 
for patients undergoing general anesthesia. In most 
circumstances, plasma [Na+] should be corrected 
to greater than 130 mEq/L for elective procedures, 
even in the absence of neurological symptoms. 
Lower concentrations may result in signifi cant cere-
bral edema that can be manifested intraoperatively 
as a decrease in minimum alveolar concentration or 
postoperatively as agitation, confusion, or somno-
lence. Patients undergoing transurethral resection 
of the prostate can absorb signì cant amounts of 
water from irrigation fl uids (as much as 20 mL/min) 
and are at high risk for rapid development of pro-
found acute water intoxication. 
 Disorders of Sodium Balance 
 ECF volume is directly proportionate to total body 
sodium content. Variations in ECF volume result 
from changes in total body sodium content. A posi-
tive sodium balance increases ECF volume, whereas 
a negative sodium balance decreases ECF volume. 
It is important to reemphasize that  extracellular 
(plasma)  Na + concentration is more indicative of 
water balance than total body sodium content. 
 NORMAL SODIUM BALANCE 
 Net sodium balance is equal to total sodium intake 
(adults average 170 mEq/d) minus both renal sodium 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1121 
excretion and extrarenal sodium losses. (One gram 
of sodium yields 43 mEq of Na + ions, whereas 1 g 
of sodium chloride yields 17 mEq of Na + ions.) Th e 
kidneys’ ability to vary urinary Na + excretion from 
less than 1 mEq/L to more than 100 mEq/L allows 
them to play a critical role in sodium balance (see 
Chapter 29). 
 REGULATION OF SODIUM 
BALANCE & EXTRACELLULAR 
FLUID VOLUME 
 Because of the relationship between ECF volume 
and total body sodium content, regulation of one 
is intimately tied to the other. Th is regulation is 
achieved via sensors (see below) that detect changes 
in the most important component of ECF, namely, 
the “eff ective” intravascular volume. Th e latter corre-
lates more closely with the rate of perfusion in renal 
capillaries than with measurable intravascular fl uid 
(plasma) volume. Indeed, with edematous disorders 
(heart failure, cirrhosis, and kidney failure), “eff ec-
tive” intravascular volume can be independent of the 
measurable plasma volume, ECF volume, and even 
cardiac output. 
 ECF volume and total body sodium content are 
ultimately controlled by appropriate adjustments 
in renal Na + excretion. In the absence of kidney 
disease, diuretic therapy, and selective renal isch-
emia, urinary Na + concentration refl ects “eff ective” 
intravascular volume. A low urine Na + concentra-
tion (<10 mEq/L) is therefore generally indicative 
of a low “eff ective” intravascular fl uid volume and 
refl ects secondary retention of Na + by the kidneys. 
 Control Mechanisms 
 Th e multiple mechanisms involved in regulating 
ECF volume and sodium balance normally comple-
ment one another but can function independently. 
In addition to altering renal Na + excretion, some 
mechanisms also produce more rapid compensatory 
hemodynamic responses when “eff ective” intravas-
cular volume is reduced. 
 A. Sensors of Volume 
 Baroreceptors are the principal volume receptors in 
the body. Because blood pressure is the product of 
cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance (see 
Chapter 20), signifi cant changes in intravascular vol-
ume (preload) not only aff ect cardiac output but also 
transiently aff ect arterial blood pressure. Th us, the 
baroreceptors at the carotid sinus and aff erent renal 
arterioles (juxtaglomerular apparatus) indirectly 
function as sensors of intravascular volume.  Changes 
in blood pressure at the carotid sinus modulate sym-
pathetic nervous system activity and nonosmotic 
ADH secretion, whereas changes at the aff erent 
renal arterioles modulate the renin– angiotensin– 
aldosterone system. Stretch receptors in both atria 
are aff ected by changes in intravascular volume, and 
the degree of atrial distention modulates the release 
of atrial natriuretic hormone and ADH. 
 B. Eﬀ ectors of Volume Change 
 Regardless of the mechanism, eff ectors of vol-
ume change ultimately alter urinary Na + excretion. 
Decreases in “eff ective” intravascular volume decrease 
urinary Na + excretion, whereas increases in the “eff ec-
tive” intravascular volume increase urinary Na + excre-
tion. Th ese mechanisms include the following: 
 1. Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone —Renin secre-
tion increases the formation of angiotensin II. Th e 
latter increases the secretion of aldosterone and 
has a direct eff ect in enhancing Na + reabsorption 
in the proximal renal tubules. Angiotensin II is also 
a potent direct vasoconstrictor and potentiates the 
actions of norepinephrine. Secretion of aldosterone 
enhances Na + reabsorption in the distal nephron 
(see Chapter 29) and is a major determinant of uri-
nary Na + excretion. 
 2. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) —Th is peptide 
is normally released from both right and left  atrial 
cells following atrial distention. ANP appears to 
have two major actions: arterial vasodilation and 
increased urinary sodium and water excretion in the 
renal collecting tubules. Na + -mediated aff erent arte-
riolar dilation and eff erent arteriolar constriction 
can also increase glomerular fi ltration rate (GFR). 
Other eff ects include the inhibition of both renin 
and aldosterone secretion and antagonism of ADH. 
 3. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) —ANP, BNP, and 
C-type natriuretic peptide are structurally related 
peptides. BNP is released by the ventricles in response 
to increased ventricular volume and pressure, and 
1122 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
ventricular overdistention, and also by the brain in 
response to increased blood pressure. BNP levels are 
usually approximately 20% of ANP levels, but dur-
ing an episode of acute congestive heart failure BNP 
levels may exceed those of ANP. BNP levels can be 
measured clinically, and a recombinant form of 
BNP, nesiritide (Natrecor), is available to treat acute 
decompensated congestive heart failure. 
 4. 
Sympathetic 
nervous 
system 
activity — 
Enhanced sympathetic activity increases Na + reab-
sorption in the proximal renal tubules, resulting in 
Na + retention, and increases renal vasoconstriction, 
which reduces renal blood fl ow (see Chapter 29). 
Conversely, stimulation of left  atrial stretch recep-
tors results in decreases in renal sympathetic tone 
and increases in renal blood fl ow (cardiorenal refl ex) 
and glomerular fi ltration. 
 5. Glomerular fi ltration rate and plasma sodium 
concentration —Th e amount of Na + fi ltered in the 
kidneys is directly proportionate to the product of 
the GFR and plasma Na + concentration. Because 
GFR is usually proportionate to intravascular vol-
ume, intravascular volume expansion can increase 
Na +  excretion. Conversely, intravascular volume 
depletion decreases Na + excretion. Similarly, even 
small elevations of blood pressure can result in a 
relatively large increase in urinary Na + excretion 
because of the resultant increase in renal blood 
fl ow and glomerular fi ltration rate. Blood pressure– 
induced diuresis ( pressure natriuresis ) appears to be 
independent of any known humorally or neurally 
mediated mechanism. 
 6. Tubuloglomerular balance —Despite wide varia-
tions in the amount of Na + fi ltered in nephrons, Na + 
reabsorption in the proximal renal tubules is normally 
controlled within narrow limits. Factors considered to 
be responsible for tubuloglomerular balance include 
the rate of renal tubular fl ow and changes in peri-
tubular capillary hydrostatic and oncotic pressures. 
Altered Na + reabsorption in the proximal tubules can 
have a marked eff ect on renal Na + excretion. 
 7. Antidiuretic hormone —Although ADH secre-
tion has little eff ect on Na + excretion, nonosmotic 
secretion of this hormone (see above) can play an 
important part in maintaining extracellular volume 
with moderate to severe decreases in the “eff ective” 
intravascular volume. 
 Extracellular Osmoregulation 
versus Volume Regulation 
 Osmoregulation protects the normal ratio of sol-
utes to water, whereas extracellular volume regula-
tion preserves absolute solute and water content 
( Table 49–7 ). As noted previously, volume regulation 
generally takes precedence over osmoregulation. 
 Anesthetic Implications 
 Problems related to altered sodium balance result 
from its manifestations as well as the underlying 
disorder. Disorders of sodium balance present either 
as hypovolemia (sodium defi cit) or hypervolemia 
(sodium excess). Both disturbances should be cor-
rected prior to elective surgical procedures. Cardiac, 
liver, and renal function should also be carefully 
evaluated in the presence of sodium excess (gener-
ally manifested as tissue edema). 
 Hypovolemic patients are sensitive to the vaso-
dilating and negative inotropic eff ects of vapor 
anesthetics, propofol, and agents associated with 
histamine release (morphine, meperidine). Dosage 
 TABLE 497 Osmoregulation versus volume 
regulation.  1  
Volume Regulation
Osmoregulation
Purpose
Control extracellular 
volume
Control 
extracellular 
osmolality
Mechanism Vary renal Na + excretion
Vary water intake
Vary renal water 
excretion
Sensors
 Afferent renal arterioles 
 Carotid baroreceptors 
 Atrial stretch receptors 
Hypothalamic 
osmoreceptors
Effectors
Renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone
Sympathetic nervous 
system
Tubuloglomerular balance
Renal pressure natriuresis
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Antidiuretic hormone
Brain natriuretic peptide
Thirst
Antidiuretic 
hormone
  1  Adapted from Rose RD:  Clinical Physiology of Acid-Base and Electrolyte 
Disorders , 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, 1989.
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1123
requirements for other drugs must also be reduced 
to compensate for decreases in their volume of dis-
tribution. Hypovolemic patients are particularly 
sensitive to sympathetic blockade from spinal or 
epidural anesthesia. If an anesthetic must be admin-
istered prior to adequate correction of hypovolemia, 
etomidate or ketamine may be the induction agents 
of choice for general anesthesia. 
 Hypervolemia should generally be corrected 
preoperatively with diuretics.  Th e major haz-
ard of increases in extracellular volume is 
impaired gas exchange due to pulmonary interstitial 
edema, alveolar edema, or large collections of pleu-
ral or ascitic fl uid. 
 Disorders of Potassium Balance 
 Potassium plays a major role in the electrophysiol-
ogy of cell membranes as well as in carbohydrate 
and protein synthesis (see below). Th e resting cell 
membrane potential is normally dependent on 
the ratio of intracellular to extracellular potassium 
concentrations. Intracellular potassium concentra-
tion is estimated to be 140 mEq/L, whereas extra-
cellular potassium concentration is normally about 
4 mEq/L. Under some conditions, a redistribution 
of K + between the ECF and ICF compartments can 
result in marked changes in extracellular [K + ] with-
out a change in total body potassium content. 
 NORMAL POTASSIUM 
BALANCE 
 Dietary potassium intake averages 80 mEq/d in 
adults (range, 40–140 mEq/d). About 70 mEq of that 
amount is normally excreted in urine, whereas the 
remaining 10 mEq is lost through the gastrointes-
tinal tract. 
 Renal excretion of potassium can vary from as 
little as 5 mEq/L to over 100 mEq/L. Nearly all the 
potassium fi ltered in glomeruli is normally reab-
sorbed in the proximal tubule and the loop of Henle. 
Th e potassium excreted in urine is the result of distal 
tubular secretion. Potassium secretion in the distal 
tubules is coupled to aldosterone-mediated reab-
sorption of sodium (see Chapter 29). 
6
 REGULATION OF 
EXTRACELLULAR POTASSIUM 
CONCENTRATION 
 Extracellular potassium concentration is deter-
mined by cell membrane Na + –K + -ATPase activity 
and plasma [K + ], and is infl uenced by the balance 
of potassium intake and excretion. Cell membrane 
Na + –K + -ATPase activity regulates the distribution of 
potassium between cells and ECF, whereas plasma 
[K + ] is the major determinant of urinary potassium 
excretion. 
 INTERCOMPARTMENTAL 
SHIFTS OF POTASSIUM 
 Intercompartmental shift s of potassium are known 
to occur following changes in extracellular pH (see 
Chapter 50), circulating insulin levels, circulating 
catecholamine activity, plasma osmolality, and pos-
sibly hypothermia. Insulin and catecholamines are 
known to directly aff ect Na + –K + -ATPase activity 
and decrease plasma [K + ]. Exercise can also tran-
siently increase plasma [K + ] as a result of the release 
of K + by muscle cells; the increase in plasma [K + ] 
(0.3–2 mEq/L) is proportionate to the intensity and 
duration of muscle activity. Intercompartmental 
potassium shift s are also thought to be responsible 
for changes in plasma [K + ] in syndromes of periodic 
paralysis (see Chapter 35). 
 Because the ICF may buff er up to 60% of an 
acid load (see Chapter 50), changes in extracellu-
lar hydrogen ion concentration (pH) directly aff ect 
extracellular [K + ]. In the setting of acidosis, extra-
cellular hydrogen ions enter cells, displacing intra-
cellular potassium ions; the resultant movement of 
potassium ions out of cells maintains electrical bal-
ance but increases extracellular and plasma [K + ]. 
Conversely, during alkalosis, extracellular potas-
sium ions move into cells to balance the movement 
of hydrogen ions out of cells; as a result, plasma [K + ] 
decreases. Although the relationship is variable, a 
useful rule of thumb is that plasma potassium con-
centration changes approximately 0.6 mEq/L per 
0.1 unit change in arterial pH (range 0.2–1.2 mEq/L 
per 0.1 unit). 
1124 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Changes in circulating insulin levels can 
directly alter plasma [K + ] independent of that hor-
mone’s eff ect on glucose transport. Insulin enhances 
the activity of membrane-bound Na + –K + -ATPase, 
increasing cellular uptake of potassium in the liver 
and in skeletal muscle, and insulin secretion may 
play an important role in the basal control of plasma 
potassium concentration and in the physiological 
response to increased potassium loads. 
 Sympathetic stimulation also increases intra-
cellular uptake of potassium by enhancing Na + –K + -
ATPase activity. Th is eff ect is mediated through 
activation of β 2 -adrenergic receptors. In contrast, 
α-adrenergic activity may impair the intracellular 
movement of K + . Plasma [K + ] oft en decreases fol-
lowing the administration of β 2 -adrenergic agonists 
as a result of uptake of potassium by muscle and the 
liver. Moreover, β-adrenergic blockade can impair 
the handling of a potassium load in some patients. 
 Acute increases in plasma osmolality (hyper-
natremia, hyperglycemia, or mannitol administra-
tion) may increase plasma [K + ] (about 0.6 mEq/L 
per 10 mOsm/L). In such instances, the movement 
of water out of cells (down its osmotic gradient) is 
accompanied by movement of K + out of cells. Th e 
latter may be the result of “solvent drag” or the 
increase in intracellular [K + ] that follows cellular 
dehydration. 
 Hypothermia has been reported to lower 
plasma [K + ] as a result of cellular uptake. Rewarm-
ing reverses this shift  and may result in transient 
hyperkalemia if potassium was given during the 
hypothermia. 
 Urinary Excretion of Potassium 
 Urinary potassium excretion generally parallels its 
extracellular concentration. Potassium is secreted 
by tubular cells in the distal nephron. Extracellular 
[K + ] is a major determinant of aldosterone secre-
tion from the adrenal gland. Hyperkalemia stimu-
lates aldosterone secretion, whereas hypokalemia 
suppresses aldosterone secretion. Renal tubular 
fl ow in the distal nephron may also be an impor-
tant determinant of urinary potassium excretion 
because high tubular fl ow rates (as during osmotic 
diuresis) increase potassium secretion by keeping 
the capillary to renal tubular gradient for potassium 
secretion high. Conversely, slow tubular fl ow rates 
increase [K + ] in tubular fl uid and decrease the gradi-
ent for K + secretion, thereby decreasing renal potas-
sium excretion. 
 HYPOKALEMIA 
 Hypokalemia, defi ned as plasma [K + ] less than 
3.5 mEq/L, can occur as a result of (1) an intercom-
partmental shift  of K + (see above), (2) increased 
potassium loss, or (3) an inadequate potassium intake 
( Table 49–8 ). Plasma potassium concentration typi-
cally correlates poorly with the total potassium defi cit. 
A decrease in plasma [K + ] from 4 mEq/L to 3 mEq/L 
usually represents a 100- to 200-mEq defi cit, whereas 
plasma [K + ] below 3 mEq/L can represent a defi cit 
anywhere between 200 mEq and 400 mEq. 
 TABLE 498 Major causes of hypokalemia. 
 Excess renal loss 
 Mineralocorticoid excess
 Primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome) 
 Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism 
 Renin excess
 Renovascular hypertension 
 Bartter’s syndrome 
 Liddle’s syndrome 
 Diuresis 
 Chronic metabolic alkalosis 
 Antibiotics
 Carbenicillin 
 Gentamicin 
 Amphotericin B 
 Renal tubular acidosis
 Distal, gradient-limited 
 Proximal 
 Ureterosigmoidostomy 
 Gastrointestinal losses 
 Vomiting 
 Diarrhea, particularly secretory diarrheas 
 ECF → ICF shifts 
 Acute alkalosis 
 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis 
 Barium ingestion 
 Insulin therapy 
 Vitamin B 12 therapy 
 Thyrotoxicosis (rarely) 
 Inadequate intake 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1125 
 Hypokalemia due to the Intracellular 
Movement of Potassium 
 Hypokalemia due to the intracellular movement of 
potassium occurs with alkalosis, insulin therapy, 
β 2 -adrenergic agonists, and hypothermia and dur-
ing attacks of hypokalemic periodic paralysis (see 
above). Hypokalemia may also be seen following 
transfusion of previously frozen red cells; these 
cells lose potassium in the preservation process 
and take up potassium following reinfusion. Cel-
lular K + uptake by red blood cells (and platelets) 
also accounts for the hypokalemia seen in patients 
recently treated with folate or vitamin B 12 for mega-
loblastic anemia. 
 Hypokalemia due 
to Increased Potassium Losses 
 Excessive potassium losses are usually either renal 
or gastrointestinal. Renal wasting of potassium is 
most commonly the result of diuresis or enhanced 
mineralocorticoid activity. Other renal causes 
include hypomagnesemia (see below), renal tubular 
acidosis (see Chapter 29), ketoacidosis, salt-wasting 
nephropathies, and some drug therapies (carbenicil-
lin and amphotericin B). Increased gastrointestinal 
loss of potassium is most commonly due to nasogas-
tric suctioning or to persistent vomiting or diarrhea. 
Other gastrointestinal causes include losses from fi s-
tulae, laxative abuse, villous adenomas, and pancre-
atic tumors secreting vasoactive intestinal peptide. 
 Chronic increased sweat formation occasionally 
causes hypokalemia, particularly when potassium 
intake is limited. Dialysis with a low-potassium-
containing dialysate solution can also cause hypo-
kalemia. Uremic patients may actually have a total 
body potassium defi cit (primarily intracellular) 
despite a normal or even high plasma concentra-
tion; the absence of hypokalemia in these instances 
is probably due to an intercompartmental shift  from 
the acidosis. Dialysis in these patients unmasks the 
total body potassium defi cit and oft en results in 
hypokalemia. 
 Urinary [K + ] less than 20 mEq/L is generally 
indicative of increased extrarenal losses, whereas 
concentrations greater than 20 mEq/L suggest renal 
wasting of K + . 
 TABLE 499 Eﬀ ects of hypokalemia.  1  
 Cardiovascular 
 Electrocardiographic changes/arrhythmias 
 Myocardial dysfunction 
 Neuromuscular 
 Skeletal muscle weakness 
 Tetany 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Ileus 
 Renal 
 Polyuria (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus) 
 Increased ammonia production 
 Increased bicarbonate reabsorption 
 Hormonal 
 Decreased insulin secretion 
 Decreased aldosterone secretion 
 Metabolic 
 Negative nitrogen balance 
 Encephalopathy in patients with liver disease 
  1  Adapted from Schrier RW, ed:  Renal and Electrolyte Disorders , 3rd ed. 
Little, Brown and Company, 1986.
 Hypokalemia due to 
Decreased Potassium Intake 
 Because of the kidney’s ability to decrease urinary 
potassium excretion to as low as 5–20 mEq/L, 
marked reductions in potassium intake are required 
to produce hypokalemia. Low potassium intakes, 
however, oft en accentuate the eff ects of increased 
potassium losses. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hypokalemia 
 Hypokalemia can produce widespread organ dysfunc-
tion ( Table 49–9 ). Most patients are asymptomatic 
until plasma [K + ] falls below 3 mEq/L. Cardiovascular 
eff ects are most prominent and include an abnormal 
ECG ( Figure 49–5 ), arrhythmias, decreased cardiac 
contractility, and a labile arterial blood pressure due 
to autonomic dysfunction. Chronic hypokalemia 
has also been reported to cause myocardial fi brosis. 
 ECG manifestations are primarily due to delayed 
ventricular repolarization and include T-wave fl at-
tening and inversion, an increasingly prominent 
U wave, ST-segment depression, increased P-wave 
amplitude, and prolongation of the P–R interval . 
1126 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Increased myocardial cell automaticity and delayed 
repolarization promote both atrial and ventricular 
arrhythmias. 
 Neuromuscular eff ects of hypokalemia include 
skeletal muscle weakness, fl accid paralysis, hypo-
refl exia, muscle cramping, ileus, and, rarely, rhab-
domyolysis. Hypokalemia induced by diuretics is 
oft en associated with metabolic alkalosis; as the 
kidneys absorb sodium to compensate for intra-
vascular volume depletion and in the presence of 
diuretic-induced hypochloremia, bicarbonate is 
absorbed. Th e end result is hypokalemia and hypo-
chloremic metabolic alkalosis. Renal dysfunction is 
seen due to impaired concentrating ability (resis-
tance to ADH, resulting in polyuria) and increased 
production of ammonia resulting in impairment 
of urinary acidifi cation. Increased ammonia pro-
duction represents intracellular acidosis; hydrogen 
ions move intracellularly to compensate for intra-
cellular potassium losses. Th e resulting metabolic 
alkalosis, together with increased ammonia pro-
duction, can precipitate encephalopathy in patients 
with advanced liver disease. Chronic hypokalemia 
has been associated with renal fi brosis (tubulointer-
stitial nephropathy). 
 Treatment of Hypokalemia 
 Th e treatment of hypokalemia depends on the 
presence and severity of any associated organ 
dysfunction. Signifi cant ECG changes such as ST-
segment changes or arrhythmias mandate con-
tinuous ECG monitoring, particularly during 
intravenous K + replacement. Digoxin therapy—as 
well as the hypokalemia itself—sensitizes the heart 
to changes in potassium ion concentration. Muscle 
strength should also be periodically assessed in 
patients with weakness. 
 In most circumstances, the safest method by 
which to correct a potassium defi cit is oral replace-
ment over several days using a potassium chlo-
ride solution (60–80 mEq/d).  Intravenous 
replacement of potassium chloride is usually 
be reserved for patients with, or at risk for, signifi -
cant cardiac manifestations or severe muscle 
 weakness. Th e goal of intravenous therapy is to 
remove the patient from immediate danger, not to 
 correct the entire potassium defi cit. Because of 
 potassium’s irritative eff ect on peripheral veins, 
 peripheral intravenous replacement should not 
exceed 8  mEq/h. Dextrose-containing solutions 
should generally be avoided because the resulting 
 hyperglycemia and secondary insulin secretion 
may actually worsen the low plasma [K + ]. 
More rapid intravenous potassium replacement 
(10–20  mEq/h) requires central venous adminis-
tration and close monitoring of the ECG. Intrave-
nous replacement should generally not exceed 
240 mEq/d. 
7
 FIGURE 495  Electrocardiographic eﬀ ects of acute hypokalemia. Note progressive ﬂ attening of the T wave, an 
increasingly prominent U wave, increased amplitude of the P wave, prolongation of the P–R interval, and ST-segment 
depression. 
R
R
R
U
U
U
T
T
T
S
S
S
P
P
P
3.9 mEq/L
2.7 mEq/L
1.3 mEq/L
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1127 
 Potassium chloride is the preferred potas-
sium salt when a metabolic alkalosis is also present 
because it also corrects the chloride defi cit discussed 
above. Potassium bicarbonate or equivalent (K + 
acetate or K + citrate) is preferable for patients with 
metabolic acidosis. Potassium phosphate is a suit-
able alternative with concomitant hypophosphate-
mia (diabetic ketoacidosis). 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Hypokalemia is a common preoperative fi nding. 
Th e decision to proceed with elective surgery is 
oft en based on lower plasma [K + ] limits somewhere 
between 3 and 3.5 mEq/L. Th e decision, how-
ever, should also be based on the rate at which the 
hypokalemia developed as well as the presence or 
absence of secondary organ dysfunction. In general, 
chronic mild hypokalemia (3–3.5 mEq/L) without 
ECG changes does not substantially increase anes-
thetic risk. Th e latter may not apply to patients 
receiving digoxin, who may be at increased risk of 
developing digoxin toxicity from the hypokalemia; 
plasma [K + ] values above 4 mEq/L are desirable in 
such patients. 
 Th e intraoperative management of hypokale-
mia requires vigilant ECG monitoring. Intravenous 
potassium should be given if atrial or ventricular 
arrhythmias develop. Glucose-free intravenous 
solutions should be used and hyperventilation 
avoided to prevent further decreases in plasma [K + ]. 
Increased sensitivity to neuromuscular blockers 
(NMBs) may be seen; therefore dosages of NMBs 
should be reduced 25–50%, and a nerve stimulator 
should be used to follow both the degree of paralysis 
and the adequacy of reversal. 
 HYPERKALEMIA 
 Hyperkalemia exists when plasma [K + ] exceeds 
5.5 mEq/L. Hyperkalemia rarely occurs in nor-
mal individuals because of the kidney’s capability 
to excrete large potassium loads. When potassium 
intake is increased slowly, the kidneys can excrete as 
much as 500 mEq of K + per day. Th e sympathetic 
nervous system and insulin secretion also play 
important roles in preventing acute increases in 
plasma [K + ] following acquired potassium loads. 
 TABLE 4910 Causes of hyperkalemia. 
 Pseudohyperkalemia 
 Red cell hemolysis 
 Marked leukocytosis/thrombocytosis 
 Intercompartmental shifts 
 Acidosis 
 Hypertonicity 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Excessive exercise 
 Periodic paralysis 
 Succinylcholine 
 Decreased renal potassium excretion 
 Renal failure 
 Decreased mineralocorticoid activity and impaired Na + 
reabsorption 
 Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
 Potassium-sparing diuretics
 Spironolactone 
 Eplerenone 
 Amiloride 
 Triamterene 
 ACE  1  inhibitors 
 Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
 Pentamidine 
 Trimethoprim 
 Enhanced Cl − reabsorption 
 Gordon’s syndrome 
 Cyclosporine 
 Increased potassium intake 
 Salt substitutes 
  1  ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme.
 Hyperkalemia can result from (1) an intercom-
partmental shift  of potassium ions, (2) decreased 
urinary excretion of potassium, or, rarely, (3) an 
increased potassium intake ( Table 49–10 ). Mea-
surements of plasma potassium concentration can 
be spuriously elevated if red cells hemolyze in a 
blood specimen. In vitro release of potassium from 
white cells in a blood specimen can also falsely indi-
cate increased levels in the measured plasma [K + ] 
when the leukocyte count exceeds 70,000 × 10 9 /L. 
A similar release of potassium from platelets occurs 
when the platelet count exceeds 1,000,000 × 10 9 /L. 
 Hyperkalemia due to Extracellular 
Movement of Potassium 
 Movement of K + out of cells can be seen with aci-
dosis, cell lysis following chemotherapy, hemolysis, 
1128 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
rhabdomyolysis, massive tissue trauma, hyperosmo-
lality, digitalis overdoses, during episodes of hyper-
kalemic periodic paralysis, and with administration 
of succinylcholine, β 2 -adrenergic blockers, and argi-
nine hydrochloride. Th e average increase in plasma 
[K + ] of 0.5 mEq/L following succinylcholine admin-
istration can be exaggerated in patients with large 
burns or severe muscle trauma and in those with 
muscle denervation, and its use in these settings 
should be avoided. 
 β 2 -Adrenergic blockade accentuates the increase 
in plasma [K + ] that occurs following exercise. 
Digoxin inhibits Na + –K + -ATPase in cell membranes, 
and digoxin overdose has been reported to cause 
hyperkalemia in some patients. Arginine hydro-
chloride, which is used to treat metabolic alkalosis, 
evaluate pituitary growth hormone reserve, and as 
a performance-enhancing supplement by athletes, 
can cause hyperkalemia as the cationic arginine ions 
enter cells and potassium ions move out to maintain 
electroneutrality. 
 Hyperkalemia due to 
Decreased Renal Excretion 
of Potassium 
 Decreased renal excretion of potassium can result 
from (1) marked reductions in glomerular fi ltration, 
(2) decreased aldosterone activity, or (3) a defect in 
potassium secretion in the distal nephron. 
 Glomerular fi ltration rates less than 5 mL/min are 
nearly always associated with hyperkalemia. Patients 
with lesser degrees of renal impairment can also read-
ily develop hyperkalemia when faced with increased 
potassium loads (dietary, catabolic, or iatrogenic). 
Uremia may also impair Na + –K + -ATPase activity. 
 Hyperkalemia due to decreased aldosterone 
activity can result from a primary defect in adre-
nal hormone synthesis or a defect in the renin–
aldosterone system. Patients with primary adrenal 
insuffi  ciency (Addison’s disease) and those with 
isolated 21-hydroxylase adrenal enzyme defi ciency 
have marked impairment of aldosterone synthesis. 
Patients with the syndrome of isolated hypoaldoste-
ronism (also called hyporeninemic hypoaldosteron-
ism, or type IV renal tubular acidosis) are usually 
diabetics with some degree of renal impairment; 
they have an impaired ability to increase aldosterone 
secretion in response to hyperkalemia. Although 
usually asymptomatic, these patients develop hyper-
kalemia when they increase their potassium intake 
or when given potassium- sparing diuretics. Th ey 
also oft en have varying degrees of Na + wasting and a 
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Similar fi ndings 
have been reported in patients with AIDS who have 
relative adrenal insuffi  ciency due to cytomegalovi-
rus infection. 
 Drugs interfering with the renin–aldosterone 
system have the potential to cause hyperkalemia, 
particularly in the presence of any degree of renal 
impairment. Nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) inhibit prostaglandin-mediated renin 
release. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors interfere with angiotensin II–mediated 
release of aldosterone. Large doses of heparin can 
interfere with aldosterone secretion. Th e potassium-
sparing diuretic spironolactone directly antagonizes 
aldosterone activity at the kidneys. 
 Decreased renal excretion of potassium can 
also occur as a result of an intrinsic or acquired 
defect in the distal nephron’s ability to secrete 
potassium. Such defects may occur even in the 
presence of normal renal function and are char-
acteristically unresponsive to mineralocorticoid 
therapy. Th e kidneys of patients with pseudohy-
poaldosteronism display an intrinsic resistance to 
aldosterone. Acquired defects have been associ-
ated with systemic lupus erythematosus, sickle cell 
anemia, obstructive uropathies, and cyclosporine 
nephropathy in transplanted kidneys. 
 Hyperkalemia due to 
Increased Potassium Intake 
 Increased potassium loads rarely cause hyperka-
lemia in normal individuals unless large amounts 
are given rapidly and intravenously. Hyperkale-
mia, however, may be seen when potassium intake 
is increased in patients receiving β blockers or 
in patients with renal impairment. Unrecognized 
sources of potassium include potassium penicillin, 
sodium substitutes (primarily potassium salts), and 
transfusion of stored whole blood. Th e plasma [K + ] 
in a unit of whole blood can increase to 30 mEq/L 
aft er 21 days of storage. Th e risk of hyperkalemia 
from multiple transfusions is reduced, although not 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1129
eliminated, by minimizing the volume of plasma 
given through the use of packed red blood cell trans-
fusions (see Chapter 51). 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hyperkalemia 
 Th e most important eff ects of hyperkalemia are on 
skeletal and cardiac muscle. Skeletal muscle weak-
ness is generally not seen until plasma [K + ] is greater 
than 8 mEq/L, and is due to sustained spontaneous 
depolarization and inactivation of Na + channels of 
muscle membrane, eventually resulting in paralysis. 
Cardiac manifestations ( Figure 49–6 ) are primarily 
due to delayed depolarization, and are consistently 
present when plasma [K + ] is greater than 7 mEq/L. 
ECG changes characteristically progress sequen-
tially from symmetrically peaked T waves (oft en 
with a shortened QT interval) → widening of the 
QRS complex → prolongation of the P–R interval 
→ loss of the P wave → loss of R-wave amplitude →
ST-segment depression (occasionally elevation) →
an ECG that resembles a sine wave, before progres-
sion to ventricular fi brillation and asystole. Contrac-
tility may be relatively well preserved until late in the 
course of progressive hyperkalemia. Hypocalcemia, 
hyponatremia, and acidosis accentuate the cardiac 
eff ects of hyperkalemia. 
 Treatment of Hyperkalemia 
 Because of its lethal potential, hyperkalemia 
exceeding 6 mEq/L should always be cor-
rected. Treatment is directed to reversal of cardiac 
manifestations and skeletal muscle weakness, and 
to restoration of normal plasma [K + ]. Th erapeu-
tic modalities employed depend on the cause of 
hyperkalemia and the severity of manifestations. 
Hyperkalemia associated with hypoaldosteronism 
can be treated with mineralocorticoid replace-
ment. Drugs contributing to hyperkalemia should 
be discontinued and sources of increased potas-
sium intake reduced or stopped. 
 Calcium (5–10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate or 
3–5 mL of 10% calcium chloride) partially antago-
nizes the cardiac eff ects of hyperkalemia and is use-
ful in patients with marked hyperkalemia. Its eff ects 
are rapid but short lived. Care must be exercised in 
administering calcium to patients taking digoxin, as 
calcium potentiates digoxin toxicity. 
 When metabolic acidosis is present, intrave-
nous sodium bicarbonate (usually 45 mEq) will pro-
mote cellular uptake of potassium and can decrease 
plasma [K + ] within 15 min. β Agonists promote 
cellular uptake of potassium and may be useful in 
acute hyperkalemia associated with massive transfu-
sions; low-dose epinephrine infusion oft en rapidly 
8
 FIGURE 496  Electrocardiographic eﬀ ects 
of hyperkalemia. Electrocardiographic changes 
characteristically progress from symmetrically peaked 
T waves, often with a shortened QT interval, to widening 
of the QRS complex, prolongation of the P–R interval, loss 
of the P wave, loss of R-wave amplitude, and ST-segment 
depression (occasionally elevation)—to an ECG that 
resembles a sine wave—before ﬁ nal progression into 
ventricular ﬁ brillation or asystole. 
R
R
R
T
T
T
S
S
S
P
P
Q
Q
Q
1130 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
decreases plasma [K + ] and provides inotropic sup-
port in this setting. An intravenous infusion of glu-
cose and insulin (30–50 g of glucose with 10 units of 
insulin) is also eff ective in promoting cellular uptake 
of potassium and lowering plasma [K + ], but may 
take up to 1 h for peak eff ect. 
 For patients with some renal function, furose-
mide is a useful adjunct in increasing urinary excre-
tion of potassium. In the absence of renal function, 
elimination of excess potassium can be accom-
plished only with nonabsorbable cation-exchange 
resins such as oral or rectal sodium polystyrene sul-
fonate (Kayexalate). Each gram of resin binds up to 
1 mEq of K + and releases 1.5 mEq of Na + ; the oral 
dose is 20 g in 100 mL of 20% sorbitol. 
 Dialysis is indicated in symptomatic patients 
with severe or refractory hyperkalemia. Hemodialy-
sis is faster and more eff ective than peritoneal dialy-
sis in decreasing plasma [K + ]. Maximal potassium 
removal with hemodialysis approaches 50 mEq/h, 
compared with 10–15 mEq/h for peritoneal dialysis. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Elective surgery should not be undertaken in 
patients with signifi cant hyperkalemia. Anesthetic 
management of hyperkalemic surgical patients is 
directed at both lowering the plasma potassium con-
centration and preventing any further increases. Th e 
ECG should be carefully monitored. Succinylcholine 
is contraindicated, as is the use of any potassium-
containing intravenous solutions such as lactated 
Ringer’s injection. Th e avoidance of metabolic or 
respiratory acidosis is critical to prevent further 
increases in plasma [K + ]. Ventilation should be con-
trolled under general anesthesia, and mild hyper-
ventilation may be desirable. Lastly, neuromuscular 
function should be monitored closely, as hyperkale-
mia can accentuate the eff ects of NMBs. 
 Disorders of Calcium Balance 
 Although 98% of total body calcium is in bone, 
maintenance of a normal extracellular calcium con-
centration is critical to homeostasis. Calcium ions 
are involved in nearly all essential biological func-
tions, including muscle contraction, the release of 
neurotransmitters and hormones, blood coagula-
tion, and bone metabolism, and abnormalities in 
calcium balance can result in profound physiologi-
cal derangements. 
 NORMAL CALCIUM BALANCE 
 Calcium intake in adults averages 600–800 mg/d. 
Intestinal absorption of calcium occurs primar-
ily in the proximal small bowel but is variable. 
Calcium is also secreted into the intestinal tract; 
moreover, this secretion appears to be constant 
and independent of absorption. Up to 80% of the 
daily calcium intake is normally lost in feces. 
 Th e kidneys are responsible for most cal-
cium excretion. Renal calcium excretion averages 
100 mg/d but may vary from as low as 50 mg/d to 
more than 300 mg/d. Normally, 98% of the fi lterable 
calcium is reabsorbed. Calcium reabsorption paral-
lels that of sodium in the proximal renal tubules and 
the ascending loop of Henle. In the distal tubules, 
however, calcium reabsorption is dependent on 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion, whereas 
sodium reabsorption is dependent on aldosterone 
secretion. Increased PTH levels enhance distal 
 calcium reabsorption and thereby decrease urinary 
calcium excretion. 
 Plasma Calcium Concentration 
 Th e normal plasma calcium concentration is 
8.5–10.5 mg/dL (2.1–2.6 mmol/L). Approximately 
50% is in the free ionized form, 40% is protein 
bound (mainly to albumin), and 10% is complexed 
with anions such as citrate and amino acids. 
Th e free ionized calcium concentration ([Ca 2+ ]) 
is  phys iologically most important. Plasma [Ca 2+ ] 
is normally 4.75–5.3 mg/dL (2.38–2.66 mEq/L or 
1.19–1.33 mmol/L). Changes in plasma albumin 
concentration aff ect total but not ionized calcium 
concentrations: for each increase or decrease of 
1 g/dL in albumin, the total plasma calcium con-
centration increases or decreases approximately 
0.8–1.0 mg/dL, respectively. 
 Changes in plasma pH directly aff ect the degree 
of protein binding and thus ionized calcium con-
centration. Ionized calcium increases approximately 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1131 
0.16 mg/dL for each decrease of 0.1 unit in plasma 
pH and decreases by the same amount for each 
0.1 unit increase in pH. 
 Regulation of Extracellular 
Ionized Calcium Concentration 
 Calcium normally enters ECF by either absorp-
tion from the intestinal tract or resorption of bone; 
only 0.5–1% of calcium in bone is exchangeable 
with ECF. In contrast, calcium normally leaves the 
extracellular compartment by (1) deposition into 
bone, (2) urinary excretion, (3) secretion into the 
intestinal tract, and (4) sweat formation. Extracel-
lular [Ca 2+ ] is closely regulated by three hormones: 
parathyroid hormone (parathormone, PTH), vita-
min D, and calcitonin. Th ese hormones act primar-
ily on bone, the distal renal tubules, and the small 
bowel. 
 PTH is the most important regulator of plasma 
[Ca 2+ ]. Decreases in plasma [Ca 2+ ] stimulate PTH 
secretion, while increases in plasma [Ca 2+ ] inhibit 
PTH secretion. Th e calcemic eff ect of PTH is due to 
(1) mobilization of calcium from bone, (2) enhance-
ment of calcium reabsorption in the distal renal 
tubules, and (3) an indirect increase in intestinal 
absorption of calcium via acceleration of 1,25-dihy-
droxycholecalciferol synthesis in the kidneys (see 
below). 
 Vitamin D exists in several forms in the body, 
but 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol has the most 
important biological activity. It is the product of the 
metabolic conversion of (primarily endogenous) 
cholecalciferol, fi rst by the liver to 25-cholecalcif-
erol and then by the kidneys to 1,25-dihydroxycho-
lecalciferol. Th e latter transformation is enhanced 
by secretion of PTH as well as hypophosphatemia. 
Vitamin D augments intestinal absorption of cal-
cium, facilitates the action of PTH on bone, and 
appears to augment renal reabsorption of calcium in 
the distal tubules. 
 Calcitonin is a polypeptide hormone that is 
secreted by parafollicular cells in the thyroid gland. 
Its secretion is stimulated by hypercalcemia and 
inhibited by hypocalcemia. Calcitonin inhibits 
bone reabsorption and increases urinary calcium 
excretion. 
 HYPERCALCEMIA 
 Hypercalcemia can occur as a result of a vari-
ety of disorders ( Table 49–11 ). In  primary hyper-
parathyroidism , secretion of PTH is increased and 
is independent of [Ca 2+ ]. In contrast, in  second-
ary hyperparathyroidism (chronic renal failure 
or malabsorption), the elevated PTH levels are in 
response to chronic hypocalcemia. Prolonged sec-
ondary hyperparathyroidism, however, can occa-
sionally result in autonomous secretion of PTH, 
resulting in a normal or elevated [Ca 2+ ] ( tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism ). 
 Patients with cancer can present with hypercal-
cemia whether or not bone metastases are present. 
Most oft en this is due to direct bony destruction, or 
secretion of humoral mediators of hypercalcemia 
(PTH-like substances, cytokines, or prostaglandins), 
or both. Hypercalcemia due to increased turnover 
of calcium from bone can also be encountered in 
patients with benign conditions such as Paget’s 
disease and chronic immobilization. Increased 
gastrointestinal absorption of calcium can lead to 
hypercalcemia in patients with the  milk-alkali syn-
drome (marked increase in calcium intake), hypervi-
taminosis D, or granulomatous diseases (enhanced 
sensitivity to vitamin D). 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hypercalcemia 
 Hypercalcemia oft en produces anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting, weakness, and polyuria. Ataxia, irritabil-
ity, lethargy, or confusion can rapidly progress to 
 TABLE 4911 Causes of hypercalcemia. 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Malignancy 
 Excessive vitamin D intake 
 Paget’s disease of bone 
 Granulomatous disorders (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis) 
 Chronic immobilization 
 Milk-alkali syndrome 
 Adrenal insufficiency 
 Drug-induced
 Thiazide diuretics 
 Lithium 
1132 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
coma. Hypertension is oft en present initially before 
hypovolemia supervenes. ECG signs include a 
shortened ST segment and a shortened QT interval. 
Hypercalcemia increases cardiac sensitivity to digi-
talis. Pancreatitis, peptic ulcer disease, and kidney 
failure may also complicate hypercalcemia. 
 Treatment of Hypercalcemia 
 Symptomatic hypercalcemia requires rapid 
treatment. Th e most eff ective initial treatment 
is rehydration followed by a brisk diuresis (urinary 
output 200–300 mL/h) utilizing intravenous saline 
infusion and a loop diuretic to accelerate calcium 
excretion. Premature diuretic therapy prior to rehy-
dration may aggravate the hypercalcemia by exac-
erbating volume depletion. Renal loss of potassium 
and magnesium usually occurs during diuresis, and 
laboratory monitoring and intravenous replacement 
as necessary should be performed. Although hydra-
tion and diuresis may remove the potential risk of 
cardiovascular and neurological complications of 
hypercalcemia, the serum calcium level usually 
remains elevated above normal. Additional therapy 
with a bisphosphonate or calcitonin may be required 
to further lower the serum calcium level. Severe 
hypercalcemia (>15 mg/dL) usually requires addi-
tional therapy aft er saline hydration and furosemide 
calciuresis. Bisphosphonates or calcitonin are pre-
ferred agents. Intravenous administration of pami-
dronate (Aredia) or etidronate (Didronel) is oft en 
utilized in this setting. Dialysis is very eff ective in 
correcting severe hypercalcemia and may be neces-
sary in the presence of kidney or heart failure. Addi-
tional treatment depends on the underlying cause of 
the hypercalcemia and may include glucocorticoids 
in the setting of vitamin D–induced hypercalcemia 
such as granulomatous disease states. 
 It is necessary to look for the underlying eti-
ology and direct appropriate treatment toward the 
cause of the hypercalcemia once the initial threat of 
hypercalcemia has been removed. Approximately 
90% of all hypercalcemia is due to either malignancy 
or hyperparathyroidism. Th e best laboratory test for 
discriminating between these two main categories 
of hypercalcemia is the PTH assay. Th e serum PTH 
concentration is usually suppressed in malignancy 
states and elevated in hyperparathyroidism. 
9
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Signifi cant hypercalcemia is a medical emergency 
and should be corrected, if possible, before admin-
istration of any anesthetic. Ionized calcium levels 
should be monitored closely. If surgery must be 
performed, saline diuresis should be continued 
intraoperatively with care to avoid hypovolemia; 
appropriate goal-directed hemodynamic and fl uid 
management therapy (see Chapter 51) should be 
utilized, especially for patients with cardiac impair-
ment. Serial measurements of [K + ] and [Mg 2+ ] 
are helpful in detecting iatrogenic hypokalemia 
and hypomagnesemia. Responses to anesthetic 
agents are not predictable. Ventilation should 
be controlled under general anesthesia. Acidosis 
should be avoided so as to not worsen the elevated 
plasma [Ca 2+ ]. 
 HYPOCALCEMIA 
 Hypocalcemia should be diagnosed only on the 
basis of the plasma ionized calcium concentration. 
When direct measurements of plasma [Ca 2+ ] are not 
available, the total calcium concentration must be 
corrected for decreases in plasma albumin concen-
tration (see above). Th e causes of hypocalcemia are 
listed in  Table 49–12 . 
 TABLE 4912 Causes of hypocalcemia. 
 Hypoparathyroidism 
 Pseudohypoparathyroidism 
 Vitamin D deficiency 
 Nutritional 
 Malabsorption
 Postsurgical (gastrectomy, short bowel) 
 Inflammatory bowel disease 
 Altered vitamin D metabolism 
 Hyperphosphatemia 
 Precipitation of calcium 
 Pancreatitis 
 Rhabdomyolysis 
 Fat embolism 
 Chelation of calcium 
 Multiple rapid red blood transfusions or rapid infusion 
of large amounts of albumin 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1133
 Hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism is a 
relatively common cause of symptomatic hypocal-
cemia. Hypoparathyroidism may be surgical, idio-
pathic, part of multiple endocrine defects (most 
oft en with adrenal insuffi  ciency), or associated 
with hypomagnesemia. Magnesium defi ciency may 
impair the secretion of PTH and antagonize the 
eff ects of PTH on bone. Hypocalcemia during sep-
sis is also thought to be due to suppression of PTH 
release. Hyperphosphatemia (see below) is also a 
relatively common cause of hypocalcemia, particu-
larly in patients with chronic renal failure. Hypo-
calcemia due to vitamin D defi ciency may be the 
result of a markedly reduced intake (nutritional), 
vitamin D malabsorption, or abnormal vitamin D 
metabolism. 
 Chelation of calcium ions with the citrate ions 
in blood preservatives is an important cause of 
perioperative hypocalcemia in transfused patients; 
similar transient decreases in [Ca 2+ ] are also pos-
sible following rapid infusions of large volumes of 
albumin. Hypocalcemia following acute pancreati-
tis is thought to be due to precipitation of calcium 
with fats (soaps) following the release of lipolytic 
enzymes and fat necrosis; hypocalcemia following 
fat embolism may have a similar basis. Precipitation 
of calcium (in injured muscle) may also be seen fol-
lowing rhabdomyolysis. 
 Less common causes of hypocalcemia include 
calcitonin-secreting medullary carcinomas of the 
thyroid, osteoblastic metastatic disease (breast and 
prostate cancer), and  pseudohypoparathyroidism 
(familial unresponsiveness to PTH). Transient hypo-
calcemia may be seen following heparin, protamine, 
or glucagon administration. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hypocalcemia 
 Manifestations of hypocalcemia include paresthe-
sias, confusion, laryngeal stridor (laryngospasm), 
carpopedal spasm (Trousseau’s sign), masseter 
spasm (Chvostek’s sign), and seizures. Biliary colic 
and bronchospasm have also been described. ECG 
may reveal cardiac irritability or QT interval pro-
longation, which may not correlate in severity with 
the degree of hypocalcemia. Decreased cardiac con-
tractility may result in heart failure, hypotension, 
or both. Decreased responsiveness to digoxin and 
β-adrenergic agonists may also occur. 
 Treatment of Hypocalcemia 
 Symptomatic hypocalcemia is a medical emer-
gency and should be treated immediately with 
intravenous calcium chloride (3–5 mL of a 10% solu-
tion) or calcium gluconate (10–20 mL of a 10% solu-
tion). (Ten milliliters of 10% CaCl 2 contains 272 mg 
of Ca 2+ , whereas 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate 
contains only 93 mg of Ca 2+ .) To avoid precipita-
tion, intravenous calcium should not be given with 
bicarbonate- or phosphate-containing solutions. 
Serial ionized calcium measurements are manda-
tory. Repeat boluses or a continuous infusion (Ca 2+
1–2 mg/kg/h) may be necessary. Plasma magnesium 
concentration should be checked to exclude hypo-
magnesemia. In chronic hypocalcemia, oral calcium 
(CaCO 3 ) and vitamin D replacement are usually 
necessary. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Signifi cant hypocalcemia should be corrected pre-
operatively. Serial ionized calcium levels should be 
monitored intraoperatively in patients with a his-
tory of hypocalcemia. Alkalosis should be avoided to 
prevent further decreases in [Ca 2+ ]. Intravenous cal-
cium may be necessary following rapid transfusions 
of citrated blood products or large volumes of albu-
min solutions. Potentiation of the negative inotropic 
eff ects of barbiturates and volatile anesthetics should 
be expected. Responses to NMBs are inconsistent 
and require close monitoring with a nerve stimulator. 
 Disorders of 
Phosphorus Balance 
 Phosphorus is an important intracellular constitu-
ent. Its presence is required for the synthesis of 
(1) the phospholipids and phosphoproteins in cell 
membranes and intracellular organelles, (2) the 
phosphonucleotides involved in protein synthesis 
and reproduction, and (3) ATP used for the storage 
of energy. Only 0.1% of total body phosphorus is in 
ECF; 85% is in bone and 15% is intracellular. 
10
1134 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 NORMAL PHOSPHORUS 
BALANCE 
 Phosphorus intake averages 800–1500 mg/d in 
adults. About 80% of that amount is normally 
absorbed in the proximal small bowel. Vitamin 
D increases intestinal absorption of phosphorus. 
Th e kidneys are the major route for phosphorus 
excretion and are responsible for regulating total 
body phosphorus content. Urinary excretion of 
 phosphorus depends on both intake and plasma 
concentration. Secretion of PTH can augment 
 urinary phosphorus excretion by inhibiting its 
proximal tubular reabsorption. Th e latter eff ect 
may be off set by PTH-induced release of phosphate 
from bone. 
 Plasma Phosphorus Concentration 
 Plasma phosphorus exists in both organic and 
inorganic forms. Organic phosphorus is mainly in 
the form of phospholipids. Of the inorganic phos-
phorus fraction, 80% is fi lterable in the kidneys and 
20% is protein bound. Th e majority of inorganic 
phosphorus is in the form of H 2 PO 4 − and HPO 4 2− 
in a 1:4 ratio. By convention, plasma phosphorus 
is measured as milligrams of elemental phospho-
rus. Normal plasma phosphorus concentration is 
2.5–4.5 mg/dL (0.8–1.45 mmol/L) in adults and 
up to 6 mg/dL in children. Plasma phosphorus 
concentration is usually measured during fasting, 
because a recent carbohydrate intake transiently 
decreases the plasma phosphorus concentration. 
Hypophosphatemia increases vitamin D produc-
tion, whereas hyperphosphatemia depresses it. 
Th e latter plays an important role in the genesis 
of secondary hyperparathyroidism in patients with 
chronic kidney failure (see Chapter 30). 
 HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA 
 Hyperphosphatemia may be seen with increased 
phosphorus intake (abuse of phosphate laxatives 
or excessive potassium phosphate administration), 
decreased phosphorus excretion (renal insuffi  -
ciency), or massive cell lysis (following chemother-
apy for lymphoma or leukemia). 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hyperphosphatemia 
 Although hyperphosphatemia itself does not 
appear to be directly responsible for any functional 
disturbances, its secondary eff ect on plasma [Ca 2+ ] 
can be important. Marked hyperphosphatemia is 
thought to lower plasma [Ca 2+ ] by precipitation 
and deposition of calcium phosphate in bone and 
soft  tissues. 
 Treatment of Hyperphosphatemia 
 Hyperphosphatemia is generally treated with phos-
phate-binding antacids such as aluminum hydrox-
ide or aluminum carbonate. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Although specifi c interactions between hyperphos-
phatemia and anesthesia are generally not described, 
renal function should be carefully evaluated. Sec-
ondary hypocalcemia should also be excluded. 
 HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA 
 Hypophosphatemia is usually the result of either a 
negative phosphorus balance or cellular uptake of 
extracellular phosphorus (an intercompartmental 
shift ). Intercompartmental shift s of phosphorus 
can occur during alkalosis and following carbo-
hydrate ingestion or insulin administration. Large 
doses of aluminum or magnesium-containing ant-
acids, severe burns, inadequate phosphorus sup-
plementation during hyperalimentation, diabetic 
ketoacidosis, alcohol withdrawal, and prolonged 
respiratory alkalosis can all produce a negative phos-
phorus balance and lead to severe hypophosphate-
mia (<0.3 mmol/dL or <1.0 mg/dL). In contrast to 
respiratory alkalosis, metabolic alkalosis rarely leads 
to severe hypophosphatemia. 
 Clinical Manifestations of 
Hypophosphatemia 
 Mild to moderate hypophosphatemia (1.5–2.5 mg/
dL) is generally asymptomatic. In contrast, severe 
hypophosphatemia (<1.0 mg/dL) is oft en associ-
ated with widespread organ dysfunction. Cardio-
myopathy, impaired oxygen delivery (decreased 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1135
2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels), hemolysis, impaired 
leukocyte function, platelet dysfunction, encepha-
lopathy, skeletal myopathy, respiratory failure, rhab-
domyolysis, skeletal demineralization, metabolic 
acidosis, and hepatic dysfunction have all been asso-
ciated with severe hypophosphatemia. 
 Treatment of Hypophosphatemia 
 Oral phosphorus replacement is generally preferable 
to parenteral replacement because of the increased 
risk of phosphate precipitation with calcium, result-
ing in hypocalcemia, and also because of the increased 
risks of hyperphosphatemia, hypomagnesemia, and 
hypotension. Accordingly, intravenous replacement 
therapy is usually reserved for instances of symptom-
atic hypophosphatemia and extremely low phosphate 
levels (<0.32 mmol/L). In situations where oral phos-
phate replacement is utilized, vitamin D is required 
for intestinal phosphate absorption. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Anesthetic management of patients with hypophos-
phatemia requires familiarity with its complications 
(see above). Hyperglycemia and respiratory alkalo-
sis should be avoided to prevent further decreases 
in plasma phosphorus concentration. Neuromus-
cular function must be monitored carefully when 
NMBs are given.  Some patients with severe 
hypophosphatemia may require mechanical 
ventilation postoperatively because of muscle 
weakness. 
 Disorders of 
Magnesium Balance 
 Magnesium is an important intracellular cation that 
functions as a cofactor in many enzyme pathways. 
Only 1–2% of total body magnesium stores is present 
in the ECF compartment; 67% is contained in bone, 
and the remaining 31% is intracellular. Magnesium 
has been reported to decrease anesthetic require-
ments, attenuate nociception, blunt the cardiovascular 
response to laryngoscopy and intubation, and poten-
tiate NMBs. Suggested mechanisms of action include 
altering central nervous system neurotransmitter 
11
release, moderating adrenal medullary catechol-
amine release, and antagonizing the eff ect of calcium 
on vascular smooth muscle. Magnesium impairs the 
calcium-mediated presynaptic release of acetylcholine 
and may also decrease motor end-plate sensitivity to 
acetylcholine and alter myocyte membrane potential. 
 In addition to the treatment of magnesium 
defi ciency, administration of magnesium is utilized 
therapeutically for preeclampsia and eclampsia, 
torsades de pointes and digoxin-induced cardiac 
tachyarrhythmias, and status asthmaticus. 
 NORMAL MAGNESIUM 
BALANCE 
 Magnesium intake averages 20–30 mEq/d (240–
370 mg/d) in adults. Of that amount, only 30–40% 
is absorbed, mainly in the distal small bowel. Renal 
excretion is the primary route for elimination, 
averaging 6–12 mEq/d. Magnesium reabsorption 
by the kidneys is very effi  cient. Twenty-fi ve per-
cent of fi ltered magne sium is reabsorbed in the 
proximal tubule, whereas 50–60% is reabsorbed in 
the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Fac-
tors known to increase magne sium reabsorption in 
the kidneys include hypomagnesemia, PTH, hypo-
calcemia, ECF depletion, and metabolic alkalosis. 
Factors known to increase renal excretion include 
hypermagnesemia, acute volume expansion, hyper-
aldosteronism, hypercalcemia, ketoacidosis, diuret-
ics, phosphate depletion, and alcohol ingestion. 
 Plasma Magnesium Concentration 
 Plasma [Mg 2+ ] is closely regulated between 1.7 
and 2.1 mEq/L (0.7–1 mmol/L or 1.7–2.4 mg/dL) 
through interaction of the gastrointestinal tract 
(absorption), bone (storage), and the kidneys (excre-
tion). Approximately 50–60% of plasma magnesium 
is unbound and diff usible. 
 HYPERMAGNESEMIA 
 Increases in plasma [Mg 2+ ] are nearly always due to 
excessive intake (magnesium-containing antacids or 
laxatives), renal impairment (GFR < 30 mL/min), 
or both. Less common causes include adrenal 
1136 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
insuffi  ciency, hypothyroidism, rhabdomyolysis, and 
lithium administration. Magnesium sulfate therapy 
for preeclampsia and eclampsia can cause hyperma-
gnesemia in the mother as well as in the fetus. 
 Clinical Manifestations of 
Hypermagnesemia 
 Symptomatic hypermagnesemia typically presents 
with neurological, neuromuscular, and cardiac 
manifestations, including hyporefl exia, sedation, 
muscle weakness, and respiratory depression. 
Vasodilation, bradycardia, and myocardial depres-
sion may cause hypotension. ECG signs may 
include prolongation of the P–R interval and wid-
ening of the QRS complex.  Marked hyper-
magnesemia can lead to respiratory and 
cardiac arrest. 
 Treatment of Hypermagnesemia 
 With relatively mild hypermagnesemia, all that 
is usually necessary is to discontinue source(s) of 
magnesium intake (most oft en antacids). In cases 
of relatively high [Mg 2+ ], and especially in the pres-
ence of clinical signs of magnesium toxicity, intra-
venous calcium can temporarily antagonize most 
of the eff ects of clinical toxicity. A loop diuretic in 
conjunction with intravenous fl uid replacement 
enhances urinary magnesium excretion in patients 
with adequate renal function. When diuretic 
administration with intravenous infusion is used 
to enhance magnesium excretion, serial measure-
ments of [Ca 2+ ] and [Mg 2+ ] should be obtained, 
a urinary catheter is required, and goal-directed 
hemodynamic and fl uid management should be 
considered. Dialysis may be necessary in patients 
with marked renal impairment. In cases of severe 
magnesium toxicity, ventilatory or circulatory 
support, or both, may be necessary. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Hypermagnesemia requires close monitoring of 
the ECG, blood pressure, and neuromuscular 
function. Potentiation of the vasodilatory and 
negative inotropic properties of anesthetics should 
be expected. Dosages of nondepolarizing NMBs 
should be reduced. 
12
 HYPOMAGNESEMIA 
 Hypomagnesemia is a common and frequently 
overlooked problem, particularly in critically ill 
patients, and is oft en associated with defi ciencies of 
other intracellular components such as potassium 
and phosphorus. It is commonly found in patients 
undergoing major cardiothoracic or abdominal 
operations, and its incidence among patients in 
intensive care units may exceed 50%. Defi ciencies 
of magnesium are generally the result of inadequate 
intake, reduced gastrointestinal absorption, and 
increased renal excretion ( Table 49–13 ). Drugs that 
cause renal wasting of magnesium include ethanol, 
theophylline, diuretics, cisplatin, aminoglycosides, 
cyclosporine, amphotericin B, pentamidine, and 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
of Hypomagnesemia 
 Most patients with hypomagnesemia are asymp-
tomatic, but anorexia, weakness, fasciculation, par-
esthesias, confusion, ataxia, and seizures may be 
 TABLE 4913 Causes of hypomagnesemia. 
 Inadequate intake 
 Nutritional 
 Reduced gastrointestinal absorption 
 Malabsorption syndromes 
 Small bowel or biliary fistulas 
 Prolonged nasogastric suctioning 
 Severe vomiting or diarrhea 
 Chronic laxative abuse 
 Increased renal losses 
 Diuresis 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Hyperparathyroidism 
 Hyperaldosteronism 
 Hypophosphatemia 
 Nephrotoxic drugs 
 Postobstructive diuresis 
 Multifactorial 
 Chronic alcoholism 
 Protein–calorie malnutrition 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Pancreatitis 
 Burns 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances
1137
Fluid replacement consists of 3500 mL of lactated 
Ringer’s injection and 750 mL of 5% albumin. 
One hour after admission to the postanes-
thesia care unit, the patient is awake, his blood 
pressure is 130/70 mm Hg, and he appears to 
be breathing well (18 breaths/min, Fi O 2 = 0.4). 
Urinary output has been only 20 mL in the last 
hour. Laboratory measurements are as  follows: 
Hb, 10.4 g/dL; plasma Na + , 133 mEq/L; K + , 
3.8 mEq/L; Cl − , 104 mEq/L; total CO 2 , 20 mmol/L; 
Pa O 2 , 156 mm Hg; arterial blood pH, 7.29; Pa CO 2 , 
38 mm Hg; and calculated HCO 3 − , 18 mEq/L. 
 What is the most likely explanation 
for the hyponatremia? 
 Multiple factors tend to promote hyponatre-
mia postoperatively, including nonosmotic antidi-
uretic hormone (ADH) secretion (surgical stress, 
hypovolemia, and pain), large evaporative and 
functional ﬂ uid losses (tissue sequestration), and 
the administration of hypotonic intravenous ﬂ u-
ids. Hyponatremia is particularly common postop-
eratively in patients who have received relatively 
large amounts of lactated Ringer’s injection ([Na + ] 
130 mEq/L); the postoperative plasma [Na + ] gener-
ally approaches 130 mEq/L in such patients. (Fluid 
replacement in this patient was appropriate con-
sidering basic maintenance requirements, blood 
loss, and the additional ﬂ uid losses usually associ-
ated with this type of surgery.) 
 Why is the patient hyperchloremic and acidotic 
(normal arterial blood pH is 7.35–7.45)? 
 Operations for supravesical urinary diversion 
utilize a segment of bowel (ileum, ileocecal seg-
ment, jejunum, or sigmoid colon) that is made to 
function as a conduit or reservoir. The simplest and 
most common procedure utilizes an isolated loop 
of ileum as a conduit: the proximal end is anasto-
mosed to the ureters, and the distal end is brought 
through the skin, forming a stoma. 
 Whenever urine comes in contact with 
bowel mucosa, the potential for signiﬁ cant 
ﬂ uid and electrolyte exchange exists. The ileum 
actively absorbs chloride in exchange for bicar-
bonate, and sodium in exchange for potassium 
encountered. Hypomagnesemia is frequently associ-
ated with both hypocalcemia (impaired PTH secre-
tion) and hypokalemia (due to renal K + wasting). 
Cardiac manifestations include electrical irritability 
and potentiation of digoxin toxicity; both factors 
are aggravated by hypokalemia. Hypomagnesemia 
is associated with an increased incidence of atrial 
fi brillation. Prolongation of the P–R and QT inter-
vals may also be present. 
 Treatment of Hypomagnesemia 
 Asymptomatic hypomagnesemia can be treated 
orally or intramuscularly. Serious manifestations 
such as seizures should be treated with intravenous 
magnesium sulfate, 1–2 g (8–16 mEq or 4–8 mmol) 
given slowly over 15–60 min. 
 Anesthetic Considerations 
 Although no specifi c anesthetic interactions are 
described, coexistent electrolyte disturbances such 
as hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypocalce-
mia are oft en present and should be corrected prior 
to surgery.  Isolated hypomagnesemia should 
be corrected prior to elective procedures 
because of its potential for causing cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Moreover, magnesium appears to have intrin-
sic antiarrhythmic properties and possibly cerebral 
protective eff ects (see Chapter 26). It is frequently 
administered preemptively to lessen the risk of post-
operative atrial fi brillation in patients undergoing 
cardiac surgery. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Electrolyte Abnormalities 
Following Urinary Diversion 
 A 70-year-old man with carcinoma of the blad-
der presents for radical cystectomy and ileal 
loop urinary diversion. He weighs 70 kg and has 
a 20-year history of hypertension. Preoperative 
laboratory 
measurements 
revealed 
normal 
plasma electrolyte concentrations and a blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN) of 20 mg/dL with a serum 
creatinine of 1.5 mg/dL. The operation lasts 4 h 
and is performed under uncomplicated general 
anesthesia. The estimated blood loss is 900 mL. 
13
1138 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
or hydrogen ions. When chloride absorption 
exceeds sodium absorption, plasma chloride con-
centration increases, whereas plasma bicarbon-
ate concentration decreases—a hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis is established. In addition, the 
colon absorbs NH 4+ directly from urine; the latter 
may also be produced by urea-splitting bacteria. 
Hypokalemia results if signiﬁ cant amounts of Na + 
are exchanged for K + . Potassium losses through 
the conduit are increased by high urinary sodium 
concentrations. Moreover, a potassium deﬁ cit may 
be present—even in the absence of hypokale-
mia—because movement of K + out of cells (sec-
ondary to the acidosis) can prevent an appreciable 
decrease in extracellular plasma [K + ]. 
 Are there any factors that tend to increase the 
likelihood of hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis 
following urinary diversion? 
 The longer the urine is in contact with bowel, 
the greater the chance that hyperchloremia and 
acidosis will occur. Mechanical problems such as 
poor emptying or redundancy of a conduit—along 
with hypovolemia—thus predispose to hyperchlo-
remic metabolic acidosis. Preexisting renal impair-
ment also appears to be a major risk factor and 
probably represents an inability to compensate for 
the excessive bicarbonate losses. 
 What treatment, if any, is required for this 
patient? 
 The ileal loop should be irrigated with saline—
through the indwelling catheter or stent—to 
exclude partial obstruction and ensure free drain-
age of urine. Hypovolemia should be considered 
and treated based on goal-directed hemodynamic 
and ﬂ uid therapy or the response to a ﬂ uid chal-
lenge (see Chapter 51). A mild to moderate sys-
temic acidosis (arterial pH > 7.25) is generally 
well tolerated by most patients. Moreover, hyper-
chloremic metabolic acidosis following ileal con-
duits is often transient and usually due to urinary 
stasis. Persistent or more severe acidosis requires 
treatment with sodium bicarbonate. Potassium 
replacement may also be required if hypokalemia 
is present. 
 Are electrolyte abnormalities seen with other 
types of urinary diversion? 
 Procedures employing bowel as a conduit (ileal 
or colonic) are less likely to result in hyperchlore-
mic metabolic acidosis than those in which bowel 
functions as a reservoir. The incidence of hyper-
chloremic metabolic acidosis approaches 80% fol-
lowing ureterosigmoidostomies. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Awad S, Allison SP, Lobo DN: Th e history of 0.9% saline. 
Clin Nutr 2008;27:179. 
 Bagshaw SM, Townsend DR, McDermid RC: Disorders 
of sodium and water balance in hospitalized patients. 
Can J Anesth 2009;56:151. 
 Chatzizisis YS, Misirli G, Hatzitolios AI, et al: Th e 
syndrome of rhabdomyolysis: Complications and 
treatment. Eur J Intern Med 2008;19:568. 
 Cooper MS, Gittoes NJL: Diagnosis and management 
of hypocalcaemia. Brit Med J 2008;336:1298. 
 Funk G-C, Linder G, Druml W, et al: Incidence and 
prognosis of dysnatremias present on ICU admission. 
Intensive Care Med 2010;36:304. 
 Geerse DA, Bindels AJ, Kuiper MA: Treatment of 
hypophosphatemia in the intensive care unit. Crit 
Care 2010;14:R147. 
 Herrod PJJ, Awad S, Redfern A, et al: Hypo- and 
hypernatraemia in surgical patients: Is there room for 
improvement? World J Surg 2010;34:495. 
 Herroeder S, Schönherr ME, De Hert SG, et al: 
Magnesium—Essentials for anesthesiologists. 
Anesthesiology 2010;114:971. 
 Jacob M, Chappell D, Rehm M: Th e ‘third space’—fact or 
fi ction? Best Pract Res Clin Anesthesiol 2009;23:145. 
 Lee R, Weber TJ: Disorders of phosphorus homeostasis. 
Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2010;17:561. 
 Lote C: Regulation and disorders of plasma potassium. 
Surgery (Oxford) 2007;25:368. 
 Muller L, Lefrant J-Y: Metabolic eff ects of plasma 
expanders. Transfusion Alternatives Transfusion 
Med 2010;11:10. 
 O’Hara D, Richardson P: Fluid and electrolyte balance, 
anaemia and blood transfusion. Surgery (Oxford) 
2008;26:383. 
 Odier C, Nguyen DK, Panisset M: Central pontine and 
extrapontine myelinolysis: From epileptic and other 
manifestations to cognitive prognosis. J Neurol 
2010;257:1176. 
 
CHAPTER 49 Management of Patients with Fluid & Electrolyte Disturbances 
1139 
 Palmer BF: Managing hyperkalemia caused by inhibitors 
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. N Engl J 
Med 2004;351:585. 
 Paptistella M, Chappell D, Hofmann-Kiefer K, et al: 
Th e role of the glycocalyx in transvascular fl uid 
shift s. Transfusion Alternatives Transfusion Med 
2010;11:92. 
 Pecherstorfer M, Brenner K, Zojer N: Current 
management strategies for hypercalcemia. Treat 
Endocrinol 2003;2:273. 
 Rehm M, Orth V, Scheingraber S, et al: Acid-base changes 
caused by 5% albumin versus 6% hydroxyethyl starch 
solution in patients undergoing acute normovolemic 
hemodilution. Anesthesiology 2000;93:1174. 
 Rosner MH, Ronco C: Dysnatremias in the intensive care 
unit. Contrib Nephrol 2010;165:292. 
 Rueth NM, Murray SE, Huddleston SJ, et al: Severe 
electrolyte disturbances aft er hyperthermic 
intraperitoneal chemotherapy: Oxaliplatin versus 
mitomycin C. Ann Surg Oncol 2011;18:174. 
 Sihler KC, Napolitano LM: Complications of massive 
transfusion. Chest 2010;137:209. 
 Tavernier B, Faivre S, Bourdon C: Hyperchloremic 
acidosis during plasma expansion. Transfusion 
Alternatives Transfusion Med 2010;11:3. 
 Waters JH, Bernstein CA: Dilutional acidosis following 
hetastarch or albumin in healthy volunteers. 
Anesthesiology 2000;93;1184. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1141
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
50
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 The strong ion diﬀ erence, P CO 2 , and total 
weak acid concentration best explain acid–
base balance in physiological systems . 
 The bicarbonate buﬀ er is eﬀ ective against 
metabolic but not respiratory acid–base 
disturbances . 
 In contrast to the bicarbonate buﬀ er, hemo-
globin is capable of buﬀ ering both carbonic 
(CO 2 ) and noncarbonic (nonvolatile) acids . 
 As a general rule, Pa CO 2 can be expected to 
increase 0.25–1 mm Hg for each 1 mEq/L 
increase in [HCO 3 − ] . 
 The renal response to acidemia is 3-fold: 
(1) increased reabsorption of the ﬁ ltered 
[HCO 3 − ], (2) increased excretion of titratable 
acids, and (3) increased production of 
ammonia . 
 During chronic respiratory acidosis, plasma 
[HCO 3 − ] increases approximately 4 mEq/L 
for each 10 mm Hg increase in Pa CO 2 above 
40 mm Hg . 
 Diarrhea is a common cause of 
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis . 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 The distinction between acute and 
chronic respiratory alkalosis is not 
always made, because the compensatory 
response to chronic respiratory alkalosis 
is quite variable: plasma [HCO 3 − ] 
decreases 2–5 mEq/L for each 
10 mm Hg decrease in Pa CO 2 below 
40 mm Hg . 
 Vomiting or continuous loss of gastric 
ﬂ uid by gastric drainage (nasogastric 
suctioning) can result in marked metabolic 
alkalosis, extracellular volume depletion, 
and hypokalemia . 
 The combination of alkalemia and 
hypokalemia can precipitate severe atrial 
and ventricular arrhythmias . 
 Changes in temperature aﬀ ect P CO 2, P O 2, 
and pH. Both P CO 2 and P O 2 decrease during 
hypothermia, but pH increases because 
temperature does not appreciably alter 
[HCO 3 − ]: Pa CO 2 decreases, but [HCO 3 − ] is 
unchanged . 
8
9
10
11
 Nearly all biochemical reactions in the body are 
dependent on maintenance of a physiological hydro-
gen ion concentration. Th e latter is tightly regulated 
because alterations in hydrogen ion concentration 
are associated with widespread organ dysfunction. 
Th is regulation—oft en referred to as acid–base 
balance—is of prime importance to anesthesiologists. 
Changes in ventilation and perfusion and the infusion 
of  electrolyte-containing solutions are common dur-
ing anesthesia and can rapidly alter acid–base balance. 
 Our understanding of acid–base balance is 
evolving. In the past, we focused on the concentration 
 Acid–Base Management 
1142 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
dissociation of water into H + and OH − are the SID, 
the P co 2 , and A TOT . 
 Acids & Bases 
 An acid is usually defi ned as a chemical species that 
can act as a proton (H + ) donor, whereas a base is a 
species that can act as a proton acceptor (Brönsted–
Lowry defi nitions). In physiological solutions, it is 
probably better to use Arrhenius’ defi nitions: An acid 
is a compound that contains hydrogen and reacts with 
water to form hydrogen ions. A base is a compound 
that produces hydroxide ions in water. Using these 
defi nitions, the SID becomes important, as other ions 
in solutions (cations and anions) will aff ect the disso-
ciation constant for water, and, therefore, the hydro-
gen ion concentration. A  strong acid is a substance 
that readily and almost irreversibly gives up an H +
and increases [H + ], whereas a  strong base avidly binds 
H + and decreases [H + ]. In contrast,  weak acids revers-
ibly donate H + , whereas  weak bases reversibly bind 
H + ; both weak acids and bases tend to have less of an 
eff ect on [H + ] (for a given concentration of the parent 
compound) than do strong acids and bases. Biological 
compounds are either weak acids or weak bases. 
of hydrogen ions [H + ], CO 2 balance, and the base 
excess/defi cit.  We now understand that the 
strong ion diff erence (SID), P co 2 , and total 
weak acid concentration (A TOT ) best explain acid–
base balance in physiological systems. 
 Th is chapter examines acid–base physiology, 
common disturbances, and their anesthetic impli-
cations. Clinical measurements of blood gases and 
their interpretation are also reviewed. 
 Deﬁ nitions 
 ACIDBASE CHEMISTRY 
 Hydrogen Ion Concentration & pH 
 In any aqueous solution, water molecules reversibly 
dissociate into hydrogen and hydroxide ions: 
 H O
H  + OH
2
+
↔
−
 Th is process is described by the dissociation 
constant,  K W : 
 KW
+
H ]
= [
+[OH ] =10
−
−14
 Th e concentration of water is omitted from 
the denominator of this expression because it 
does not vary appreciably and is already included 
in the constant. Th erefore, given [H + ] or [OH − ], 
the concentration of the other ion can be readily 
calculated. 
 Example: If [H + ] = 10 −8 nEq/L, then [OH − ] = 
10 −14 ÷ 10 −8 = 10 −6 nEq/L. 
 Arterial [H + ] is normally 40 nEq/L, or 40 × 
10 −9 mol/L. Hydrogen ion concentration is more 
commonly expressed as pH, which is defi ned as the 
negative logarithm (base 10) of [H + ] ( Figure 50–1 ). 
Normal arterial pH is therefore –log (40 × 10 −9 ) = 
7.40. Hydrogen ion concentrations between 16 and 
160 nEq/L (pH 6.8–7.8) are compatible with life. 
 Like most dissociation constants,  K W is aff ected 
by changes in temperature. Th us, the electroneutral-
ity point for water occurs at a pH of 7.0 at 25°C, but 
at about a pH of 6.8 at 37°C; temperature-related 
changes may be important during hypothermia (see 
Chapter 22). 
 Because physiological fl uids are complex 
aqueous solutions, other factors that aff ect the 
1
Normal
Acidemia
Alkalemia
6.9
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
pH
7.4
40
7.5
7.6
7.7
Hydrogen ion (H+) nEq/L
 FIGURE 501  The relationship between pH and [H + ]. 
Note that between a pH of 7.10 and 7.50, the relationship 
between pH and [H + ] is nearly linear. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Narins RG, Emmett M: Simple and mixed acid–base 
disorders: a practical approach. Medicine 1980;49:161.) 
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management 
1143 
 Conjugate Pairs & Buﬀ ers 
 As discussed above, when the weak acid HA is in 
solution, HA can act as an acid by donating an H + , 
and A − can act as a base by taking up H + . A − is there-
fore oft en referred to as the conjugate base of HA. 
A similar concept can be applied for weak bases. 
Consider the weak base B, where 
 B + H
BH
+
+
↔
 BH + is therefore the conjugate acid of B. 
 A  buff er is a solution that contains a weak acid 
and its conjugate base or a weak base and its con-
jugate acid ( conjugate pairs ). Buff ers minimize any 
change in [H + ] by readily accepting or giving up 
hydrogen ions. It is readily apparent that buff ers are 
most effi  cient in minimizing changes in the [H + ] of a 
solution (ie, [A − ] = [HA]) when pH = p K . Moreover, 
the conjugate pair must be present in signifi cant 
quantities in solution to act as an eff ective buff er. 
 CLINICAL DISORDERS 
 A clear understanding of acid–base disorders and 
compensatory physiological responses requires pre-
cise terminology ( Table 50–1 ). Th e suffi  x “-osis” is 
used here to denote any pathological process that 
alters arterial pH. Th us, any disorder that tends to 
reduce pH to a less than normal value is an  acidosis , 
 For a solution containing the weak acid HA, 
where 
 HA
H
–
↔
+
+
A
 a dissociation constant,  K , can be defi ned as follows: 
 
K =
]
]
[HA]
 or [H ] = K[HA]
+
[H+ [A−
]
[A−
 Th e negative logarithmic form of the latter equa-
tion is called the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation: 
 
]
[A−
pH = p
+ log [HA]
K
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
 From this equation, it is apparent that the pH of 
this solution is related to the ratio of the dissociated 
anion to the undissociated acid. 
 Th e problem with this approach is that it is 
phenomenological—measure the pH and bicarbon-
ate, and then other variables can be manipulated 
mathematically. Th is approach works well with pure 
water—the concentration of [H + ] must equal [OH − ]. 
But physiological solutions are far more complex. 
Even in such a complex solution, the [H + ] can be 
predicted using three variables: the SID, the P co 2 , 
and A TOT . 
 Strong Ion Diﬀ erence 
 Th e  SID is the sum of all the strong, completely or 
almost completely dissociated, cations (Na + , K + , 
Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ ) minus the strong anions (Cl − , lactate − , 
etc.) ( Figure 50–2 ). Although we can calculate the 
SID, because the laws of electroneutrality must be 
observed, if there is a SID, other unmeasured ions 
must be present. P co 2 is an independent variable, 
assuming ventilation is ongoing. Th e conjugate base 
of HA is A − and is composed mostly of phosphates 
and proteins that do not change independent of the 
other two variables. A − plus AH is an independent 
variable because its value is not determined by any 
other variable. Note that [H + ] is not a strong ion 
(water does not completely dissociate), but it can, 
does, and must change in response to any change 
in SID, P co 2 , or A TOT to comply with the laws of 
electroneutrality and conservation of mass. Strong 
ions cannot be made to achieve electroneutrality, 
but hydrogen ions, H + , are created or consumed 
based on changes in the dissociation of water. 
Na+
HCO3
–
A–
CO3
–2
Cl–
Other cations
SIG
SIDe
Lactate
SIDa
Cations
Anions
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
mEq/L
 FIGURE 502  The strong ion diﬀ erence (SID). SIDa, 
apparent strong ion diﬀ erence. SIDe, eﬀ ective strong 
ion diﬀ erence. The strong ion gap (SIG) is the diﬀ erence 
between SIDa and SIDe and represents the anion gap. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Greenbaum J, Nirmalan M: 
Acid-base balance: Stewart’s physiochemical approach, Curr Anaesth 
Crit Care June 2005;16(3):133-135.) 
1144 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
compartments is related to their concentration. 
Bicarbonate is the most important buff er in the extra-
cellular fl uid compartment. Hemoglobin, though 
restricted inside red blood cells, also  functions as an 
important buff er in blood. Other proteins probably 
play a major role in buff ering the intracellular fl uid 
compartment. Phosphate and ammonium ions are 
important urinary buff ers. 
 Buff ering of the extracellular compartment can 
also be accomplished by the exchange of extracel-
lular H + for Na + and Ca 2+ ions from bone and by 
the exchange of extracellular H + for intracellular K + . 
Acid loads can demineralize bone and release alka-
line compounds (CaCO 3 and CaHPO 4 ). Alkaline 
loads (NaHCO 3 ) increase the deposition of carbon-
ate in bone. 
 Buff ering by plasma bicarbonate is almost 
immediate, whereas that due to interstitial bicar-
bonate requires 15–20 min. In contrast, buff ering by 
intracellular proteins and bone is slower (2–4 h). Up 
to 50% to 60% of acid loads may ultimately be buff -
ered by bone and intracellular buff ers. 
 The Bicarbonate Buﬀ er 
 Although in the strictest sense, the bicarbonate 
buff er consists of H 2 CO 3 and HCO 3 − , CO 2 tension 
(P co 2 ) may be substituted for H 2 CO 3 because: 
 H O + CO
2
2 ↔
↔
+
+
 −
H CO
H
HCO 
2
3
3
 Th is hydration of CO 2 is catalyzed by carbonic 
anhydrase. If adjustments are made in the dissocia-
tion constant for the bicarbonate buff er and if the 
solubility coeffi  cient for CO 2 (0.03 mEq/L) is taken 
into consideration, the Henderson–Hasselbalch 
equation for bicarbonate can be written as follows: 
 
−
pH = p ′+
[HCO
0.03 Pa
3
2
CO
K
]
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
 where p K ′ = 6.1. 
 Note that its p K ′ is well removed from the nor-
mal arterial pH of 7.40, which means that bicar-
bonate would not be expected to be an effi  cient 
extracellular buff er (see above). Th e bicarbonate 
system is, however, important for two reasons: (1) 
bicarbonate (HCO 3 − ) is present in relatively high 
concentrations in extracellular fl uid, and (2) more 
whereas one tending to increase pH is termed an 
 alkalosis . If the disorder primarily aff ects [HCO 3 − ], it 
is termed  metabolic . If the disorder primarily aff ects 
Pa co 2 , it is termed  respiratory . Secondary compensa-
tory responses (see below) should be referred to as just 
that and not as an “-osis.” One might therefore refer to 
a metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation. 
 When only one pathological process occurs by 
itself, the acid–base disorder is considered to be sim-
ple. Th e presence of two or more primary processes 
indicates a  mixed acid–base disorder. 
 Th e suffi  x “-emia” is used to denote the net eff ect 
of all primary processes and compensatory physi-
ological responses (see below) on arterial blood pH. 
Because arterial blood pH is normally 7.35–7.45 
in adults, the term  acidemia signifi es a pH <7.35, 
whereas  alkalemia signifi es a pH >7.45. 
 Compensatory Mechanisms 
 Physiological responses to changes in [H + ] are char-
acterized by three phases: (1) immediate chemical 
buff ering, (2) respiratory compensation (whenever 
possible), and (3) a slower but more eff ective renal 
compensatory response that may nearly normalize 
arterial pH even if the pathological process remains 
present. 
 BODY BUFFERS 
 Physiologically important buff ers in humans include 
bicarbonate (H 2 CO 3 /HCO 3 − ), hemoglobin (HbH/
Hb − ), other intracellular proteins (PrH/Pr − ), phos-
phates (H 2 PO 4 − /HPO 4 2− ), and ammonia (NH 3 /NH 4 + ). 
Th e eff ectiveness of these buff ers in the various fl uid 
 TABLE 501 Deﬁ ning acid–base disorders. 
Disorder
Primary 
Change
Compensatory 
Response
Respiratory
Acidosis
Alkalosis
↑ Pa CO 2 
↓ Pa CO 2 
↑ HCO 3 − 
↓ HCO 3 − 
Metabolic
Acidosis
Alkalosis
↓ HCO 3 − 
↑ HCO 3 − 
↓ Pa CO 2 
↑ Pa CO 2 
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management
1145
 It should be emphasized that the bicarbonate 
buff er is eff ective against metabolic but  not
respiratory acid–base disturbances. If 3 mEq/L of a 
strong nonvolatile acid, such as HCl, is added to 
extracellular fl uid, the following reaction takes 
place: 
 
 
H
+
→
HCO3
−
3 mEq/L of H
 mEq/L of  
CO
+
 
2
24
3
HCO3
−
H O
 mEq/L of CO
2
2
+
+
3
21 mEq/L of 
+
 Note that HCO 3 − reacts with H + to produce 
CO 2 . Moreover, the CO 2 generated is normally elim-
inated by the lungs such that Pa co 2 does not change. 
Consequently, [H + ] = 24 × 40 ÷ 21 = 45.7 nEq/L, and 
pH = 7.34. Furthermore, the decrease in [HCO 3 − ] 
refl ects the amount of nonvolatile acid added. 
 In contrast, an increase in CO 2 tension (vola-
tile acid) has a minimal eff ect on [HCO 3 ]. If, for 
example, Pa co 2 increases from 40 to 80 mm Hg, 
the dissolved CO 2 increases only from 1.2 mEq/L 
to 2.2 mEq/L. Moreover, the equilibrium constant 
for the hydration of CO 2 is such that an increase 
of this magnitude minimally drives the reaction to 
the left : 
 
 −
↔
↔
H O+ CO
H CO
+
H
HCO
2
2
2
3
+
3
 If the valid assumption is made that [HCO 3 − ] 
does not appreciably change, then 
 
=
[H ]
nEq/L    and    pH = 7.10
+ =
×
(
)
24 80
24
80
 [H + ] therefore increases by 40 nEq/L, and 
because HCO 3 − is produced in a 1:1 ratio with H + , 
[HCO 3 − ] also increases by 40 nEq/L. Th us, extracel-
lular [HCO 3 − ] increases negligibly, from 24 mEq/L 
to 24.000040 mEq/L. Th erefore, the bicarbonate 
buff er is not eff ective against increases in Pa co 2 , and 
changes in [HCO 3 − ] do not refl ect the severity of a 
respiratory acidosis. 
 Hemoglobin as a Buﬀ er 
 Hemoglobin is rich in histidine, which is an eff ec-
tive buff er from pH 5.7 to 7.7 (p K a 6.8). Hemoglobin 
is the most important noncarbonic buff er in extra-
cellular fl uid. Simplistically, hemoglobin may be 
thought of as existing in red blood cells in 
2
importantly—Pa co 2 and plasma [HCO 3 − ] are 
closely regulated by the lungs and the kidneys, 
respectively. Th e ability of these two organs to 
alter the [HCO 3 − ]/Pa co 2 ratio allows them to exert 
important infl uences on arterial pH. 
 A simplifi ed and more practical derivation of 
the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation for the bicar-
bonate buff er is as follows: 
 
[H ] = 24 × PaCO
[HCO ]
+
2
3
−
 Th is equation is very useful clinically because 
pH can be readily converted to [H + ] ( Table 50–2 ). 
Note that below 7.40, [H + ] increases 1.25 nEq/L for 
each 0.01 decrease in pH; above 7.40, [H + ] decreases 
0.8 nEq/L for each 0.01 increase in pH. 
 Example: If arterial pH = 7.28 and Pa co 2 =
24 mm Hg, what should the plasma [HCO 3 − ] be? 
 
[(40
]
[H+
+
=
×
−
=
40
28)
1.25]
55 nEq/L
 Th erefore, 
 
[HCO ]
3
 −
[HCO ]
3
 −
55 =
×
24
24
(
)
mEq/L
×
=
24
24
55
10 5.
and
=
 TABLE 502 The relationship between pH 
and [H + ]. 
pH
[H + ] nEq/L
6.80
158
6.90
126
7.00
100
7.10
79
7.20
63
7.30
50
7.40
40
7.50
32
7.60
25
7.70
20
1146 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
stimulates ventilation and limits the compensatory 
respiratory response. Consequently, Pa co 2 usually 
does not increase above 55 mm Hg in response to 
metabolic alkalosis.  As a general rule, Pa co 2
can be expected to increase 0.25–1 mm Hg for 
each 1 mEq/L increase in [HCO 3 − ]. 
 RENAL COMPENSATION 
 Th e ability of the kidneys to control the amount of 
HCO 3 − reabsorbed from fi ltered tubular fl uid, form 
new HCO 3 − , and eliminate H + in the form of titratable 
acids and ammonium ions (see Chapter 29) allows 
them to exert a major infl uence on pH during both 
metabolic and respiratory acid–base disturbances. 
In fact, the kidneys are responsible for eliminating 
the approximately 1 mEq/kg per day of sulfuric acid, 
phosphoric acid, and incompletely oxidized organic 
acids that are normally produced by the metabolism 
of dietary and endogenous proteins, nucleoproteins, 
and organic phosphates (from phosphoproteins and 
phospholipids). Metabolism of nucleoproteins also 
produces uric acid. Incomplete combustion of fatty 
acids and glucose produces keto acids and lactic acid. 
Endogenous alkali are produced during the metabo-
lism of some anionic amino acids (glutamate and 
aspartate) and other organic compounds (citrate, 
acetate, and lactate), but the quantity is insuffi  cient 
to off set the endogenous acid production. 
 Renal Compensation During Acidosis 
 Th e renal response to acidemia is 3-fold: 
(1) increased reabsorption of the fi ltered 
HCO 3 − , (2) increased excretion of titratable acids, 
and (3) increased production of ammonia. Although 
these mechanisms are probably activated immedi-
ately, their eff ects are generally not appreciable for 
12–24 hr and may not be maximal for up to 5 days. 
 A. Increased Reabsorption of HCO 3 − 
 Bicarbonate reabsorption is shown in  Figure 50–3 . 
CO 2 within renal tubular cells combines with water 
in the presence of carbonic anhydrase. Th e carbonic 
acid (H 2 CO 3 ) formed rapidly dissociates into H +
and HCO 3 − . Bicarbonate ion then enters the blood-
stream while the H + is secreted into the renal tubule, 
where it reacts with fi ltered HCO 3 − to form H 2 CO 3 . 
4
5
equilibrium as a weak acid (HHb) and a potassium 
salt (KHb).  In contrast to the bicarbonate buf-
fer, hemoglobin is capable of buff ering both 
carbonic (CO 2 ) and noncarbonic (nonvolatile) acids: 
 
K 
+
+
+
H
KHb
HHb
and 
+
↔
+
↔
+
KHb
HHb
HCO3
−
O
2
3
H C
 RESPIRATORY COMPENSATION 
 Changes in alveolar ventilation responsible for 
the respiratory compensation of Pa co 2 are medi-
ated by chemoreceptors within the brainstem (see 
Chapter  23). Th ese receptors respond to changes 
in cerebrospinal spinal fl uid pH. Minute ventila-
tion increases 1–4 L/min for every (acute) 1 mm Hg 
increase in Pa co 2 . In fact, the lungs are respon-
sible for eliminating the approximately 15 mEq of 
CO 2 produced every day as a byproduct of carbo-
hydrate and fat metabolism. Respiratory compen-
satory responses are also important in defending 
against marked changes in pH during metabolic 
disturbances. 
 Respiratory Compensation 
During Metabolic Acidosis 
 Decreases in arterial blood pH stimulate medullary 
respiratory centers. Th e resulting increase in alveo-
lar ventilation lowers Pa co 2 and tends to restore 
arterial pH toward normal. Th e respiratory response 
to lower Pa co 2 occurs rapidly but may not reach a 
predictably steady state until 12–24 hr; pH is never 
completely restored to normal. Pa co 2 normally 
decreases 1–1.5 mm Hg below 40 mm Hg for every 
1 mEq/L decrease in plasma [HCO 3 − ]. 
 Respiratory Compensation During 
Metabolic Alkalosis 
 Increases in arterial blood pH depress respiratory 
centers. Th e resulting alveolar hypoventilation tends 
to elevate Pa co 2 and restore arterial pH toward nor-
mal. Th e respiratory response to metabolic alkalosis 
is generally less predictable than the respiratory 
response to metabolic acidosis. Hypoxemia, as a 
result of progressive hypoventilation, eventually 
activates oxygen-sensitive chemoreceptors; the latter 
3
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management 
1147 
is that H + is excreted from the body as H 2 PO 4 − , 
and the HCO 3 − that is generated in the process 
can enter the bloodstream. With a p K of 6.8, the 
H 2 PO 4 − /HPO 4 2− pair is normally an ideal urinary 
buff er. When urinary pH approaches 4.4, however, 
all of the phosphate reaching the distal tubule is in 
the H 2 PO 4 − form; HPO 4 2− ions are no longer avail-
able for eliminating H + . 
 C. Increased Formation of Ammonia 
 Aft er complete reabsorption of HCO 3 − and con-
sumption of the phosphate buff er, the NH 3 /NH 4 + 
pair becomes the most important urinary buff er 
( Figure 50–5 ). Deamination of glutamine within 
the mitochondria of proximal tubular cells is the 
principal source of NH 3 production in the kidneys. 
Acidemia markedly increases renal NH 3 production. 
Th e ammonia formed is then able to passively cross 
the cell’s luminal membrane, enter the tubular fl uid, 
and react with H + to form NH 4 + . Unlike NH 3 , NH 4 + 
does not readily penetrate the luminal membrane 
Carbonic anhydrase associated with the luminal 
brush border catalyzes the dissociation of H 2 CO 3 
into CO 2 and H 2 O. Th e CO 2 thus formed can dif-
fuse back into the renal tubular cell to replace the 
CO 2 originally consumed. Th e proximal tubules 
normally reabsorb 80% to 90% of the fi ltered bicar-
bonate load along with sodium, whereas the distal 
tubules are responsible for the remaining 10% to 
20%. Unlike the proximal H + pump, the H + pump in 
the distal tubule is not necessarily linked to sodium 
r eabsorption and is capable of generating steep H + 
gradients between tubular fl uid and tubular cells. 
Urinary pH can decrease to as low as 4.4 (compared 
with a pH of 7.40 in plasma). 
 B. Increased Excretion of Titratable Acids 
 Aft er all of the HCO 3 − in tubular fl uid is reclaimed, 
the H + secreted into the tubular lumen can com-
bine with HPO 4 2− to form H 2 PO 4 − ( Figure 50–4 ); 
the latter is not readily reabsorbed because of its 
charge and is eliminated in urine. Th e net result 
Na+
+
+
+
H+
H+
HCO3
–
HCO3–
H2CO3
H2CO3
CO2
H2O
+
CO2
H2O
Proximal
renal
tubule
Peritubular
Peritubular
capillary
capillary
Peritubular
capillary
Carbonic
anhydrase
 FIGURE 503  Reclamation of ﬁ ltered HCO 3 − by the 
proximal renal tubules. 
Na+
+
+
H+
H+
HCO3
–
HPO4
2–
H2PO4
–
H2CO3
+
CO2
H2O
Renal
tubule
Peritubular
Peritubular
capillary
capillary
Peritubular
capillary
Carbonic
anhydrase
 FIGURE 504  Formation of a titratable acid in urine. 
1148 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
resulting increase in HCO 3 − formation can initiate 
or propagate metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic alkalo-
sis is commonly associated with increased mineralo-
corticoid activity, even in the absence of sodium and 
chloride depletion. 
 Base Excess 
 Base excess is the amount of acid or base (expressed 
in mEq/L) that must be added for blood pH to 
return to 7.40 and Pa co 2 to return to 40 mm Hg at 
full O 2 saturation and 37°C. Moreover, it adjusts for 
noncarbonic buff ering in the blood. Simplistically, 
base excess represents the metabolic component of 
an acid–base disturbance. A positive value indicates 
metabolic alkalosis, whereas a negative value reveals 
metabolic acidosis. Base excess is usually derived 
graphically or electronically from a nomogram 
originally developed by Siggaard–Andersen and 
requires measurement of hemoglobin concentration 
( Figure 50–6 ). 
 Acidosis 
 PHYSIOLOGICAL 
EFFECTS OF ACIDEMIA 
 [H + ] is strictly regulated in the nanomole/liter 
(36–43 nmol/L) range, as H + ions have high charge 
densities and “large” electric fi elds that can aff ect 
and is therefore trapped within the tubules. Th us, 
excretion of NH 4 + in urine eff ectively eliminates H + . 
 Renal Compensation During Alkalosis 
 Th e tremendous amount of HCO 3 − normally fi ltered 
and subsequently reabsorbed allows the kidneys 
to rapidly excrete large amounts of bicarbonate, if 
necessary (see Chapter 49). As a result, the kidneys 
are highly eff ective in protecting against metabolic 
alkalosis, which therefore generally occurs only in 
association with concomitant sodium defi ciency 
or mineralocorticoid excess. Sodium depletion 
decreases extracellular fl uid volume and enhances 
Na + reabsorption in the proximal tubule. To main-
tain neutrality, the Na + ion is brought across with a 
Cl − ion. As Cl − ions decrease in number (<10 mEq/L 
of urine), HCO 3 − must be reabsorbed. Increased H + 
secretion in exchange for augmented Na + reabsorp-
tion favors HCO 3 − formation with metabolic alka-
losis. Similarly, increased mineralocorticoid activity 
augments aldosterone-mediated Na + reabsorption in 
exchange for H + secretion in the distal tubules. Th e 
Na+
+
+
+
NH3
NH3
NH4
+
H+
H+
HCO3
–
H2CO3
CO2
H2O
Renal
tubule
Peritubular
Peritubular
capillary
capillary
Peritubular
capillary
Amino acid
(glutamine)
Keto acid
 FIGURE 505  Formation of ammonia in urine. 
pH
Decreased
Decreased
PaCO2
PaCO2
Increased
Increased
Decreased
Increased
Respiratory
acidosis
Respiratory
alkalosis
Metabolic
acidosis
Metabolic
alkalosis
 FIGURE 506  Diagnosis of simple acid–base disorders. 
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management 
1149 
the strength of hydrogen bonds that are present on 
most physiological molecules. Biochemical reac-
tions are very sensitive to changes in [H + ]. Th e over-
all eff ects of acidemia seen in patients represent the 
balance between its direct biochemical eff ects and 
the eff ects of acidemia-induced sympathoadrenal 
activation. With severe acidosis (pH < 7.20), direct 
depressant eff ects predominate. Direct myocardial 
and smooth muscle depression reduces cardiac con-
tractility and peripheral vascular resistance, result-
ing in progressive hypotension. Severe acidosis can 
lead to tissue hypoxia, despite a rightward shift  in 
hemoglobin affi  nity for oxygen. Both cardiac and 
vascular smooth muscle become less responsive 
to endogenous and exogenous catecholamines, 
and the threshold for ventricular fi brillation is 
decreased. Progressive hyperkalemia as a result of 
the movement of K + out of cells in exchange for 
extracellular H + is also potentially lethal. Plasma 
[K + ] increases approximately 0.6  mEq/L for each 
0.10 decrease in pH. 
 Central nervous system depression is more 
prominent with respiratory acidosis than with meta-
bolic acidosis. Th is eff ect is oft en termed  CO  2   narco-
sis . Unlike CO 2 , H + ions do not readily penetrate the 
blood–brain barrier. 
 RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS 
 Respiratory acidosis is defi ned as a primary increase 
in Pa co 2 . Th is increase drives the reaction 
 
↔
↔
HCO3
 −
H O+ CO
H CO
H +
2
2
2
3
+
 to the right, leading to an increase in [H + ] and a 
decrease in arterial pH. For the reasons described 
above, [HCO 3 − ] is minimally aff ected. 
 Pa co 2 represents the balance between CO 2 pro-
duction and CO 2 elimination: 
 
Pa
CO production
Alveolar ventilation
CO2
2
=
 CO 2 is a byproduct of fat and carbohydrate 
metabolism. Muscle activity, body temperature, and 
thyroid hormone activity can all have major infl u-
ences on CO 2 production. Because CO 2 production 
does not appreciably vary under most circum-
stances, respiratory acidosis is usually the result of 
alveolar hypoventilation ( Table 50–3 ). In patients 
 TABLE 503 Causes of respiratory acidosis. 
 Alveolar hypoventilation 
Central nervous system depression
Drug-induced
Sleep disorders
Obesity hypoventilation (Pickwickian) syndrome
Cerebral ischemia
Cerebral trauma
Neuromuscular disorders
Myopathies
Neuropathies
Chest wall abnormalities
Flail chest
Kyphoscoliosis
Pleural abnormalities
Pneumothorax
Pleural effusion
Airway obstruction
Upper airway
Foreign body
Tumor
Laryngospasm
Sleep disorders
Lower airway
Severe asthma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Tumor
Parenchymal lung disease
Pulmonary edema
Cardiogenic
Noncardiogenic
Pulmonary emboli
Pneumonia
Aspiration
Interstitial lung disease
Ventilator malfunction
 Increased CO 2 production 
Large caloric loads
Malignant hyperthermia
Intensive shivering
Prolonged seizure activity
Thyroid storm
Extensive thermal injury (burns)
with a limited capacity to increase alveolar ventila-
tion, however, increased CO 2 production can pre-
cipitate respiratory acidosis. 
 Acute Respiratory Acidosis 
 Th e compensatory response to acute (6–12 h) 
elevations in Pa co 2 is limited. Buff ering is primar-
ily provided by hemoglobin and the exchange of 
extracellular H + for Na + and K + from bone and the 
1150 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
buff ering by this mixture mainly produces sodium 
bicarbonate instead of CO 2 . Tromethamine has the 
added advantage of lacking sodium and may be a 
more eff ective intracellular buff er. 
 Patients with a baseline chronic respiratory 
acidosis require special consideration. When such 
patients develop acute ventilatory failure, the goal 
of therapy should be to return Pa co 2 to the patient’s 
“normal” baseline. Normalizing the patient’s Pa co 2
to 40 mm Hg will produces the equivalent of a respi-
ratory alkalosis (see below). Oxygen therapy must 
also be carefully controlled, because the respiratory 
drive in these patients may be dependent on hypox-
emia, not Pa co 2 . “Normalization” of Pa co 2 or relative 
hyperoxia can precipitate severe hypoventilation. 
 METABOLIC ACIDOSIS 
 Metabolic acidosis is defi ned as a primary decrease 
in [HCO 3 − ]. Pathological processes can initiate 
metabolic acidosis by one of three mechanisms: 
(1) consumption of HCO 3 − by a strong nonvolatile 
acid, (2) renal or gastrointestinal wasting of bicar-
bonate, or (3) rapid dilution of the extracellular 
fl uid compartment with a bicarbonate-free fl uid. 
 A fall in plasma [HCO 3 − ] without a propor-
tionate reduction in Pa co 2 decreases arterial pH. 
Th e pulmonary compensatory response in a simple 
metabolic acidosis (see above) characteristically 
does not reduce Pa co 2 to a level that completely 
normalizes pH but can produce marked hyperven-
tilation (Kussmaul’s respiration). 
Table 50–4 lists disorders that can cause meta-
bolic acidosis. Note that diff erential diagnosis of 
metabolic acidosis may be facilitated by calculation 
of the anion gap. 
 The Anion Gap 
 Th e  anion gap in plasma is most commonly defi ned 
as the diff erence between the major measured cat-
ions and the major measured anions: 
Anion gap = major plasma cations 
− major plasma anions
 Or 
 
HCO3
−
Anion gap
[Na ] ([Cl ] [
])
+
=
−
+
−
intracellular fl uid compartment (see above). Th e 
renal response to retain more bicarbonate is acutely 
very limited. As a result, plasma [HCO 3 − ] increases 
only about 1 mEq/L for each 10 mm Hg increase in 
Pa co 2 above 40 mm Hg. 
 Chronic Respiratory Acidosis 
 “Full” renal compensation characterizes chronic 
respiratory acidosis. Renal compensation is appre-
ciable only aft er 12–24 hr and may not peak until 
3–5 days. During that time, the sustained increase in 
Pa co 2 has been present long enough to permit maxi-
mal renal compensation.  During chronic 
respiratory acidosis, plasma [HCO 3 − ] increases 
approximately 4 mEq/L for each 10 mm Hg increase 
in Pa co 2 above 40 mm Hg. 
 Treatment of Respiratory Acidosis 
 Respiratory acidosis is treated by reversing the 
imbalance between CO 2 production and alveolar 
ventilation. In most instances, this is accomplished 
by increasing alveolar ventilation. Measures aimed at 
reducing CO 2 production are useful only in specifi c 
instances (eg, dantrolene for malignant hyperther-
mia, muscle paralysis for tetanus, antithyroid medi-
cation for thyroid storm, and reduced caloric intake 
in patients receiving enteral or parenteral nutrition). 
Potential temporizing measures aimed at improv-
ing alveolar ventilation (in addition to controlled 
mechanical ventilation) include bronchodilation, 
reversal of narcosis, or improving lung compliance 
(diuresis). Severe acidosis (pH <7.20), CO 2 narcosis, 
and respiratory muscle fatigue are indications for 
mechanical ventilation. An increased inspired oxy-
gen concentration is also usually necessary, as coex-
istent hypoxemia is common. Intravenous NaHCO 3 
is rarely necessary, unless pH is <7.10 and HCO 3 − is 
<15 mEq/L. Sodium bicarbonate therapy will tran-
siently increase Pa co 2 : 
 
↔
2
2
HCO3
 −
H +
+
+
CO
H O
 Buff ers that do not produce CO 2 , such as 
Carbicarb TM or tromethamine (THAM), are theoret-
ically attractive alternatives; however, there is almost 
no evidence showing that they have greater effi  cacy 
than bicarbonate. Carbicarb TM is a mixture of 0.3 M 
sodium bicarbonate and 0.3 M sodium carbonate; 
6
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management 
1151 
 “Unmeasured cations” include K + , Ca 2+ , and 
Mg 2+ , whereas “unmeasured anions” include all 
organic anions (including plasma proteins), phos-
phates, and sulfates. Plasma albumin normally 
accounts for the largest fraction of the anion gap 
(about 11 mEq/L). Th e anion gap decreases by 
2.5 mEq/L for every 1 g/dL reduction in plasma 
albumin concentration.  Any process that increases 
“unmeasured anions” or decreases “unmeasured 
cations” will increase the anion gap. Conversely, 
any process that decreases “unmeasured anions” 
or increases “unmeasured cations” will decrease 
the anion gap . 
 Mild elevations of plasma anion gap up to 
20 mEq/L may not be helpful diagnostically dur-
ing acidosis, but values >30 mEq/L usually indicate 
the presence of a high anion gap acidosis (below). 
Metabolic alkalosis can also produce a high anion 
gap because of extracellular volume depletion, an 
increased charge on albumin, and a compensatory 
increase in lactate production. A low plasma anion 
gap may be encountered with hypoalbuminemia, bro-
mide or lithium intoxication, and multiple myeloma. 
 High Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis 
 Metabolic acidosis with an increased anion gap is 
characterized by an increase in relatively strong 
nonvolatile acids. Th ese acids dissociate into H + and 
their respective anions; the H + consumes HCO 3 − to 
produce CO 2 , whereas their anions (conjugate bases) 
accumulate and take the place of HCO 3 − in extracellu-
lar fl uid (hence the anion gap increases). Nonvolatile 
acids can be endogenously produced or ingested. 
 A. Failure to Excrete Endogenous 
Nonvolatile Acids 
 Endogenously produced organic acids are nor-
mally eliminated by the kidneys in urine (above). 
Glomerular fi ltration rates below 20 mL/min (renal 
failure) typically result in progressive metabolic aci-
dosis from the accumulation of these acids. 
 B. Increased Endogenous 
Nonvolatile Acid Production 
 Severe tissue hypoxia following hypoxemia, hypo-
perfusion (ischemia), or an inability to utilize 
oxygen (cyanide poisoning) can result in  lactic aci-
dosis . Lactic acid is the end product of the anaerobic 
 Some physicians include plasma K + in the cal-
culation. Using normal values, 
 Anion gap = 140 − (104 + 24) = 12 mEq/L
× (normal range = 7 − 14 mEq/L)
 In reality, an anion gap cannot exist because 
electroneutrality must be maintained in the body; 
the sum of all anions must equal the sum of all cat-
ions. Th erefore, 
 Anion gap = unmeasured anions 
− unmeasured cations
 TABLE 504 Causes of metabolic acidosis. 
 Increased anion gap 
Increased production of endogenous nonvolatile acids
Renal failure
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic
Starvation
Lactic acidosis
Mixed
Nonketotic hyperosmolar coma
Alcoholic
Inborn errors of metabolism
Ingestion of toxin
Salicylate
Methanol
Ethylene glycol
Paraldehyde
Toluene
Sulfur
Rhabdomyolysis
 Normal anion gap (hyperchloremic) 
Increased gastrointestinal losses of HCO 3 − 
Diarrhea
Anion exchange resins (cholestyramine)
Ingestion of CaCl 2 , MgCl 2 
Fistulas (pancreatic, biliary, or small bowel)
Ureterosigmoidostomy or obstructed ileal loop
Increased renal losses of HCO 3 − 
Renal tubular acidosis
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Hypoaldosteronism
Dilutional
Large amount of bicarbonate-free fluids 
 (eg, 0.9% NaCl)
Total parenteral nutrition (Cl − salts of amino acids)
Increased intake of chloride-containing acids
Ammonium chloride
Lysine hydrochloride
Arginine hydrochloride
1152 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Normal Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis 
 Metabolic acidosis associated with a normal anion 
gap is typically characterized by hyperchloremia. 
Plasma [Cl − ] increases to take the place of the HCO 3 −
ions that are lost.  Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
most commonly results from abnormal gastroin-
testinal or renal losses of HCO 3 − , or from excessive 
intravenous administration of 0.9% NaCl solution. 
 Calculation of the anion gap in urine can be 
helpful in diagnosing a normal anion gap acidosis. 
 Urine anion gap = ([Na+] + [K+]) − [Cl−]
 Th e urine anion gap is normally positive or close 
to zero. Th e principal unmeasured urinary cation is 
normally NH 4 + , which should increase (along with 
Cl − ) during a metabolic acidosis; the latter results 
in a negative urinary anion gap. Impairment of H +
or NH 4 + secretion, as occurs in renal failure or renal 
tubular acidosis (below), results in a positive urine 
anion gap in spite of systemic acidosis. 
 A. Increased Gastrointestinal Loss of HCO 3 − 
 Diarrhea is a common cause of hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis. Diarrheal fl uid contains 
20–50 mEq/L of HCO 3 − . Small bowel, biliary, and 
pancreatic fl uids are all rich in HCO 3 − . Loss of large 
volumes of these fl uids can lead to hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis. Patients with ureterosigmoidos-
tomies and those with ileal loops that are too long or 
that become partially obstructed frequently develop 
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Th e inges-
tion of chloride-containing anion-exchange resins 
 (cholestyramine) or large amounts of calcium or 
magnesium chloride can result in increased absorp-
tion of chloride and loss of bicarbonate ions. Th ese 
nonabsorbable resins bind bicarbonate ions, whereas 
calcium and magnesium combine with bicarbonate 
to form insoluble salts within the intestines. 
 B. Increased Renal Loss of HCO 3 − 
 Renal wasting of HCO 3 − can occur as a result of fail-
ure to reabsorb fi ltered HCO 3 − or to secrete adequate 
amounts of H + in the form of titratable acid or ammo-
nium ion. Th ese defects are encountered in patients 
taking carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, such as acet-
azolamide, and in those with renal tubular acidosis. 
Renal tubular acidosis comprises a group of 
nonazotemic defects of H + secretion by the renal 
7
metabolism of glucose (glycolysis) and can rapidly 
accumulate under these conditions. Decreased uti-
lization of lactate by the liver, and, to a lesser extent 
by the kidneys, is less commonly responsible for lac-
tic acidosis; causes include hypoperfusion, alcohol-
ism, and liver disease. Lactate levels can be readily 
measured and are normally 0.3–1.3 mEq/L. Acidosis 
resulting from D-lactic acid, which is not recognized 
by α-lactate dehydrogenase (and not measured by 
routine assays), may be encountered in patients with 
short bowel syndromes; D-lactic acid is formed by 
colonic bacteria from dietary glucose and starch and 
is absorbed systemically. 
 An absolute or relative lack of insulin can result 
in hyperglycemia and progressive  ketoacidosis from 
the accumulation of β-hydroxybutyric and aceto-
acetic acids. Ketoacidosis may also be seen following 
starvation and alcoholic binges. Th e pathophysi-
ology of the acidosis oft en associated with severe 
alcoholic intoxication and nonketotic hyperosmolar 
coma is complex and may represent a build-up of 
lactic, keto, or other unknown acids. 
 Some inborn errors of metabolism, such as 
maple syrup urine disease, methylmalonic aciduria, 
propionic acidemia, and isovaleric acidemia, pro-
duce a high anion gap metabolic acidosis as a result 
of accumulation of abnormal amino acids. 
 C. Ingestion of Exogenous Nonvolatile Acids 
 Ingestion of large amounts of salicylates frequently 
results in metabolic acidosis. Salicylic acid and other 
acid intermediates rapidly accumulate and produce 
a high anion gap acidosis. Because salicylates also 
produce direct respiratory stimulation, most adults 
develop mixed metabolic acidosis with superim-
posed respiratory alkalosis. Ingestion of methanol 
(methyl alcohol) frequently produces acidosis and 
visual disturbances (retinitis). Symptoms are typi-
cally delayed until the slow oxidation of methanol 
by alcohol dehydrogenase produces formic acid, 
which is highly toxic to the retina. Th e high anion 
gap represents the accumulation of many organic 
acids, including acetic acid. Th e toxicity of ethylene 
glycol is also the result of the action of alcohol dehy-
drogenase to produce glycolic acid. Glycolic acid, 
the principal cause of the acidosis, is further metab-
olized to form oxalic acid, which can be deposited in 
the renal tubules and result in renal failure. 
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management 
1153 
of the acidemia should be corrected. Respiration 
should be controlled, if necessary; a Pa co 2 in the low 
30s may be desirable to partially return pH to nor-
mal. If arterial blood pH remains below 7.20, alkali 
therapy, usually in the form of NaHCO 3 (usually a 
7.5% solution), may be necessary. Pa co 2 may tran-
siently rise as HCO 3 − is consumed by acids (empha-
sizing the need to control ventilation in severe 
acidemia). Th e amount of NaHCO 3 given is decided 
empirically as a fi xed dose (1 mEq/kg) or is derived 
from the base excess and the calculated bicarbon-
ate space (see below). In either case, serial blood gas 
measurements are mandatory to avoid complica-
tions (eg, overshoot alkalosis and sodium overload) 
and to guide further therapy. Raising arterial pH to 
>7.25 is usually suffi  cient to overcome the adverse 
physiological eff ects of the acidemia. Profound or 
refractory acidemia may require acute hemodialysis 
with a bicarbonate dialysate. 
 Th e routine use of large amounts of NaHCO 3 
in treating cardiac arrest and low fl ow states is not 
recommended. Paradoxical intracellular acidosis 
may occur, particularly when CO 2 elimination is 
impaired, because the CO 2 formed readily enters 
cells, but the bicarbonate ion does not. Alternate buf-
fers that do not produce CO 2 , such as Carbicarb TM 
or tromethamine (THAM), may be theoretically 
preferable, but are unproven clinically. 
 Specifi c therapy for diabetic ketoacidosis 
includes replacement of the existing fl uid defi cit 
(as a result of a hyperglycemic osmotic diuresis) 
fi rst, as well as insulin, potassium, phosphate, and 
magnesium. Th e treatment of lactic acidosis should 
be directed fi rst at restoring adequate oxygenation 
and tissue perfusion. Alkalinization of the urine 
with NaHCO 3 to a pH greater than 7.0 increases 
elimination of salicylate following salicylate poi-
soning. Treatment options for ethanol or ethylene 
glycol intoxication include ethanol infusion or 
fomepizole administration, which competitively 
inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase and hemodialysis or 
hemofi ltration. 
 Bicarbonate Space 
 Th e bicarbonate space is defi ned as the volume to 
which HCO 3 − will distribute when it is given intrave-
nously. Although this theoretically should equal the 
extracellular fl uid space (approximately 25% of body 
tubules, resulting in a urinary pH that is too high for 
the systemic acidemia. Th ese defects may be a result 
of a primary renal defect or may be secondary to a 
systemic disorder. Th e site of the H + -secreting defect 
may be in the distal (type 1) or proximal (type 2) 
renal tubule. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism is 
commonly referred to as type 4 renal tubular aci-
dosis. With distal renal tubular acidosis, the defect 
occurs at a site aft er most of the fi ltered HCO 3 − has 
been reclaimed. As a result, there is a failure to 
acidify the urine, so that net acid excretion is less 
than the daily net acid production. Th is disorder is 
frequently associated with hypokalemia, deminer-
alization of bone, nephrolithiasis, and nephrocalci-
nosis. Alkali (NaHCO 3 ) therapy (1–3 mEq/kg/d) is 
usually suffi  cient to reverse those side eff ects. With 
the less common proximal renal tubular acidosis, 
defective H + secretion in the proximal tubule results 
in massive wasting of HCO 3 − . Concomitant defects 
in tubular reabsorption of other substances, such 
as glucose, amino acids, or phosphates, are com-
mon. Th e hyperchloremic acidosis results in volume 
depletion and hypokalemia. Treatment involves giv-
ing alkali (as much as 10–25 mEq/kg per day) and 
potassium supplements. 
 C. Other Causes of Hyperchloremic Acidosis 
 A  dilutional hyperchloremic acidosis can occur when 
extracellular volume is rapidly expanded with a 
bicarbonate-free fl uid, such as normal saline. Th is is 
a reason to prefer balanced salt solutions over 0.9% 
saline for fl uid resuscitation. Th e plasma HCO 3 − 
decreases in proportion to the amount of fl uid 
infused as extracellular HCO 3 − is diluted. Amino 
acid infusions (parenteral hyperalimentation) con-
tain organic cations in excess of organic anions and 
can produce hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis 
because chloride is commonly used as the anion for 
the cationic amino acids. Lastly, the administration 
of excessive quantities of chloride-containing acids, 
such as ammonium chloride or arginine hydrochlo-
ride (usually given to treat a metabolic alkalosis), 
can cause hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. 
 Treatment of Metabolic Acidosis 
 Several general measures can be undertaken to con-
trol the severity of acidemia until the underlying 
processes are corrected. Any respiratory component 
1154 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
cells in exchange for the movement of extracellular 
K + into cells can produce hypokalemia. Alkalosis 
increases the number of anionic binding sites for 
Ca 2+ on plasma proteins and can therefore decrease 
ionized plasma [Ca 2+ ], leading to circulatory depres-
sion and neuromuscular irritability. Respiratory 
alkalosis reduces cerebral blood fl ow, increases sys-
temic vascular resistance, and may precipitate coro-
nary vasospasm. In the lungs, respiratory alkalosis 
increases bronchial smooth muscle tone (broncho-
constriction), but decreases pulmonary vascular 
resistance. 
 RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS 
 Respiratory alkalosis is defi ned as a primary decrease 
in Pa co 2 . Th e mechanism is usually an inappropriate 
increase in alveolar ventilation relative to CO 2 pro-
duction.  Table 50–5 lists the most common causes 
of respiratory alkalosis. Plasma [HCO 3 − ] usually 
weight), in reality, it ranges anywhere between 25% 
and 60% of body weight, depending on the sever-
ity and duration of the acidosis. Th is variation is at 
least partly related to the amount of intracellular and 
bone buff ering that has taken place. 
 Example: Calculate the amount of NaHCO 3 
necessary to correct a base defi cit (BD) of –10 mEq/L 
for a 70-kg man with an estimated HCO 3 − space 
of 30%: 
 NaHCO3 = BD × 30% × body weight in L
 NaHCO3 = −10 mEq/L × 30% × 70 L = 210 mEq
 In practice, only 50% of the calculated dose 
(105 mEq) is usually given, aft er which another 
blood gas is measured. 
 ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS 
IN PATIENTS WITH ACIDOSIS 
 Acidemia can potentiate the depressant eff ects of 
most sedatives and anesthetic agents on the central 
nervous and circulatory systems. Because most opi-
oids are weak bases, acidosis can increase the frac-
tion of the drug in the nonionized form and facilitate 
penetration of the opioid into the brain. Increased 
sedation and depression of airway refl exes may pre-
dispose to pulmonary aspiration. Th e circulatory 
depressant eff ects of both volatile and intravenous 
anesthetics can also be exaggerated. Moreover, any 
agent that rapidly decreases sympathetic tone can 
potentially allow unopposed circulatory depression 
in the setting of acidosis. Halothane is more arrhyth-
mogenic in the presence of acidosis. Succinylcholine 
should generally be avoided in acidotic patients 
with hyperkalemia to prevent further increases in 
plasma [K + ].  
 Alkalosis 
 PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS 
OF ALKALOSIS 
 Alkalosis increases the affi  nity of hemoglobin for 
oxygen and shift s the oxygen dissociation curve to 
the left , making it more diffi  cult for hemoglobin to 
give up oxygen to tissues. Movement of H + out of 
 TABLE 505 Causes of respiratory alkalosis. 
 Central stimulation 
Pain
Anxiety
Ischemia
Stroke
Tumor
Infection
Fever
Drug-induced
Salicylates
Progesterone (pregnancy)
Analeptics (doxapram)
 Peripheral stimulation 
Hypoxemia
High altitude
Pulmonary disease
Congestive heart failure
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
Asthma
Pulmonary embolism
Severe anemia
 Unknown mechanism 
Sepsis
Metabolic encephalopathies
 Iatrogenic 
Ventilator-induced
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management
1155
such as furosemide, ethacrynic acid, and thiazides, 
increase Na + , Cl − , and K + excretion, resulting in 
NaCl depletion, hypokalemia, and usually mild met-
abolic alkalosis. Loss of gastric fl uid is also a com-
mon cause of chloride-sensitive metabolic alkalosis. 
Gastric secretions contain 25–100 mEq/L of H + , 
40–160 mEq/L of Na + , about 15 mEq/L of K + , and 
about 200 mEq/L of Cl − .  Vomiting or continu-
ous loss of gastric fl uid by gastric drainage 
(nasogastric suctioning) can result in marked meta-
bolic alkalosis, extracellular volume depletion, and 
hypokalemia. Rapid normalization of Pa co 2 aft er 
plasma [HCO 3 − ] has risen in chronic respiratory aci-
dosis results in metabolic alkalosis (posthypercapnic 
alkalosis; see above). Infants being fed formulas con-
taining Na + without chloride readily develop meta-
bolic alkalosis because of the increased H + (or K + ) 
secretion that must accompany sodium absorption. 
9
decreases 2 mEq/L for each 10 mm Hg acute decrease 
in Pa co 2 below 40 mm Hg.  Th e distinction 
between acute and chronic respiratory alkalosis 
is not always made, because the compensatory 
response to chronic respiratory alkalosis is quite 
variable: plasma [HCO 3 − ] decreases 2–5 mEq/L for 
each 10 mm Hg decrease in Pa co 2 below 40 mm Hg. 
 Treatment of Respiratory Alkalosis 
 Correction of the underlying process is the only 
treatment for respiratory alkalosis. For severe alka-
lemia (arterial pH >7.60), intravenous hydrochloric 
acid, arginine chloride, or ammonium chloride may 
be indicated (see below). 
 METABOLIC ALKALOSIS 
 Metabolic alkalosis is defi ned as a primary increase 
in plasma [HCO 3 − ]. Most cases of metabolic alka-
losis can be divided into (1) those associated with 
NaCl defi ciency and extracellular fl uid depletion, 
oft en described as chloride sensitive, and (2) those 
associated with enhanced mineralocorticoid activ-
ity, commonly referred to as chloride-resistant 
( Table 50–6 ). 
 Chloride-Sensitive Metabolic Alkalosis 
 Depletion of extracellular fl uid causes the renal 
tubules to avidly reabsorb Na + . Because not enough 
Cl − is available to accompany all of the Na + ions reab-
sorbed, increased H + secretion must take place to 
maintain electroneutrality. In eff ect, HCO 3 − ions that 
might otherwise have been excreted are reabsorbed, 
resulting in metabolic alkalosis. Physiologically, 
maintenance of extracellular fl uid volume is there-
fore given priority over acid–base balance. Because 
secretion of K + ion can also maintain electroneutral-
ity, potassium secretion is also enhanced. Moreover, 
hypokalemia augments H + secretion (and HCO 3 −
reabsorption) and will also propagate metabolic 
alkalosis. Indeed, severe hypokalemia alone can 
cause alkalosis. Urinary chloride concentrations 
during a chloride-sensitive metabolic alkalosis are 
characteristically low (<10 mEq/L). 
 Diuretic therapy is the most common cause of 
chloride-sensitive metabolic alkalosis. Diuretics, 
8
 TABLE 506 Causes of metabolic alkalosis. 
 Chloride-sensitive 
Gastrointestinal
Vomiting
Gastric drainage
Chloride diarrhea
Villous adenoma
Renal
Diuretics
Posthypercapnic
Low chloride intake
Sweat
Cystic fibrosis
 Chloride-resistant 
Increased mineralocorticoid activity
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Edematous disorders (secondary hyperaldosteronism)
Cushing’s syndrome
Licorice ingestion
Bartter’s syndrome
Severe hypokalemia
 Miscellaneous 
Massive blood transfusion
Acetate-containing colloid solutions
Alkaline administration with renal insufficiency
Alkali therapy
Combined antacid and cation-exchange resin therapy
Hypercalcemia
Milk-alkali syndrome
Bone metastases
Sodium penicillins
Glucose feeding after starvation
1156 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
in mineralocorticoid activity readily responds to 
aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone). When 
arterial blood pH is greater than 7.60, treatment with 
intravenous hydrochloric acid (0.1 mol/L), ammo-
nium chloride (0.1 mol/L), arginine hydrochloride, 
or hemodialysis should be considered. 
 ANESTHETIC 
CONSIDERATIONS IN 
PATIENTS WITH ALKALEMIA 
 Respiratory alkalosis seems to prolong the duration 
of opioid-induced respiratory depression; this eff ect 
may result from increased protein binding of opi-
oids. Cerebral ischemia can occur from marked 
reduction in cerebral blood fl ow during respiratory 
alkalosis, particularly during hypotension. 
 Th e combination of alkalemia and hypokale-
mia can precipitate severe atrial and ventricular 
arrhythmias. Potentiation of nondepolarizing neu-
romuscular blockade is reported with alkalemia, 
but may be more directly related to concomitant 
hypokalemia. 
 DIAGNOSIS OF 
ACIDBASE DISORDERS 
 Interpretation of acid–base status from analysis of 
blood gases requires a systematic approach. A rec-
ommended approach follows ( Figure 50–6 ): 
1. 
 Examine arterial pH: Is acidemia or alkalemia 
present? 
2. 
 Examine Pa co 2 : Is the change in Pa co 2 
consistent with a respiratory component? 
3. 
 If the change in Pa co 2 does not explain the 
change in arterial pH, does the change in 
[HCO 3 − ] indicate a metabolic component? 
4. 
 Make a tentative diagnosis (see  Table 50–1 ). 
5. 
 Compare the change in [HCO 3 − ] with the 
change in Paco 2 . Does a compensatory 
response exist ( Table 50–7 )? Because arterial 
pH is related to the ratio of Pa co 2 to [HCO 3 − ], 
both respiratory and renal compensatory 
mechanisms are always such that Paco 2 
and [HCO 3 − ] change in the same direction. 
10
 Chloride-Resistant Metabolic Alkalosis 
 Increased mineralocorticoid activity commonly 
results in metabolic alkalosis, even when it is not 
associated with extracellular volume depletion. 
Inappropriate increases in mineralocorticoid activ-
ity cause sodium retention and expansion of extra-
cellular fl uid volume. Increased H + and K + secretion 
takes place to balance enhanced mineralocorticoid-
mediated sodium reabsorption, resulting in meta-
bolic alkalosis and hypokalemia. Urinary chloride 
concentrations are typically greater than 20 mEq/L 
in such cases. 
 Other Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis 
 Metabolic alkalosis is rarely encountered in patients 
given even large doses of NaHCO 3 unless renal 
excretion of HCO 3 − is impaired. Th e administra-
tion of large amounts of blood products and some 
plasma protein-containing colloid solution fre-
quently results in metabolic alkalosis. Th e citrate, 
lactate, and acetate contained in these fl uids are con-
verted by the liver into HCO 3 − . Patients receiving 
high doses of sodium penicillin (particularly car-
benicillin) can develop metabolic alkalosis. Because 
penicillins act as nonabsorbable anions in the 
renal tubules, increased H + (or K + ) secretion must 
accompany sodium absorption. For reasons that 
are not clear, hypercalcemia that results from non-
parathyroid causes (milk-alkali syndrome and bone 
metastases) is also oft en associated with metabolic 
alkalosis. Th e pathophysiology of alkalosis following 
refeeding is also unknown. 
 Treatment of Metabolic Alkalosis 
 As with other acid–base disorders, correction of 
metabolic alkalosis is never complete until the 
underlying disorder is treated. When ventilation is 
controlled, any respiratory component contribut-
ing to alkalemia should be corrected by decreasing 
minute ventilation to normalize Pa co 2 . Th e treat-
ment of choice for chloride-sensitive metabolic 
alkalosis is administration of intravenous saline 
(NaCl) and potassium (KCl). H 2 -blocker therapy is 
useful when excessive loss of gastric fl uid is a fac-
tor. Acetazolamide may also be useful in edematous 
patients. Alkalosis associated with primary increases 
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management
1157
and the percentage oxygen saturation of hemoglo-
bin. As a rule, only P o 2 , P co 2 , and pH are measured. 
Hemoglobin and percentage oxygen saturation are 
measured with a cooximeter. [HCO 3 − ] is derived 
using the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation and base 
excess from the Siggaard–Andersen nomogram. 
 Sample Source & Collection 
 Arterial blood samples are most commonly utilized 
clinically, though capillary or venous blood can be 
used if the limitations of such samples are recognized. 
Oxygen tension in venous blood (normally 40 mm 
Hg) refl ects tissue extraction, not pulmonary func-
tion. Venous P co 2 is usually 4–6 mm Hg higher than 
Pa co 2 . Consequently, venous blood pH is usually 
0.05 U lower than arterial blood pH. Despite these 
limitations, venous blood is oft en useful in determin-
ing acid–base status. Capillary blood represents a 
mixture of arterial and venous blood, and the values 
obtained refl ect this fact. Samples are usually collected 
in heparin-coated syringes and should be analyzed as 
soon as possible. Air bubbles should be eliminated, 
and the sample should be capped and placed on ice 
to prevent signifi cant uptake of gas from blood cells 
or loss of gases to the atmosphere. Although heparin 
is highly acidic, excessive amounts of heparin in the 
sample syringe usually lower pH only minimally, but 
decrease P co 2 in direct proportion to percentage dilu-
tion and have a variable eff ect on P o 2 . 
 Temperature Correction 
 Changes in temperature aff ect P co 2, P o 2, and 
pH. Decreases in temperature lower the partial 
pressure of a gas in solution—even though the total 
gas content does not change—because gas solubil-
ity is inversely proportionate to temperature. Both 
P co 2 and P o 2 therefore decrease during hypother-
mia, but pH increases because temperature does 
not appreciably alter [HCO 3 − ]: Pa co 2 decreases, but 
[HCO 3 − ] is unchanged. Because blood gas tensions 
and pH are always measured at 37°C, controversy 
exists over whether to correct the measured values to 
the patient’s actual temperature. “Normal” values at 
temperatures other than 37°C are not known. Many 
clinicians use the measurements at 37°C directly 
(“α-stat”), regardless of the patient’s actual tempera-
ture (see Chapter 22). 
11
A change in opposite directions implies a 
mixed acid–base disorder. 
6. 
 If the compensatory response is more or less 
than expected, by defi nition, a mixed acid–base 
disorder exists. 
7. 
 Calculate the plasma anion gap in the case of 
metabolic acidosis. 
8. 
 Measure urinary chloride concentration in the 
case of metabolic alkalosis. 
 An alternative approach that is rapid, but per-
haps less precise, is to correlate changes in pH with 
changes in CO 2 or HCO 3 . For a respiratory dis-
turbance, every 10 mm Hg change in CO 2 should 
change arterial pH by approximately 0.08 U in the 
opposite direction. During metabolic disturbances, 
every 6 mEq change in HCO 3 also changes arterial 
pH by 0.1 in the same direction. If the change in pH 
exceeds or is less than predicated, a mixed acid–base 
disorder is likely to be present. 
 MEASUREMENT OF BLOOD 
GAS TENSIONS & pH 
 Values obtained by routine blood gas measurement 
include oxygen and carbon dioxide tensions (P o 2 
and P co 2 ), pH, [HCO 3 − ], base excess, hemoglobin, 
 TABLE 507 Normal compensatory 
responses in acid–base disturbances. 
Disturbance
Response
Expected Change
Respiratory acidosis
Acute
Chronic
↑ [HCO 3 − ]
↑ [HCO 3 − ]
1 mEq/L/10 mm Hg 
increase in Pa CO 2 
4 mEq/L/10 mm Hg 
increase in Pa CO 2 
Respiratory alkalosis
Acute
Chronic
↓ [HCO 3 − ]
↓ [HCO 3 − ]
2 mEq/L/10 mm Hg 
decrease in Pa CO 2 
4 mEq/L/10 mm Hg 
decrease in Pa CO 2 
Metabolic acidosis
↓ Pa CO 2 
1.2 × the decrease 
in [HCO 3 − ]
Metabolic alkalosis
↑ Pa CO 2 
0.7 × the increase 
in [HCO 3 − ]
1158 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 What are likely causes of these disturbances? 
 The respiratory alkalosis is probably the result 
of congestive heart failure, whereas the metabolic 
acidosis results from lactic acidosis secondary to 
poor perfusion. The latter is suggested by the cal-
culated plasma anion gap: 
 Anion gap = 135 − (95 + 8) = 32 mEq/L
 The lactate level was in fact measured and 
found to be elevated at 14.4 mEq/L. It is probable 
that ﬂ uid overload precipitated the congestive 
heart failure . 
 What treatment is indicated? 
 Treatment should be directed at the primary 
process, (ie, the congestive heart failure). The 
patient was treated with diuresis and inotropes . 
 Following diuresis, the patient’s tachypnea 
has improved, but perfusion still seems to be poor. 
Repeat laboratory measurements are as follows 
(F IO 2 = 0.5): 
 Pa CO 2 = 23 mm Hg 
 pH = 7.52 
 Pa O 2 = 136 mm Hg 
 Calculated [HCO 3 − ] = 18 mEq/L 
 BD = –3.0 mEq/L 
 Hb = 10.3 g/dL 
 [Na + ] = 137 mEq/L 
 [Cl − ] = 92 mEq/L 
 [K + ] = 3.9 mEq/L 
 [Total CO 2 ] = 18.5 mEq/L 
 What is the acid–base disturbance? 
 Respiratory alkalosis is still present, whereas 
the BD seems to have improved. Note that the 
hemoglobin concentration has increased slightly, 
but [K + ] has decreased as a result of the diuresis. 
With the new Pa CO 2 , the expected [HCO 3 − ] should 
be 20.6 mEq/L: 
 (40 − 10) ×  2
10
 mEq/L = 3.4 mEq/L below 24 mEq/L
 Therefore, the patient still has metabolic acido-
sis because the [HCO 3 − ] is 2 mEq/L less. Note again 
 CASE DISCUSSION
A Complex Acid–Base Disturbance 
 A 1-month-old male infant with an anorectal mal-
formation undergoes anoplasty. Postoperatively, 
he is found to be in congestive heart failure result-
ing from coarctation of the aorta. He is noted to 
have tachypnea, decreased urinary output, poor 
peripheral perfusion, hepatomegaly, and cardio-
megaly. Following tracheal intubation, the infant 
is placed on a ventilator (pressure support ven-
tilation, fraction of inspired oxygen [F IO 2 ] = 1.0). 
Initial arterial blood gas, hemoglobin, and elec-
trolyte measurements are as follows: 
 Pa CO 2 = 11 mm 
 pH = 7.47 
 Pa O 2 = 209 mm Hg 
 Calculated [HCO 3 − ] = 7.7 mEq/L 
 BD = −14.6 mEq/L 
 Hb = 9.5 g/Dl 
 [Na + ] = 135 mEq/L 
 [Cl − ] = 95 mEq/L 
 [K + ] = 5.5 mEq/L 
 [Total CO 2 ] = 8 mEq/L 
 Note that the [total CO 2 ] normally measured 
with electrolytes includes both plasma [HCO 3 − ] 
and dissolved CO 2 in plasma . 
 What is the acid–base disturbance? 
 Using the approach described above, the 
patient clearly has an alkalosis (pH >7.45), which is 
at least partly respiratory in origin (PaCO 2 <40 mm 
Hg). Because PaCO 2 has decreased by nearly 30 mm 
Hg, we would expect [HCO 3 − ] to be 18 mEq/L: 
(40 − 10) ×  2
10
 mEq/L = 6 mEq/L below 24 mEq/L
 In fact, the patient’s [HCO 3 − ] is nearly 10 mEq/L 
less than that! The patient therefore also has a 
mixed acid–base disturbance: primary respiratory 
alkalosis and primary metabolic acidosis. Note 
that the diﬀ erence between the patient’s [HCO 3 − ] 
and the [HCO 3 − ] expected for a pure respiratory 
alkalosis roughly corresponds to the base excess . 
 
CHAPTER 50 Acid–Base Management 
1159 
 Outcome 
 The respiratory alkalosis and the metabolic aci-
dosis have now resolved, and the metabolic alkalo-
sis is now most prominent . 
 Intravenous KCl replacement and a small 
amount of saline were judiciously given, followed 
by complete resolution of metabolic alkalosis. The 
patient subsequently underwent surgical correc-
tion of the coarctation . 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Corey HE: Bench-to-bedside review: Fundamental 
principles of acid-base physiology. Crit Care 2005;9:184. 
 Dzierba AL, Abraham P: A practical approach to 
understanding acid-base abnormalities in critical 
illness. J Pharm Pract 2011;24:17. 
 Gunnerson KJ: Clinical review: the meaning of acid-
base abnormalities in the intensive care unit – 
epidemiology. Crit Care 2005;9:508. 
 Kaplan LJ, Frangos S: Clinical review: acid-base 
abnormalities in the intensive care unit. Crit Care 
2005;9:198. 
 Kellum JA: Acid-base disorders and strong ion gap. 
Contrib Nephrol Basel 2007;156:158. 
 Kraut JA, Madias NE: Metabolic acidosis: 
pathophysiology, diagnosis and management. Nature 
Rev Nephrol 2010;6:274. 
 Morgan TJ: Clinical review: the meaning of acid-base 
abnormalities in the intensive care unit – eff ects of 
fl uid administration. Crit Care 2005;9:204. 
 Morris CG, Low J: Metabolic acidosis in the critically 
ill: part 1. Classifi cation and pathophysiology. 
Anaesthesia 2008;63:294. 
 Morris CG, Low J: Metabolic acidosis in the critically ill: 
part 2. Causes and treatment. Anaesthesia 2008;63:396. 
that this diﬀ erence is close to the given BD and that 
the anion gap is still high: 
 Anion gap = 137 − (92 + 18) = 27 
 The repeat lactate measurement is now 
13.2 mEq/L . 
 The high anion gap and lactate level explain 
why the patient is still not doing well and indi-
cate that a new process is masking the severity 
of the metabolic acidosis (which is essentially 
unchanged) . 
 Given the clinical course, it is likely that the 
patient now has a triple acid–base disorder: respi-
ratory alkalosis, metabolic acidosis, and now 
metabolic alkalosis. The latter probably resulted 
from hypovolemia secondary to excessive diuresis 
(chloride-sensitive metabolic alkalosis). Note also 
that the metabolic alkalosis is nearly equal in mag-
nitude to the metabolic acidosis . 
 The patient was subsequently given packed 
red blood cells in saline, and within 24 hr all three 
disorders began to improve: 
 Pa CO 2 = 35 mm Hg 
 pH = 7.51 
 Pa O 2 = 124 mm Hg 
 Calculated [HCO 3 − ] = 26.8 mEq/L 
 Base excess = +5.0 mEq/L 
 Hb = 15 g/dL 
 [Na + ] = 136 mEq/L 
 [Cl − ] = 91 mEq/L 
 [K + ] = 3.2 mEq/L 
 [Total CO 2 ] = 27 mEq/L 
 Lactate = 2.7 mEq/L 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1161
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
 Although the intravascular half-life of a 
crystalloid solution is 20–30 min, most 
colloid solutions have intravascular half-lives 
between 3 and 6 h. 
 Patients with a normal hematocrit should 
generally be transfused only after losses 
greater than 10–20% of their blood volume. 
The exact point is based on the patient’s 
medical condition and the surgical procedure. 
 The most severe transfusion reactions are due 
to ABO incompatibility; naturally acquired 
antibodies can react against the transfused 
(foreign) antigens, activate complement, and 
result in intravascular hemolysis. 
 In anesthetized patients, an acute 
hemolytic reaction is manifested by a rise 
in temperature, unexplained tachycardia, 
hypotension, hemoglobinuria, and diﬀ use 
oozing in the surgical ﬁ eld. 
 Allogeneic transfusion of blood products 
may diminish immunoresponsiveness and 
promote inﬂ ammation. 
1
2
3
4
5
 Immunocompromised and 
immunosuppressed patients (eg, premature 
infants, organ transplant recipients, and 
cancer patients) are particularly susceptible 
to severe transfusion-related cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infections. Ideally, such patients should 
receive only CMV-negative units. 
 The most common cause of nonsurgical 
bleeding following massive blood 
transfusion is dilutional thrombocytopenia. 
 Clinically important hypocalcemia, causing 
cardiac depression, will not occur in most 
normal patients unless the transfusion rate 
exceeds 1 unit every 5 min, and intravenous 
calcium salts should rarely be required in the 
absence of measured hypocalcemia. 
 Once adequate tissue perfusion is restored, 
the most consistent acid-base abnormality 
following massive blood transfusion is 
metabolic alkalosis, caused by the rapid 
hepatic metabolism of citric acid and lactic 
acid to bicarbonate. 
6
7
8
9
 Almost all patients undergoing surgical procedures 
require venous access for administration of intrave-
nous fl uids and medication, and some patients will 
require transfusion of blood components. Th e anes-
thesia provider should be able to assess intravascular 
volume with suffi  cient accuracy to correct exist-
ing fl uid or electrolyte defi cits and replace ongoing 
losses. Errors in fl uid and electrolyte replacement or 
transfusion may result in morbidity or death. 
 Evaluation of 
Intravascular Volume 
 Clinical estimation of intravascular volume must be 
relied upon because objective measurements of fl uid 
compartment volumes are not practical in the clini-
cal environment. Intravascular volume can be esti-
mated using patient history, physical examination, 
 Fluid Management & Blood 
Component Therapy 
51
1162 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 LABORATORY EVALUATION 
 Several laboratory measurements may be used as 
surrogates of intravascular volume and adequacy of 
tissue perfusion, including serial hematocrits, arte-
rial blood pH, urinary specifi c gravity or osmolality, 
urinary sodium or chloride concentration, serum 
sodium, and the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to serum 
creatinine ratio. However, these measurements are 
only indirect indices of intravascular volume, and 
they oft en cannot be relied upon intraoperatively 
because they are aff ected by many perioperative fac-
tors and because laboratory results are oft en delayed. 
Laboratory signs of dehydration may include rising 
hematocrit and hemoglobin, progressive metabolic 
acidosis (including lactic acidosis), urinary specifi c 
gravity greater than 1.010, urinary sodium less than 10 
mEq/L, urinary osmolality greater than 450 mOsm/L, 
hypernatremia, and BUN-to-creatinine ratio greater 
than 10:1. Th e hemoglobin and hematocrit are usu-
ally unchanged in patients with acute hypovolemia 
and laboratory analysis, oft en with the aid of 
 sophisticated hemodynamic monitoring techniques. 
Regardless of the method employed, serial evalua-
tions are necessary to confi rm initial impressions 
and to guide fl uid, electrolyte, and blood component 
therapy. Multiple modalities should complement 
one another, because all parameters are indirect, 
nonspecifi c measures of volume; reliance upon any 
one parameter may lead to erroneous conclusions. 
 PATIENT HISTORY 
 Th e patient history is an important tool in preop-
erative volume status assessment. Important fac-
tors include recent oral intake, persistent vomiting 
or diarrhea, gastric suction, signifi cant blood loss 
or wound drainage, intravenous fl uid and blood 
administration, and recent hemodialysis if the 
patient has kidney failure. 
 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION 
 Indications of hypovolemia include abnormal skin 
turgor, dehydration of mucous membranes, thready 
peripheral pulses, increased resting heart rate and 
decreased blood pressure, orthostatic heart rate and 
blood pressure changes from the supine to sitting 
or standing positions, and decreased urinary fl ow 
rate ( Table 51–1 ). Unfortunately, many medica-
tions administered during anesthesia, as well as the 
neuroendocrine stress response to operative proce-
dures, alter these signs and render them unreliable 
in the immediate postoperative period. Intraopera-
tively, the fullness of a peripheral pulse, urinary fl ow 
rate, and indirect signs such as the response of blood 
pressure to positive-pressure ventilation and to the 
vasodilating or negative inotropic eff ects of anes-
thetics, are most oft en used. 
 Pitting edema—presacral in the bedridden 
patient or pretibial in the ambulatory patient—and 
increased urinary fl ow are signs of excess extracel-
lular water and likely hypervolemia in patients with 
normal cardiac, hepatic, and renal function. Late 
signs of hypervolemia in settings such as congestive 
heart failure may include tachycardia, elevated jugu-
lar pulse pressure, pulmonary crackles and rales, 
wheezing, cyanosis, and pink, frothy pulmonary 
secretions. 
 TABLE 511 Signs of ﬂ uid loss (hypovolemia). 
Sign
Fluid Loss (Expressed as Percentage 
of Body Weight)
 5% 
 10% 
 15% 
Mucous 
membranes
Dry
Very dry
Parched
Sensorium
Normal
Lethargic
Obtunded
Orthostatic 
changes
None
Present
Marked
In heart 
rate
>15 bpm ↑  1  
In blood 
pressure
>10 mm Hg ↓
Urinary flow 
rate
Mildly 
decreased
Decreased
Markedly 
decreased
Pulse rate
Normal or 
increased
Increased 
>100 bpm
Markedly 
increased 
>120 bpm
Blood 
pressure
Normal
Mildly 
decreased with 
respiratory 
variation
Decreased
  1  bpm, beats per minute.
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1163 
therapy utilizing arterial pulse contour analy-
sis and estimation of stroke volume variation (eg, 
 LIDCOrapid, Vigileo FloTrak), esophageal Doppler, 
or transesophageal echocardiography should be 
considered when accurate determination of hemo-
dynamic and fl uid status is important. Stroke vol-
ume variation (SVV) is calculated as follows: 
 SVV = SV max − SV min /SV mean 
 Th e maximum, minimum and mean SV are 
calculated for a set period of time by the various 
measuring devices. During spontaneous ventilation 
the blood pressure decreases on inspiration. During 
positive pressure ventilation the opposite occurs. 
Normal SVV is less than 10–15% for patients on 
controlled ventilation. Patients with greater degrees 
of SVV are likely to be responsive to fl uid therapy. 
In addition to providing a better assessment of the 
patient’s volume and hemodynamic status than 
that obtained with CVP monitoring, these modali-
ties avoid the multiple risks associated with central 
venous and pulmonary artery catheters. 
 Intravenous Fluids 
 Intravenous fl uid therapy may consist of infusions 
of crystalloids, colloids, or a combination of both. 
Crystalloid solutions are aqueous solutions of ions 
(salts) with or without glucose, whereas colloid solu-
tions also contain high-molecular-weight substances 
such as proteins or large glucose polymers. Colloid 
solutions help maintain plasma colloid oncotic pres-
sure (see Chapter 49) and for the most part remain 
intravascular, whereas crystalloid solutions rapidly 
equilibrate with and distribute throughout the entire 
extracellular fl uid space. 
 Controversy exists regarding the use of colloid 
versus crystalloid fl uids for surgical patients. Propo-
nents of colloids justifi ably argue that by maintaining 
plasma oncotic pressure, colloids are more effi  cient 
(ie, a smaller volume of colloids than crystalloids 
is required to produce the same eff ect) in restoring 
normal intravascular volume and cardiac output. 
Crystalloid proponents, on the other hand, maintain 
that the crystalloid solutions are equally eff ective 
when given in appropriate amounts. Concerns that 
secondary to acute blood loss because there is insuf-
fi cient time for extravascular fl uid to shift  into the 
intravascular space. Radiographic indicators of vol-
ume overload include increased pulmonary vascular 
and interstitial markings (Kerley “B” lines) or diff use 
alveolar infi ltrates. 
 HEMODYNAMIC 
MEASUREMENTS 
 Hemodynamic monitoring is discussed in Chapter 5. 
Central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring has been 
used in patients with normal cardiac and pulmonary 
function when volume status is diffi  cult to assess 
by other means or when rapid or major alterations 
are expected. However, static CVP readings do not 
provide an accurate or reliable indication of volume 
status. 
 Pulmonary artery pressure monitoring has been 
used in settings where central venous pressures do 
not correlate with the clinical assessment or when the 
patient has primary or secondary right ventricular 
dysfunction; the latter is usually due to pulmonary 
or left  ventricular disease, respectively. Pulmonary 
artery occlusion pressure (PAOP) readings of less 
than 8 mm Hg indicate hypovolemia in the presence 
of confi rmatory clinical signs; however, values less 
than 15 mm Hg may be associated with relative hypo-
volemia in patients with poor ventricular compliance. 
PAOP measurements greater than 18 mm Hg are 
elevated and generally imply left  ventricular volume 
overload. Th e normal relationship between PAOP 
and left  ventricular end-diastolic volume is altered by 
the presence of mitral valve disease (particularly ste-
nosis), severe aortic stenosis, or a left  atrial myxoma 
or thrombus, as well as by increased thoracic and pul-
monary airway pressures (see Chapters 5, 20, 21, and 
22). All PAOP measurements should be obtained at 
end expiration and interpreted in the context of the 
clinical setting. Finally, one should recognize that 
multiple studies have failed to show that pulmo-
nary artery pressure monitoring leads to improved 
outcomes in critically ill patients, and that echocar-
diography provides a much more accurate and less 
invasive estimate of cardiac fi lling and function. 
 Intravascular volume status is oft en diffi  cult to 
assess, and goal-directed hemodynamic and fl uid 
1164 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Some evidence suggests that marked tissue 
edema can impair oxygen transport, tissue heal-
ing, and return of bowel function following major 
surgery. 
 CRYSTALLOID SOLUTIONS 
 Crystalloids are usually considered as the initial 
resuscitation fl uid in patients with hemorrhagic and 
septic shock, in burn patients, in patients with head 
injury (to maintain cerebral perfusion pressure), and 
in patients undergoing plasmapheresis and hepatic 
resection. Colloids may be included in resuscitation 
eff orts following initial administration of crystalloid 
solutions depending upon anesthesia provider pref-
erences and institutional protocols. 
 A wide variety of solutions is available 
( Table 51–2 ), and choice is according to the type of 
colloids may enhance the formation of pulmonary 
edema fl uid in patients with increased pulmonary 
capillary permeability appear to be unfounded (see 
Chapter 23). Several generalizations can be made: 
1. 
 Crystalloids, when given in suffi  cient amounts, 
are just as eff ective as colloids in restoring 
intravascular volume. 
2. 
 Replacing an intravascular volume defi cit with 
crystalloids generally requires three to four 
times the volume needed when using colloids. 
3. 
 Surgical patients may have an extracellular fl uid 
defi cit that exceeds the intravascular defi cit. 
4. 
 Severe intravascular fl uid defi cits can be more 
rapidly corrected using colloid solutions. 
5. 
 Th e rapid administration of large amounts 
of crystalloids (>4–5 L) is more frequently 
associated with tissue edema. 
 TABLE 512 Composition of crystalloid solutions. 
Solution
Toxicity 
(mOsm/L)
Na + 
(mEq/L)
Cl − 
(mEq/L)
K + 
(mEq/L)
Ca 2+ 
 (mEq/L)
Mg 2+ 
 (mEq/L)
Glucose 
(g/L)
Lactate 
(mEq/L)
HCO 3 − 
(mEq/L)
Acetate 
(mEq/L)
Gluconate 
(mEq/L)
5% dextrose 
in water 
(D 5 W)
Hypo (253)–
50
Normal 
saline (NS)
Iso (308)
154
154
D 5 ¼NS
Iso (355)
38.5
38.5
50
D 5 ½NS
Hyper (432)
77
77
50
D 5 NS
Hyper (586)
154
154
50
Lactated 
Ringer’s 
injection (LR)
Iso (273)
130
109
4
3
28
D 5 LR
Hyper (525)
130
109
4
3
50
28
½NS
Hypo (154)
77
77
3% S
Hyper (1026)
513
513
5% S
Hyper (1710)
855
855
7.5% 
NaHCO 3 
Hyper (1786)
893
893
Plasmalyte
Iso (294)
140
98
5
3
27
23
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy
1165
defi cits (eg, hemorrhagic shock) prior to the arrival 
of blood for transfusion, and (2) fl uid resuscitation 
in the presence of severe hypoalbuminemia or con-
ditions associated with large protein losses such as 
burns. For burn patients, colloids are not included in 
most initial resuscitation protocols (and we strongly 
recommend that burn surgeons and anesthesia per-
sonnel develop a resuscitation protocol and follow 
it), but may be considered following initial resuscita-
tion with more extensive burn injuries during subse-
quent operative procedures. 
 Many clinicians also use colloid solutions in 
 conjunction with crystalloids when fl uid replace-
ment needs exceed 3–4 L prior to transfusion. It 
should be noted that colloid solutions are prepared 
in normal saline (Cl − 145–154 mEq/L) and thus can 
also cause hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis (see 
above). Some clinicians suggest that during anesthe-
sia, maintenance (and other) fl uid requirements be 
provided with crystalloid solutions and blood loss 
be replaced on a milliliter-per-milliliter basis with 
colloid solutions (including blood products). 
 Several colloid solutions are generally available. 
All are derived from either plasma proteins or syn-
thetic glucose polymers and are supplied in isotonic 
electrolyte solutions. 
 Blood-derived colloids include albumin (5% 
and 25% solutions) and plasma protein fraction 
(5%). Both are heated to 60°C for at least 10 h to 
minimize the risk of transmitting hepatitis and other 
viral diseases. Plasma protein fraction contains α- 
and β-globulins in addition to albumin and has 
occasionally resulted in hypotensive reactions. Th ese 
reactions are allergic in nature and may involve acti-
vators of prekallikrein. 
 Synthetic colloids include dextrose starches and 
gelatins. Gelatins are associated with histamine-
mediated allergic reactions and are not available in 
the United States.  Dextran is available as dextran 
70 (Macrodex) and dextran 40 (Rheomacrodex), 
which have average molecular weights of 70,000 
and 40,000, respectively. Although dextran 70 is a 
better volume expander than dextran 40, the latter 
also improves blood fl ow through the microcircu-
lation, presumably by decreasing blood viscosity, 
and is oft en administered to take advantage of these 
rheological properties rather than to meet “fl uid 
fl uid loss being replaced. For losses primarily involv-
ing water, replacement is with hypotonic solutions, 
also called maintenance-type solutions. If losses 
involve both water and electrolytes, replacement 
is with isotonic electrolyte solutions, also called 
replacement-type solutions. Glucose is provided in 
some solutions to maintain tonicity, or prevent keto-
sis and hypoglycemia due to fasting, or based on 
tradition. Children are prone to developing hypo-
glycemia (<50 mg/dL) following 4- to 8-h fasts. 
 Because most intraoperative fl uid losses are iso-
tonic, replacement-type solutions are generally used. 
Th e most commonly used fl uid is lactated Ringer’s 
solution. Although it is slightly hypotonic, provid-
ing approximately 100 mL of free water per liter and 
tending to lower serum sodium, lactated Ringer’s 
generally has the least eff ect on extracellular fl uid 
composition and appears to be the most physiologi-
cal solution when large volumes are necessary. Th e 
lactate in this solution is converted by the liver into 
bicarbonate.  When given in large volumes, nor-
mal saline produces a dilutional hyperchloremic 
acidosis because of its high sodium and chloride 
content (154 mEq/L): plasma bicarbonate con-
centration decreases as chloride concentration 
increases.  Normal saline is the preferred solution for 
hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis and for diluting 
packed red blood cells prior to transfusion. Five per-
cent dextrose in water (D 5 W) is used for replacement 
of pure water defi cits and as a maintenance fl uid for 
patients on sodium restriction. Hypertonic 3% saline 
is employed in therapy of severe symptomatic hypo-
natremia (see Chapter 49). Hypotonic solutions must 
be administered slowly to avoid inducing hemolysis. 
 COLLOID SOLUTIONS 
 Th e osmotic activity of the high-molecular-weight 
substances in colloids tends to maintain these solu-
tions intravascularly.  Although the intravascu-
lar half-life of a crystalloid solution is 
20–30 min, most colloid solutions have intravascu-
lar half-lives between 3 and 6 h. Th e relatively greater 
cost and occasional complications associated with 
colloids may limit their use. Generally accepted 
indications for colloids include (1) fl uid resuscita-
tion in patients with severe intravascular fl uid 
1
1166 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
sweating, and insensible losses from the skin and 
lungs. Normal maintenance requirements can be 
estimated from  Table 51–3 . 
 PREEXISTING DEFICITS 
 Patients presenting for surgery aft er an overnight 
fast without any fl uid intake will have a preexisting 
defi cit proportionate to the duration of the fast. Th e 
defi cit can be estimated by multiplying the normal 
maintenance rate by the length of the fast. For the 
average 70-kg person fasting for 8 h, this amounts to 
(40 + 20 + 50) mL/h × 8 h, or 880 mL. In fact, the real 
defi cit is less as a result of renal conservation. (Aft er 
all, how many of us would feel the need to consume 
nearly 1L of fl uid upon awakening aft er 8 hours of 
sleep?) 
 Abnormal fl uid losses frequently contribute to 
preoperative defi cits. Preoperative bleeding, vomit-
ing, diuresis, and diarrhea are oft en contributory. 
Occult losses (really redistribution; see below) due 
to fl uid sequestration by traumatized or infected tis-
sues or by ascites can also be substantial. Increased 
insensible losses due to hyperventilation, fever, and 
sweating are oft en overlooked. 
 Ideally, defi cits should be replaced preopera-
tively in surgical patients. Th e fl uids used should be 
similar in composition to the fl uids lost ( Table 51–4 ). 
 SURGICAL FLUID LOSSES 
 Blood Loss 
 One of the most important, yet diffi  cult, tasks of 
anesthesia personnel is to monitor and estimate 
blood loss. Although estimates are complicated by 
requirements.” Antiplatelet eff ects are also described 
for dextrans. Infusions exceeding 20 mL/kg per day 
can interfere with blood typing, may prolong bleed-
ing time, and have been associated with kidney fail-
ure. Dextrans can also be antigenic, and both mild 
and severe anaphylactoid and anaphylactic reactions 
are described. Dextran 1 (Promit) may be adminis-
tered prior to dextran 40 or dextran 70 to prevent 
severe anaphylactic reactions; it acts as a hapten and 
binds any circulating dextran antibodies. 
 Hetastarch (hydroxyethyl starch) is available 
in multiple formulations, which are designated by 
concentration, molecular weight, degree of starch 
substitution (on a molar basis), and ratio of hydrox-
ylation between the C2 and the C6 positions. Th us 
in some countries a wide variety of formulations are 
available with concentrations between 6% and 10%, 
molecular weights between 200 and 670, and degree 
of molar substitution between 0.4 and 0.7. A greater 
ratio of C2 versus C6 substitution leads to longer per-
sistence in plasma. Th e starch molecules are derived 
from plants. Smaller starch molecules are eliminated 
by the kidneys, whereas large molecules must fi rst be 
broken down by amylase. Hetastarch is highly eff ec-
tive as a plasma expander and is less expensive than 
albumin. Moreover, hetastarch is nonantigenic, and 
anaphylactoid reactions are rare. Coagulation stud-
ies and bleeding times are generally not signifi cantly 
aff ected following infusions of older, higher molecu-
lar weight formulations up to 1.0 L in adults. Newer, 
lower molecular weight formulations can safely be 
given in larger volumes. 
 Perioperative Fluid Therapy 
 Perioperative fl uid therapy includes replacement of 
normal losses (maintenance requirements), of pre-
existing fl uid defi cits, and of surgical wound losses 
including blood loss. 
 NORMAL MAINTENANCE 
REQUIREMENTS 
 In the absence of oral intake, fl uid and electrolyte 
defi cits can rapidly develop as a result of contin-
ued urine formation, gastrointestinal secretions, 
 TABLE 513 Estimating maintenance ﬂ uid 
requirements.  1  
Weight
Rate
For the first 10 kg
4 mL/kg/h
For the next 10 kg
Add 2 mL/kg/h
For each kg above 20 kg
Add 1 mL/kg/h
  1  Example: What are the maintenance ﬂ uid requirements for a 25-kg child?
Answer: 40 + 20 + 5 = 65 mL/h.
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1167 
severe intravascular depletion. Everything related 
to “third-space” fl uid loss is controversial, including 
whether it actually exists in patients other than those 
with peritonitis, burns, and similar situations char-
acterized by infl amed or infected tissue. Trauma-
tized, infl amed, or infected tissue can sequester large 
amounts of fl uid in the interstitial space and can 
translocate fl uid across serosal surfaces (ascites) or 
into bowel lumen. Shift ing of intravascular fl uid into 
the interstitial space is especially important; protein-
free fl uid shift  across an intact vascular barrier into 
the interstitial space is exacerbated by hypervolemia, 
and pathological alteration of the vascular barrier 
allows protein-rich fl uid shift . 
 INTRAOPERATIVE FLUID 
REPLACEMENT 
 Intraoperative fl uid therapy should include supply-
ing basic fl uid requirements and replacing residual 
preoperative defi cits as well as intraoperative losses 
(blood loss, fl uid redistribution, and evaporation). 
Selection of the type of intravenous solution depends 
on the surgical procedure and the expected blood 
loss. For minor procedures involving minimal blood 
loss, dilute maintenance solutions can be used. For 
all other procedures, lactated Ringer’s solution or 
Plasmalyte is generally used even for maintenance 
requirements. 
occult bleeding into the wound or under the surgical 
drapes, accuracy is important to guide fl uid therapy 
and transfusion. 
 Th e most commonly used method for esti-
mating blood loss is measurement of blood in the 
surgical suction container and visual estimation of 
the blood on surgical sponges (“4 by 4’s”) and lapa-
rotomy pads (“lap sponges”). A fully soaked 4 × 4 
sponge is said to hold 10 mL of blood, whereas a 
soaked “lap” holds 100–150 mL. More accurate esti-
mates are obtained if sponges and “laps” are weighed 
before and aft er use, which is especially important 
during pediatric procedures. Use of irrigating solu-
tions complicates estimates, but their use should be 
noted and an attempt made to compensate. Serial 
hematocrits or hemoglobin concentrations refl ect 
the ratio of blood cells to plasma, not necessarily 
blood loss, and rapid fl uid shift s and intravenous 
replacement aff ect measurements. 
 Other Fluid Losses 
 Many surgical procedures are associated with oblig-
atory losses of fl uids other than blood. Such losses 
are due mainly to evaporation and internal redistri-
bution of body fl uids. Evaporative losses are most 
signifi cant with large wounds and are proportional 
to the surface area exposed and to the duration of 
the surgical procedure. 
 Internal redistribution of fl uids—oft en called 
 third-spacing —can cause massive fl uid shift s and 
 TABLE 514 Electrolyte content of body ﬂ uids. 
Fluid
Na + (mEq/L)
K + (mEq/L)
Cl − (mEq/L)
HCO 3 − (mEq/L)
Sweat
30–50
5
45–55
Saliva
2–40
10–30
6–30
30
Gastric juice
High acidity
10–30
5–40
80–150
Low acidity
70–140
5–40
55–95
5–25
Pancreatic secretions
115–180
5
55–95
60–110
Biliary secretions 
130–160
5
90–120
30–40
Ileal fluid
40–135
5–30
20–90
20–30
Diarrheal stool
20–160
10–40
30–120
30–50
1168 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
the hematocrit to fall to 30% can be calculated as 
follows: 
1. 
 Estimate blood volume from  Table 51–5 . 
2. 
 Estimate the red blood cell volume (RBCV) at 
the preoperative hematocrit (RBCV preop ). 
3. 
 Estimate RBCV at a hematocrit of 30% 
(RBCV 30% ), assuming normal blood volume is 
maintained. 
4. 
 Calculate the RBCV lost when the hematocrit 
is 30%; RBCV lost = RBCV preop – RBCV 30% . 
5. 
 Allowable blood loss = RBCV lost × 3. 
 Example 
 An 85-kg woman has a preoperative hematocrit of 
35%. How much blood loss will decrease her hema-
tocrit to 30%? 
 Estimated blood volume  = 65 mL/kg × 85 kg 
= 5525 mL. 
 RBCV 35% = 5525 × 35% = 1934 mL. 
 RBCV 30% = 5525 × 30% = 1658 mL. 
 Red cell loss at 30% = 1934 − 1658 = 276 mL. 
 Allowable blood loss = 3 × 276 mL = 828 mL. 
 Th erefore, transfusion should be considered 
only when this patient’s blood loss exceeds 800 mL. 
Increasingly, transfusions are not recommended 
until the hematocrit decreases to 24% or lower 
(hemoglobin <8.0 g/dL), but it is necessary to take 
into account the rate of blood loss and comorbid 
conditions (eg, cardiac disease, in which case trans-
fusion might be indicated if only 800 mL of blood 
is lost). 
 Clinical guidelines commonly used include: 
(1) one unit of red blood cells will increase hemoglo-
bin 1 g/dL and the hematocrit 2–3% in adults; and 
(2) a 10-mL/kg transfusion of red blood cells will 
increase hemoglobin concentration by 3 g/dL and 
the hematocrit by 10%. 
 Replacing Redistributive 
& Evaporative Losses 
 Because redistributive and evaporative losses are 
primarily related to wound size and the extent of 
surgical dissections and manipulations, procedures 
can be classifi ed according to the degree of tissue 
trauma. Th ese additional fl uid losses can be replaced 
 Replacing Blood Loss 
 Ideally, blood loss should be replaced with crystal-
loid or colloid solutions to maintain intravascular 
volume (normovolemia) until the danger of anemia 
outweighs the risks of transfusion. At that point, fur-
ther blood loss is replaced with transfusions of red 
blood cells to maintain hemoglobin concentration 
(or hematocrit) at that level. Th ere are no mandatory 
transfusion triggers. Th e point where the benefi ts of 
transfusion outweigh its risks must be considered on 
an individual basis. 
 Below a hemoglobin concentration of 7 g/dL, 
the resting cardiac output increases to maintain a 
normal oxygen delivery. An increased hemoglobin 
concentration may be appropriate for older and 
sicker patients with cardiac or pulmonary disease, 
particularly when there is clinical evidence (eg, a 
reduced mixed venous oxygen saturation and a per-
sisting tachycardia) that transfusion would be useful. 
 In settings other than massive trauma, most 
clinicians administer lactated Ringer’s solution or 
Plasmalyte in approximately three to four times the 
volume of the blood lost, or colloid in a 1:1 ratio, 
until the transfusion point is reached. At that time, 
blood is replaced unit-for-unit as it is lost, with 
reconstituted packed red blood cells. 
 Th e transfusion point can be determined pre-
operatively from the hematocrit and by estimating 
blood volume ( Table 51–5 ).  Patients with a 
normal hematocrit should generally be 
 transfused only aft er losses greater than 10–20% of 
their blood volume. Th e exact point is based on the 
patient’s medical condition and the surgical 
 procedure. Th e amount of blood loss necessary for 
2
 TABLE 515 Average blood volumes. 
Age
Blood Volume
Neonates
Premature
95 mL/kg
Full-term
85 mL/kg
Infants
80 mL/kg
Adults
Men
75 mL/kg
Women
65 mL/kg
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy
1169
antigen are considered Rh-positive. Approximately 
85% of the white population and 92% of the black 
population has the D antigen, and individuals lack-
ing this antigen are called Rh-negative. In contrast 
to the ABO groups, Rh-negative patients usually 
develop antibodies against the D antigen only aft er 
an Rh-positive transfusion or with pregnancy, in the 
situation of an Rh-negative mother delivering an 
Rh-positive baby. 
 Other Red Blood Cell Antigen Systems 
 Other red cell antigen systems include Lewis, P, Ii, 
MNS, Kidd, Kell, Duff y, Lutheran, Xg, Sid, Car-
tright, YK, and Chido Rodgers. Fortunately, with 
some exceptions (Kell, Kidd, Duff y, and Ss), alloan-
tibodies against these antigens rarely cause serious 
hemolytic reactions. 
 COMPATIBILITY TESTING 
 Th e purpose of compatibility testing is to predict and 
to prevent antigen–antibody reactions as a result of 
red cell transfusions. 
 ABO–Rh Testing 
 Th e most severe transfusion reactions are due 
to ABO incompatibility; naturally acquired 
antibodies can react against the transfused (foreign) 
antigens, activate complement, and result in intra-
vascular hemolysis. Th e patient’s red cells are tested 
with serum known to have antibodies against A and 
against B to determine blood type. Because of the 
almost universal prevalence of natural ABO anti-
bodies, confi rmation of blood type is then made by 
testing the patient’s serum against red cells with a 
known antigen type. 
 Th e patient’s red cells are also tested with anti-
D antibodies to determine Rh status. If the subject 
is Rh-negative, the presence of anti-D antibody is 
checked by mixing the patient’s serum against Rh-
positive red cells. Th e probability of developing 
anti-D antibodies aft er a single exposure to the Rh 
antigen is 50–70%. 
 Antibody Screen 
 Th e purpose of this test is to detect in the serum the 
presence of the antibodies that are most commonly 
3
according to  Table 51–6 , based on whether tissue 
trauma is minimal, moderate, or severe. Th ese val-
ues are only guidelines, and actual needs vary con-
siderably from patient to patient. 
 Transfusion 
 BLOOD GROUPS 
 Human red cell membranes are estimated to con-
tain at least 300 diff erent antigenic determinants, 
and at least 20 separate blood group antigen sys-
tems are known. Fortunately, only the ABO and the 
Rh systems are important in the majority of blood 
transfusions. Individuals oft en produce antibodies 
(alloantibodies) to the alleles they lack within each 
system. Such antibodies are responsible for the most 
serious reactions to transfusions. Antibodies may 
occur “naturally” or in response to sensitization 
from a previous transfusion or pregnancy. 
 The ABO System 
 ABO blood group typing is determined by the pres-
ence or absence of A or B red blood cell (RBC) 
surface antigens: Type A blood has A RBC antigen, 
type B blood has B RBC antigen, type AB blood has 
both A and B RBC antigens, and type O blood has 
neither A nor B RBC antigen present. Almost all 
individuals not having A or B antigen “naturally” 
produce antibodies, mainly immunoglobulin (Ig) 
M, against those missing antigens within the fi rst 
year of life. 
 The Rh System 
 Th ere are approximately 46 Rhesus group red cell 
surface antigens, and patients with the D Rhesus 
 TABLE 516 Redistribution and evaporative 
surgical ﬂ uid losses. 
Degree of Tissue Trauma
Additional Fluid 
Requirement
Minimal (eg, herniorrhaphy)
0–2 mL/kg
Moderate (eg, cholecystectomy)
2–4 mL/kg
Severe (eg, bowel resection)
4–8 mL/kg
1170 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 BLOOD BANK PRACTICES 
 Blood donors are screened to exclude medical con-
ditions that might adversely aff ect the donor or the 
recipient. Once the blood is collected, it is typed, 
screened for antibodies, and tested for hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C, syphilis, and human immunodefi ciency 
virus (HIV). A preservative–anticoagulant solu-
tion is added. Th e most commonly used solution is 
 CPDA-1, which contains citrate as an anticoagulant 
(by binding calcium), phosphate as a buff er, dex-
trose as a red cell energy source, and adenosine as 
a precursor for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) syn-
thesis. CPDA-1-preserved blood can be stored for 
35 days, aft er which the viability of the red cells 
rapidly decreases. Alternatively, use of either AS-1 
(Adsol) or AS-3 (Nutrice) extends the shelf-life to 
6 weeks. 
 Nearly all units collected are separated into 
their component parts (ie, red cells, platelets, and 
plasma). In other words, whole blood units are rarely 
available for transfusion in civilian practice. When 
centrifuged, one unit of whole blood yields approxi-
mately 250 mL of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) 
with a hematocrit of 70%; following the addition of 
saline preservative, the volume of a unit of PRBCs 
oft en reaches 350 mL. Red cells are normally stored 
at 1–6°C, but may be frozen in a hypertonic glyc-
erol solution for up to 10 years. Th e latter technique 
is usually reserved for storage of blood with rare 
phenotypes. 
 Th e supernatant is centrifuged to yield platelets 
and plasma. Th e unit of platelets obtained generally 
contains 50–70 mL of plasma and can be stored at 
20–24°C for 5 days. Th e remaining plasma super-
natant is further processed and frozen to yield fresh 
frozen plasma; rapid freezing helps prevent inac-
tivation of labile coagulation factors (V and VIII). 
Slow thawing of fresh frozen plasma yields a gelati-
nous precipitate (cryoprecipitate) that contains high 
concentrations of factor VIII and fi brinogen. Once 
separated, this cryoprecipitate can be refrozen for 
storage. One unit of blood yields about 200 mL of 
plasma, which is frozen for storage; once thawed, it 
must be transfused within 24 h. Most platelets are 
now obtained from donors by apheresis, and a single 
platelet apheresis unit is equivalent to the amount of 
platelets derived from 6–8 units of whole blood. 
associated with non-ABO hemolytic reactions. 
Th e test (also known as the indirect Coombs test) 
requires 45 min and involves mixing the patient’s 
serum with red cells of known antigenic composi-
tion; if specifi c antibodies are present, they will coat 
the red cell membrane, and subsequent addition of 
an antiglobulin antibody results in red cell aggluti-
nation. Antibody screens are routinely done on all 
donor blood and are frequently done for a potential 
recipient instead of a crossmatch (below). 
 Crossmatch 
 A crossmatch mimics the transfusion: donor red 
cells are mixed with recipient serum. Crossmatching 
serves three functions: (1) it confi rms ABO and Rh 
typing, (2) it detects antibodies to the other blood 
group systems, and (3) it detects antibodies in low 
titers or those that do not agglutinate easily. 
 Type & Crossmatch versus 
Type & Screen 
 In the situation of negative antibody screen without 
crossmatch, the incidence of serious hemolytic reac-
tion with ABO- and Rh-compatible transfusion is 
less than 1:10,000. Crossmatching, however, assures 
optimal safety and detects the presence of less com-
mon antibodies not usually tested for in a screen. 
Because of the expense and time involved (45 min), 
crossmatches are oft en now performed before the 
need to transfuse only when the patient’s antibody 
screen is positive, when the probability of transfu-
sion is high, or when the patient is considered at risk 
for alloimmunization. 
 EMERGENCY TRANSFUSIONS 
 When a patient is exsanguinating, the urgent need 
to transfuse may arise prior to completion of a 
crossmatch, screen, or even blood typing. If the 
patient’s blood type is known, an abbreviated cross-
match, requiring less than 5 min, will confi rm ABO 
compatibility.  If the recipient’s blood type and Rh 
status is not known with certainty and transfu-
sion must be started before determination, type 
O Rh-negative (universal donor) red cells may 
be used. 
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1171 
 Each unit of FFP carries the same infectious 
risk as a unit of whole blood. In addition, occasional 
patients may become sensitized to plasma proteins. 
ABO-compatible units should generally be given 
but are not mandatory. As with red cells, FFP should 
generally be warmed to 37°C prior to transfusion. 
 Platelets 
 Platelet transfusions should be given to patients 
with  thrombocytopenia or dysfunctional platelets 
in  the presence of bleeding. Prophylactic plate-
let transfusions are also indicated in patients with 
platelet counts below 10,000–20,000 × 10 9 /L because 
of an increased risk of spontaneous hemorrhage. 
 Platelet counts less than 50,000 × 10 9 /L are 
associated with increased blood loss during surgery. 
Th rombocytopenic patients oft en receive prophylac-
tic platelet transfusions prior to surgery or invasive 
procedures. Vaginal delivery and minor surgical pro-
cedures may be performed in patients with normal 
platelet function and counts greater than 50,000 × 
10 9 /L. Administration of a single unit of platelets may 
be expected to increase the platelet count by 5000–
10,000 × 10 9 /L, and with administration of a platelet 
apheresis unit, by 30,000–60,000 × 10 9 /L. 
 ABO-compatible platelet transfusions are desir-
able but not necessary. Transfused platelets gener-
ally survive only 1–7 days following transfusion. 
ABO compatibility may increase platelet survival. 
Rh sensitization can occur in Rh-negative recipients 
due to the presence of a few red cells in Rh-positive 
platelet units. Moreover, anti-A or anti-B antibod-
ies in the 70 mL of plasma in each platelet unit can 
cause a hemolytic reaction against the recipient’s red 
cells when a large number of ABO-incompatible 
platelet units is given. Administration of Rh immu-
noglobulin to Rh-negative individuals can protect 
against Rh sensitization following Rh-positive plate-
let transfusions. 
 Granulocyte Transfusions 
 Granulocyte transfusions, prepared by leukapher-
esis, may be indicated in neutropenic patients with 
bacterial infections not responding to antibiotics. 
Transfused granulocytes have a very short circu-
latory life span, so that daily transfusions of 10 10 
granulocytes are usually required. Irradiation of 
 Th e use of leukocyte-reduced ( leukoreduction ) 
blood products has been rapidly adopted by many 
countries, including the United States, in order to 
decrease the risk of transfusion-related febrile reac-
tions, infections, and immunosuppression. 
 INTRAOPERATIVE 
TRANSFUSION PRACTICES 
 Packed Red Blood Cells 
 Blood transfusions should be given as PRBCs, which 
allows optimal utilization of blood bank resources. 
Surgical patients require volume as well as red cells, 
and crystalloid or colloid can be infused simultane-
ously through a second intravenous line for volume 
replacement. 
 Prior to transfusion, each unit should be care-
fully checked against the blood bank slip and the 
recipient’s identity bracelet. Th e transfusion tubing 
should contain a 170-µm fi lter to trap any clots or 
debris. Blood for intraoperative transfusion should 
be warmed to 37°C during infusion, particularly 
when more than 2–3 units will be transfused; failure 
to do so can result in profound hypothermia. Th e 
additive eff ects of hypothermia and the typically low 
levels of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) in stored 
blood can cause a marked left ward shift  of the hemo-
globin–oxygen dissociation curve (see Chapter 23) 
and, at least theoretically, promote tissue hypoxia. 
 Fresh Frozen Plasma 
 Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains all plasma 
proteins, including most clotting factors. Transfu-
sions of FFP are indicated in the treatment of iso-
lated factor defi ciencies, the reversal of warfarin 
therapy, and the correction of coagulopathy asso-
ciated with liver disease. Each unit of FFP gener-
ally increases the level of each clotting factor by 
2–3% in adults. Th e initial therapeutic dose is usu-
ally 10–15 mL/kg. Th e goal is to achieve 30% of the 
normal coagulation factor concentration. 
 FFP may also be used in patients who have 
received massive blood transfusions (see below) and 
continue to bleed following platelet transfusions. 
Patients with antithrombin III defi ciency or throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura also benefi t from 
FFP transfusions. 
1172 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
or cryoprecipitate may contain small amounts of 
plasma with anti-A or anti-B (or both) alloantibod-
ies. Transfusions of large volumes of such units can 
lead to intravascular hemolysis. Hemolytic reactions 
are commonly classifi ed as either acute (intravascu-
lar) or delayed (extravascular). 
 Acute Hemolytic Reactions 
 Acute intravascular hemolysis is usually due to ABO 
blood incompatibility, and the reported frequency is 
approximately 1:38,000 transfusions. Th e most com-
mon cause is misidentifi cation of a patient, blood 
specimen, or transfusion unit. Th ese reactions are 
oft en severe, and may occur aft er infusion of as little 
as 10–15 mL of ABO-incompatible blood. Th e risk 
of a fatal hemolytic reaction is about 1 in 100,000 
transfusions. In awake patients, symptoms include 
chills, fever, nausea, and chest and fl ank pain. 
 In anesthetized patients, an acute hemolytic 
reaction may be manifested by a rise in 
temperature, unexplained tachycardia, hypotension, 
hemoglobinuria, and diff use oozing in the surgical 
fi eld. Disseminated intravascular coagulation, shock, 
and kidney failure can develop rapidly. Th e severity 
of a reaction oft en depends upon the volume of 
incompatible blood that has been administered. 
Management of hemolytic reactions can be 
summarized as follows: 
1. 
 If a hemolytic reaction is suspected, the 
transfusion should be stopped immediately 
and the blood bank should be notifi ed. 
2. 
 Th e unit should be rechecked against the blood 
slip and the patient’s identity bracelet. 
3. 
 Blood should be drawn to identify hemoglobin 
in plasma, to repeat compatibility testing, and to 
obtain coagulation studies and a platelet count. 
4. 
 A urinary catheter should be inserted, and the 
urine should be checked for hemoglobin. 
5. 
 Osmotic diuresis should be initiated with 
mannitol and intravenous fl uids. 
 Delayed Hemolytic Reactions 
 A delayed hemolytic reaction—also called extravas-
cular hemolysis—is generally mild and is caused by 
antibodies to non-D antigens of the Rh system or 
4
these units decreases the incidence of graft -versus-
host reactions, pulmonary endothelial damage, and 
other problems associated with transfusion of leu-
kocytes (see below), but may adversely aff ect gran-
ulocyte function. Th e availability of  granulocyte 
colony- stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte- 
macrophage colony- stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has 
greatly reduced the use of granulocyte transfusions. 
 Indications for Procoagulant 
Transfusions 
 Blood products can be misused in surgical settings. 
Use of a transfusion algorithm, particularly for com-
ponents such as plasma, platelets, and cryoprecipi-
tate, and particularly when the algorithm is guided 
by appropriate laboratory testing, will reduce unnec-
essary transfusion of these precious (but dangerous) 
resources (see Chapter 22). Derived from military 
experience, there is a trend in major trauma care 
towards transfusing blood products in equal ratios 
early in resuscitation in order to preempt or cor-
rect trauma-induced coagulopathy. Th is balanced 
approach to transfusion of blood products, 1:1:1 
(one unit of FFP and one unit of platelets with each 
unit of PRBCs) is termed damage control resuscita-
tion (see Chapter 39). 
 Complications of 
Blood Transfusion 
 IMMUNE COMPLICATIONS 
 Immune complications following blood transfusions 
are primarily due to sensitization of the recipient 
to donor red cells, white cells, platelets, or plasma 
proteins. Less commonly, the transfused cells or 
serum may mount an immune response against the 
recipient. 
 1. Hemolytic Reactions 
 Hemolytic reactions usually involve specifi c 
destruction of the transfused red cells by the recipi-
ent’s antibodies. Less commonly, hemolysis of a 
recipient’s red cells occurs as a result of transfusion 
of red cell antibodies. Incompatible units of plate-
let concentrates, FFP, clotting factor concentrates, 
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1173 
relatively common (1–3% of transfusion episodes) 
and are characterized by an increase in temperature 
without evidence of hemolysis. Patients with a his-
tory of repeated febrile reactions should receive leu-
koreduced transfusions only. 
 Urticarial Reactions 
 Urticarial reactions are usually characterized by 
erythema, hives, and itching without fever. Th ey 
are relatively common (1% of transfusions) and are 
thought to be due to sensitization of the patient to 
transfused plasma proteins. Urticarial reactions can 
be treated with antihistaminic drugs (H 1 and per-
haps H 2 blockers) and steroids. 
 Anaphylactic Reactions 
 Anaphylactic reactions are rare (approximately 
1:150,000 transfusions). Th ese severe reactions may 
occur aft er only a few milliliters of blood has been 
given, typically in IgA-defi cient patients with anti-
IgA antibodies who receive IgA-containing blood 
transfusions. Th e prevalence of IgA defi ciency is 
estimated to be 1:600–800 in the general population. 
Such reactions require treatment with epinephrine, 
fl uids, corticosteroids, and H 1 and H 2 blockers. 
Patients with IgA defi ciency should receive thor-
oughly washed packed red cells, deglycerolized fro-
zen red cells, or IgA-free blood units. 
 Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury 
 Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) pres-
ents as acute hypoxia and noncardiac pulmonary 
edema occurring within 6 h of blood product transfu-
sion. It may occur as frequently as 1:5000 transfused 
units, and with transfusion of any blood compo-
nent, but especially platelets and FFP. It is thought 
that transfusion of antileukocytic or anti-HLA anti-
bodies results in damage to the alveolar–capillary 
membrane. Treatment is similar to that for acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (see Chapter 57), with 
the important diff erence that TRALI may resolve 
within a few days with supportive therapy. 
 Graft-Versus-Host Disease 
 Th is type of reaction may be seen in immunocom-
promised patients. Cellular blood products con-
tain lymphocytes capable of mounting an immune 
to foreign alleles in other systems such as the Kell, 
Duff y, or Kidd antigens. Following an ABO and Rh 
D-compatible transfusion, patients have a 1–1.6% 
chance of forming antibodies directed against for-
eign antigens in these other systems. By the time 
signifi cant amounts of these antibodies have formed 
(weeks to months), the transfused red cells have 
been cleared from the circulation. Moreover, the 
titer of these antibodies subsequently decreases and 
may become undetectable. Reexposure to the same 
foreign antigen during a subsequent red cell trans-
fusion, however, triggers an anamnestic antibody 
response against the foreign antigen. Th e hemolytic 
reaction is therefore typically delayed 2–21 days aft er 
transfusion, and symptoms are generally mild, con-
sisting of malaise, jaundice, and fever. Th e patient’s 
hematocrit typically fails to rise, or rises only tran-
siently, in spite of the transfusion and the absence 
of bleeding. Th e serum unconjugated bilirubin 
increases as a result of hemoglobin breakdown. 
 Diagnosis of delayed antibody-mediated hemo-
lytic reactions may be facilitated by the antiglobulin 
(Coombs) test. Th e direct Coombs test detects the 
presence of antibodies on the membrane of red cells. 
In this setting, however, this test cannot distinguish 
between recipient antibodies coated on donor red 
cells and donor antibodies coated on recipient red 
cells. Th e latter requires a more detailed reexami-
nation of pretransfusion specimens from both the 
patient and the donor. 
 Th e treatment of delayed hemolytic reactions 
is primarily supportive. Th e frequency of delayed 
hemolytic transfusion reactions is estimated to be 
approximately 1:12,000 transfusions. Pregnancy 
(exposure to fetal red cells) can also be responsible 
for the formation of alloantibodies to red cells. 
 2. Nonhemolytic Immune Reactions 
 Nonhemolytic immune reactions are due to sensi-
tization of the recipient to the donor’s white cells, 
platelets, or plasma proteins; the risk of these reac-
tions may be minimized by the use of leukoreduced 
blood products. 
 Febrile Reactions 
 White cell or platelet sensitization is typically 
manifested as a febrile reaction. Such reactions are 
1174 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
less virulent virus. All blood is tested for the pres-
ence of anti-HIV-1 and anti-HIV-2 antibodies. Th e 
requirement for nucleic acid testing by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) has decreased the risk 
of transfusion-transmitted HIV to approximately 
1:1,900,000 transfusions. 
 C. Other Viral Infections 
 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein–Barr virus 
usually cause asymptomatic or mild systemic illness. 
Some individuals infected with these viruses become 
asymptomatic infectious carriers; the white cells in 
blood units from such donors are capable of trans-
mitting either virus.  Immunocompromised 
and immunosuppressed patients (eg, prema-
ture infants, organ transplant recipients, and cancer 
patients) are particularly susceptible to severe trans-
fusion-related CMV infections. Ideally, such patients 
should receive only CMV-negative units. However, 
recent studies indicate that the risk of CMV trans-
mission from transfusion of leukoreduced blood 
products is equivalent to CMV test-negative units. 
Human T-cell lymphotropic viruses 1 and 2 (HTLV-1 
and HTLV-2) are leukemia and lymphoma viruses, 
respectively, that have been reported to be transmit-
ted by blood transfusion; the former has also been 
associated with myelopathy. Parvovirus transmis-
sion has been reported following transfusion of 
coagulation factor concentrates and can result in 
transient aplastic crises in immunocompromised 
hosts. West Nile virus infection may result in enceph-
alitis with a fatality rate of up to 10%, and transmis-
sion of this virus by transfusion has been reported. 
 Parasitic Infections 
 Parasitic diseases that can be transmitted by trans-
fusion include malaria, toxoplasmosis, and Chagas’ 
disease. Such cases are very rare. 
 Bacterial Infections 
 Bacterial contamination of blood products is the 
second leading cause of transfusion-associated mor-
tality. Th e prevalence of positive bacterial cultures in 
blood products ranges from 1:2000 for platelets to 
1:7000 for PRBCs and may be due to transient donor 
bacteremia or inadequate antisepsis during phlebot-
omy. Th e prevalence of sepsis due to blood transfu-
sion ranges from 1:25,000 for platelets to 1:250,000 
6
response against the compromised (recipient) host. 
Use of special leukocyte fi lters alone does not reli-
ably prevent graft -versus-host disease; irradiation 
(1500–3000 cGy) of red cell, granulocyte, and plate-
let transfusions eff ectively eliminates lymphocytes 
without altering the effi  cacy of such transfusions. 
 Post-Transfusion Purpura 
 Rarely, profound thrombocytopenia may occur fol-
lowing blood transfusions. Th is post-transfusion 
purpura results from the development of platelet 
alloantibodies. For unknown reasons, these anti-
bodies also destroy the patient’s own platelets. Th e 
platelet count typically drops precipitously 5–10 days 
following transfusion. Treatment includes intrave-
nous IgG and plasmapheresis. 
 Transfusion-Related 
Immunomodulation 
 Allogeneic transfusion of blood products may 
diminish immunoresponsiveness and promote 
infl ammation. Post-transfusion immunosuppres-
sion is clearly evident in renal transplant recipients, 
in whom preoperative blood transfusion improves 
graft  survival. Recent studies suggest that periop-
erative transfusion may increase the risk of postop-
erative bacterial infection, cancer recurrence, and 
mortality, all of which emphasize the need to avoid 
unnecessary administration of blood products. 
 INFECTIOUS COMPLICATIONS 
 Viral Infections 
 A. Hepatitis 
 Th e incidence of post-transfusion viral hepatitis var-
ies greatly, from approximately 1:200,000 transfu-
sions (for hepatitis B) to approximately 1:1,900,000 
(for hepatitis C). Most acute cases are anicteric. 
Hepatitis C is the more serious infection; most cases 
progress to chronic hepatitis, with cirrhosis develop-
ing in 20% of chronic carriers and hepatocellular car-
cinoma developing in up to 5% of chronic carriers. 
 B. Acquired Immunodeﬁ ciency 
Syndrome (AIDS) 
 Th e virus responsible AIDS, HIV-1, is transmis-
sible by blood transfusion. HIV-2 is a similar, but 
5
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy
1175
depression, will not occur in most normal patients 
unless the transfusion rate exceeds 1 unit every 
5 min, and intravenous calcium salts should rarely 
be required in the absence of measured hypocalce-
mia. Because citrate metabolism is primarily hepatic, 
patients with hepatic disease or dysfunction (and 
possibly hypothermic patients) may demonstrate 
hypocalcemia and require calcium infusion during 
massive transfusion, as may small children and oth-
ers with relatively impaired parathyroid–vitamin D 
function. 
 Hypothermia 
 Massive blood transfusion is an absolute indication 
for warming all blood products and intravenous 
fl uids to normal body temperature. Ventricular 
arrhythmias progressing to fi brillation oft en occur 
at temperatures close to 30°C, and hypothermia can 
hamper cardiac resuscitation. Th e use of rapid infu-
sion devices with effi  cient heat transfer capability 
has decreased the incidence of transfusion-related 
hypothermia. 
 Acid–Base Balance 
 Although stored blood is acidic due to the citric acid 
anticoagulant and accumulation of red cell metabo-
lites (carbon dioxide and lactic acid), metabolic aci-
dosis due to transfusion is uncommon because 
citric acid and lactic acid are rapidly metabo-
lized to bicarbonate by the normal liver.  In the situa-
tion of massive blood transfusion, acid-base status is 
largely dependent upon tissue perfusion, rate of 
blood transfusion, and citrate metabolism. Once 
normal tissue perfusion is restored, any metabolic 
acidosis typically resolves, and metabolic alkalosis 
commonly occurs as citrate and lactate contained in 
transfusions and resuscitation fl uids are converted 
to bicarbonate by the liver. 
 Serum Potassium Concentration 
Th e extracellular concentration of potassium in 
stored blood steadily increases with time. Th e 
amount of extracellular potassium transfused with 
each unit is typically less than 4 mEq per unit. Hyper-
kalemia can develop regardless of the age of the 
blood when transfusion rates exceed 100 mL/min. 
Th e treatment of hyperkalemia is discussed in 
9
for PRBCs. Both gram-positive ( Staphylococcus ) 
and gram-negative ( Yersinia and  Citrobacter ) bacte-
ria can contaminate blood transfusions and trans-
mit disease. To avoid the possibility of signifi cant 
bacterial contamination, blood products should be 
administered over a period shorter than 4 h. Specifi c 
bacterial diseases rarely transmitted by blood trans-
fusions from donors include syphilis, brucellosis, 
salmonellosis, yersiniosis, and various rickettsioses. 
 MASSIVE BLOOD 
TRANSFUSION 
Massive transfusion is most oft en defi ned as the 
need to transfuse one to two times the patient’s 
blood volume. For most adult patients, that is the 
equivalent of 10–20 units. Th e approach to mas-
sive transfusion (and to lesser degrees of transfu-
sion) aft er trauma injury has been greatly infl uenced 
by military experience in recent Middle Eastern 
and Central Asian wars in which outcomes have 
improved with concurrent transfusion of packed red 
cells, plasma, and platelets to avoid dilutional coagu-
lopathy (see Chapter 39). 
 Coagulopathy 
 Th e most common cause of nonsurgical bleed-
ing following massive blood transfusion is 
dilutional thrombocytopenia, although clinically sig-
nifi cant dilution of coagulation factors may also occur. 
Coagulation studies and platelet counts, if readily 
available, should guide platelet and FFP transfu-
sion. Although most clinicians will be familiar with 
“routine” coagulation tests (eg, prothrombin time 
[PT], activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT], 
international normalized ratio [INR], platelet count, 
fi brinogen), multiple studies show that viscoelastic 
analysis of whole blood clotting (thromboelastog-
raphy, rotation thromboelastometry, and Sonoclot 
analysis) may be more useful in resuscitation, liver 
transplantation, and cardiac surgical settings. 
 Citrate Toxicity 
 Calcium binding by the citrate preservative can rise 
in importance following transfusion of large vol-
umes of blood or blood products.  Clinically 
important hypocalcemia, causing cardiac 
7
8
1176 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Contraindications to blood salvage and reinfusion 
include septic contamination of the wound and 
perhaps malignancy. Newer, simpler systems allow 
reinfusion of shed blood without centrifugation. 
 NORMOVOLEMIC 
HEMODILUTION 
 Acute normovolemic hemodilution relies on the 
premise that if the concentration of red cells is 
decreased, total red cell loss is reduced when large 
amounts of blood are shed; moreover, cardiac out-
put remains normal because intravascular volume 
is maintained. One or two units of blood are typi-
cally removed just prior to surgery from a large-bore 
intravenous catheter and replaced with crystalloid 
and colloids so that the patient remains normovole-
mic but has a hematocrit of 21–25%. Th e blood that 
is removed is stored in a CPD bag at room temper-
ature (up to 6 h) to preserve platelet function; the 
blood is given back to the patient aft er the blood loss 
or sooner if necessary. 
 DONORDIRECTED 
TRANSFUSIONS 
 Patients can request donated blood from family 
members or friends known to be ABO compat-
ible. Most blood banks discourage this practice and 
generally require donation at least 7 days prior to 
surgery in order to process the donated blood and 
confi rm compatibility. Studies comparing the safety 
of donor-directed units to that of random donor 
units have found either no diff erence, or that ran-
dom units from blood banks are safer than directed 
units. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
A Patient with Sickle Cell Disease 
 A 24-year-old black woman with a history of 
sickle cell anemia presents with  abdominal pain 
and is scheduled for cholecystectomy. 
 What is sickle cell anemia? 
 Sickle cell anemia is a hereditary hemo-
lytic anemia resulting from the formation of an 
Chapter 49. Hypokalemia is commonly encountered 
postoperatively, particularly in association with 
metabolic alkalosis (see Chapters 49 and 50). 
 Alternative Strategies 
for Management of 
Blood Loss During Surgery 
 AUTOLOGOUS TRANSFUSION 
 Patients undergoing elective surgical procedures 
with a high probability for transfusion can donate 
their own blood for use during that surgery. Collec-
tion is usually started 4–5 weeks prior to the pro-
cedure. Th e patient is allowed to donate a unit as 
long as the hematocrit is at least 34% or hemoglo-
bin at least 11 g/dL. A minimum of 72 h is required 
between donations to make certain that plasma vol-
ume returns to normal. With iron supplementation 
and erythropoietin therapy, at least 3 or 4 units can 
usually be collected prior to operation. Some stud-
ies suggest that autologous blood transfusions do 
not adversely aff ect survival in patients undergoing 
operations for cancer. Although autologous transfu-
sions likely reduce the risk of infection and transfu-
sion reactions, they are not risk-free. Risks include 
those of immunological reactions due to clerical 
errors in collection, labeling, and administration; 
bacterial contamination; and improper storage. 
Allergic reactions can occur due to allergens (eg, 
ethylene oxide) that dissolve into the blood from 
collection and storage equipment. 
 BLOOD SALVAGE & 
REINFUSION 
 Th is technique is used widely during cardiac, major 
vascular, and orthopedic surgery (see Chapter 22). 
Th e shed blood is aspirated intraoperatively into a 
reservoir and mixed with heparin. Aft er a suffi  cient 
amount of blood is collected, the red cells are con-
centrated and washed to remove debris and anti-
coagulant and then reinfused into the patient. Th e 
concentrates obtained usually have hematocrits 
of 50–60%. To be used eff ectively, this technique 
requires blood losses greater than 1000–1500 mL. 
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1177 
abnormal hemoglobin (HbS). HbS diﬀ ers struc-
turally from the normal adult hemoglobin (HbA) 
only in the substitution of valine for glutamic acid 
at the sixth position of the β chain. Functionally, 
sickle hemoglobin has less aﬃ  nity for oxygen 
(P 50 = 31 mm Hg) as well as decreased solubility. 
Upon deoxygenation, HbS readily polymerizes and 
precipitates inside red blood cells (RBCs), causing 
them to sickle. Sickle cell patients produce vari-
able amounts (2–20%) of fetal hemoglobin (HbF). 
It is likely that cells with large amounts of HbF are 
somewhat protected from sickling. The continu-
ous destruction of irreversibly sickled cells leads 
to anemia, and hematocrits are typically 18–30% 
due to the extravascular hemolysis. RBC survival 
is reduced to 10–15 days, compared with up to 
120 days in normal individuals. 
 What is the diﬀ erence between sickle cell anemia 
and sickle cell trait? 
 When the genetic defect for adult hemoglo-
bin is present on both the maternally and pater-
nally derived chromosomes (No. 11), the patient 
is homozygous for HbS and has sickle cell anemia 
(HbSS). When only one chromosome has the sickle 
gene, the patient is heterozygous and has  sickle 
cell trait (HbAS). Patients with the sickle trait pro-
duce variable amounts of HbA (55–60%) and HbS 
(35–40%). Unlike those with HbSS, they are gener-
ally not anemic, are asymptomatic, and have a nor-
mal life span. Sickling occurs only under extreme 
hypoxemia or in low-ﬂ ow states. Sickling is par-
ticularly apt to occur in the renal medulla; indeed, 
many patients with the sickle trait have impaired 
renal concentrating ability. Some patients with 
HbAS have been reported to have renal medullary, 
splenic, and pulmonary infarcts. 
 What is the prevalence of the sickle cell gene 
in black Americans? 
 Sickle cell anemia is primarily a disease of indi-
viduals of Central African ancestry. Approximately 
0.2–0.5% of African Americans are homozygous 
for the sickle gene and approximately 8–10% are 
heterozygous. Sickle cell anemia is found less com-
monly in patients of Mediterranean ancestry. 
 What is the pathophysiology? 
 Conditions favoring the formation of deoxy-
hemoglobin (eg, hypoxemia, acidosis, intracellular 
hypertonicity or dehydration, increased 2,3-DPG 
levels, or increased temperature) can precipitate 
sickling in patients with HbSS. Hypothermia may 
also be detrimental because of the associated 
vasoconstriction (see below). Intracellular polym-
erization of HbS distorts red cells, makes them less 
pliable and more “sticky,” increasing blood viscos-
ity. Sickling may initially be reversible but eventu-
ally becomes irreversible in some cells. Formation 
of red cell aggregates in capillaries can obstruct 
tissue microcirculation. A vicious cycle is estab-
lished in which circulatory stasis leads to localized 
hypoxia, which, in turn, causes more sickling. 
 With what symptoms do patients with sickle cell 
anemia usually present? 
 Patients with HbSS generally ﬁ rst develop 
symptoms in infancy, when levels of fetal hemo-
globin (HbF) decline. The disease is characterized 
by both acute episodic crises and chronic and 
progressive features ( Table 51–7 ). Children dis-
play retarded growth and have recurrent infec-
tions. Recurrent splenic infarction leads to splenic 
atrophy and functional asplenism by adolescence. 
Patients usually die from recurrent infections or 
kidney failure. Crises are often precipitated by 
infection, cold weather, dehydration, or other 
forms of stress. Crises may be divided into three 
types: 
1.  Vasoocclusive crises: Depending on the ves-
sels involved, these acute episodes can result 
in micro- or macroinfarctions. Most painful 
crises are thought to be due to microinfarcts 
in the various tissues. Clinically, they present 
as acute abdominal, chest, back, or joint pain. 
Diﬀ erentiation between surgical and nonsurgi-
cal causes of abdominal pain is diﬃ  cult. Most 
patients form pigmented gallstones by adult-
hood, and many present with acute cholecysti-
tis. Vasoocclusive phenomena in larger vessels 
can produce thromboses resulting in splenic, 
cerebral, pulmonary, hepatic, renal, and, less 
commonly, myocardial infarctions. 
1178 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
2.  Aplastic crisis: Profound anemia (Hb 2–3 g/dL) 
can rapidly occur when red cell production 
in the bone marrow is exhausted or sup-
pressed. Infections and folate deﬁ ciency may 
play a major role. Some patients also develop 
leukopenia. 
3.  Splenic sequestration crisis: Sudden pooling 
of blood in the spleen can occur in infants and 
young children and can cause life-threatening 
hypotension. The mechanism is thought to be 
partial or complete occlusion of venous drain-
age from the spleen. 
 How is sickle cell anemia diagnosed? 
 RBCs from patients with sickle cell anemia 
readily sickle following addition of an oxygen-
consuming reagent (metabisulﬁ te) or a hyper-
tonic ionic solution (solubility test). Conﬁ rmation 
requires hemoglobin electrophoresis. 
 What would be the best way to prepare patients 
with sickle cell anemia for surgery? 
 Optimal preoperative preparation is desirable 
for all patients undergoing surgery. Patients should 
be well hydrated, infections should be controlled, 
and the hemoglobin concentration should be at an 
acceptable level. Preoperative transfusion therapy 
must be individualized for the patient and to the 
surgical procedure. Partial exchange transfusions 
before major surgical procedures are usually advo-
cated, which decrease blood viscosity, increase 
blood oxygen-carrying capacity, and decrease like-
lihood of sickling. The goal of such transfusions is 
generally to achieve a hematocrit of 35–40% with 
40–50% normal hemoglobin (HbA). 
 Are there any special intraoperative 
considerations? 
 Conditions that might promote hemoglobin 
desaturation or low-ﬂ ow states should be avoided. 
Every eﬀ ort must be made to avoid hypothermia, 
hyperthermia, acidosis, and even mild degrees of 
hypoxemia, hypotension, or hypovolemia. Gen-
erous hydration and a relatively high (>50%) 
inspired oxygen tension are desirable. The prin-
cipal compensatory mechanism for impaired tis-
sue oxygen delivery in these patients is increased 
 TABLE 517 Manifestations of sickle cell 
anemia. 
 Neurological 
 Stroke 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
 Coma 
 Seizures 
 Ocular 
 Vitreous hemorrhage 
 Retinal infarcts 
 Proliferative retinopathy 
 Retinal detachment 
 Pulmonary 
 Increased intrapulmonary shunting 
 Pleuritis 
 Recurrent pulmonary infections 
 Pulmonary infarcts 
 Cardiovascular 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Cor pulmonale 
 Pericarditis 
 Myocardial infarction 
 Gastrointestinal 
 Cholelithiasis (pigmented stones) 
 Cholecystitis 
 Hepatic infarcts 
 Hepatic abscesses 
 Hepatic fibrosis 
 Hematological 
 Anemia 
 Aplastic anemia 
 Recurrent infections 
 Splenic infarcts 
 Splenic sequestration 
 Functional asplenia 
 Genitourinary 
 Hematuria 
 Renal papillary necrosis 
 Impaired renal concentrating ability (isosthenuria) 
 Nephrotic syndrome 
 Renal insufficiency 
 Renal failure 
 Priapism 
 Skeletal 
 Synovitis 
 Arthritis 
 Aseptic necrosis of femoral head 
 Small bone infarcts in hand and feet (dactylitis) 
 Biconcave (“fishmouth”) vertebrae 
 Osteomyelitis 
 Skin 
 Chronic ulcers 
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1179 
as ineﬀ ective hematopoiesis. The latter can result 
in hypertrophy of the bone marrow and often an 
abnormal skeleton.  Maxillary hypertrophy may 
make tracheal intubation diﬃ  cult. Thalassemias 
are most common in patients of Southeast Asian, 
African, Mediterranean, and Indian ancestry. 
 What is hemoglobin C disease? 
 Substitution of lysine for glutamic acid at posi-
tion 6 on the β subunit results in hemoglobin C 
(HbC). Approximately 0.05% of black Americans 
carry the gene for HbC. Patients homozygous for 
HbC generally have only a mild hemolytic anemia 
and splenomegaly and rarely develop signiﬁ cant 
complications. The tendency for HbC to crystallize 
in hypertonic environments is probably respon-
sible for the hemolysis and characteristically pro-
duces  target cells on the peripheral blood smear. 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of the genotype HbSC? 
 Nearly 0.1% of black Americans are simultane-
ously heterozygous for both HbS and HbC (HbSC). 
These patients generally have a mild to moderate 
hemolytic anemia. Some patients occasionally 
have painful crises, splenic infarcts, and hepatic 
dysfunction. Eye manifestations similar to those 
associated with HbSS disease are particularly 
prominent. Females with HbSC have a high rate of 
complications during the third trimester of preg-
nancy and delivery. 
 What is hemoglobin E? 
 Hemoglobin E is the result of a single substitu-
tion on the β chain and is the second most com-
mon hemoglobin variant worldwide. It is most 
often encountered in patients from Southeast 
Asia. Although oxygen-binding aﬃ  nity is normal, 
the substitution impairs production of β chains 
(similar to β-thalassemia). Homozygous patients 
have marked microcytosis and prominent target 
cells, but are not usually anemic and lack any other 
manifestations. 
 What is the hematologic signiﬁ cance of glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁ ciency? 
 RBCs are normally well-protected against 
oxidizing agents. The sulfhydryl groups on 
cardiac output, which should be maintained intra-
operatively. Goal-directed hemodynamic monitor-
ing and ﬂ uid therapy utilizing arterial pulse wave 
analysis, esophageal Doppler, or transesophageal 
echocardiography, or central venous pressure or 
pulmonary artery pressure monitoring with mixed 
venous oxygen saturation is often useful. Mild 
alkalosis may help avoid sickling, but even mod-
erate degrees of respiratory alkalosis may have an 
adverse eﬀ ect on cerebral blood ﬂ ow. Many clini-
cians also avoid the use of tourniquets. 
 Are there any special postoperative 
considerations? 
 Most perioperative deaths occur in the post-
operative period, and the same management 
principles applied intraoperatively should be uti-
lized in the postoperative period. Hypoxemia and 
pulmonary complications are major risk factors. 
Supplemental oxygen, optimal hemodynamic, 
ﬂ uid, and pain and symptom management, and 
pulmonary physiotherapy and early ambulation all 
help minimize the risk of these complications. 
 What is the signiﬁ cance of sickle cell anemia and 
thalassemia in the same patient? 
 The combination of HbS and thalassemia, most 
commonly sickle β-thalassemia, has a variable and 
unpredictable eﬀ ect on disease severity. This com-
bination is usually milder in black patients than in 
those of Mediterranean ancestry. 
 What is the pathophysiology of thalassemia? 
 Thalassemia is a hereditary defect in the pro-
duction of one or more of the normal subunits of 
hemoglobin. Patients with thalassemia may be able 
to produce normal HbA but have reduced amounts 
of α- or β-chain production; the severity of this 
defect depends on the subunit aﬀ ected and the 
degree to which hemoglobin production is aﬀ ected. 
Symptoms range from absent to severe. Patients 
with α-thalassemia produce reduced amounts of 
α subunit, whereas patients with β-thalassemia 
produce reduced amounts of the β subunit. The 
formation of hemoglobins with abnormal sub-
unit composition can alter the red cell membrane 
and lead to variable degrees of hemolysis as well 
1180 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
activity decreases as RBCs age; therefore aging 
red cells are most susceptible to oxidation. This 
decay is markedly accelerated in patients with the 
Mediterranean variant but only moderately so in 
patients with the A − variant. 
 Most patients with G6PD deﬁ ciency are not 
anemic but can develop hemolysis following 
stresses such as viral and bacterial infections, or 
after administration of certain drugs ( Table 51–8 ). 
Hemolytic episodes can be precipitated by meta-
bolic acidosis (eg, diabetic ketoacidosis) and may 
present with hemoglobinuria and hypotension. 
Such episodes are generally self-limited because 
only the older population of RBCs is destroyed. 
Mediterranean variants may be associated with 
chronic hemolytic anemia of varying severity and 
may include the classic feature of marked sensitiv-
ity to fava beans. 
 Management of G6PD deﬁ ciency is primarily 
preventive, avoiding factors known to promote or 
exacerbate hemolysis. Measures aimed at preserv-
ing kidney function (see above) are indicated in 
patients who develop hemoglobinuria. 
hemoglobin are protected by reduced glutathi-
one. The latter is regenerated by NADPH (reduced 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate), 
which itself is regenerated by glucose metabolism 
in the hexose monophosphate shunt. Glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a critical 
enzyme in this pathway. A defect in this pathway 
results in an inadequate amount of reduced gluta-
thione, which can potentially result in the oxidation 
and precipitation of hemoglobin in red cells (seen 
as  Heinz bodies ) and hemolysis. 
 Abnormalities in G6PD are relatively common, 
with over 400 variants described. Clinical manifes-
tations are quite variable, depending on the func-
tional signiﬁ cance of the enzyme abnormality. Up 
to 15% of black American males have the common, 
clinically signiﬁ cant, A − variant. A second variant is 
common in individuals of eastern Mediterranean 
ancestry, and a third in individuals of Chinese 
ancestry. Because the locus for the enzyme is on 
the X chromosome, abnormalities are X-linked 
traits, with males being primarily aﬀ ected. G6PD 
 TABLE 518 Drugs to avoid in patients with 
G6PD  1  deﬁ ciency. 
 Drugs that may cause hemolysis 
 Sulfonamides 
 Antimalarial drugs 
 Nitrofurantoin 
 Nalidixic acid 
 Probenecid 
 Aminosalicylic acid 
 Phenacetin 
 Acetanilid 
 Ascorbic acid (in large doses) 
 Vitamin K 
 Methylene blue 
 Quinine  2  
 Quinidine  3  
 Chloramphenicol 
 Penicillamine 
 Dimercaprol 
 Other drugs 
 Prilocaine 
 Nitroprusside 
  1  G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
  2  May be safe in patients with A − variant.
  3  Should be avoided because of potential to cause methemoglobinemia.
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Alderson P, Bunn F, Li Wan Po A, et al: Human albumin 
solution for resuscitation and volume expansion in 
critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2011;(10):CD001208. Update in: Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2011;(11):CD001208. 
 Bolt J, Ince C: Th e impact of fl uid therapy on 
microcirculation and tissue oxygenation in hypovolemic 
patients. A review. Intensive Care Med 2010;36:1299. 
 Brienza N, Giglio MT, Marucci M, et al: Does 
perioperative hemodynamic optimization protect 
renal function in surgical patients? A meta-analytic 
study. Crit Care Med 2009;37:2079. 
 Canet J, Belda FJ: Perioperative hyperoxia. Th e debate is 
only getting started. Anesthesiology 2011;114:1271. 
 Carson JL, Carless PA, Hebert PC: Transfusion thresholds 
and other strategies for guiding allogeneic red 
blood cell transfusion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2012;4:CD002042. 
 Carson JL, Grossman BJ, Kleinman S, et al: For the Clinical 
Transfusion Medicine Committee of the AABB: Red 
blood cell transfusion: A clinical practice guideline 
from the AABB. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:49. 
 
CHAPTER 51 Fluid Management & Blood Component Therapy 
1181 
high-risk surgical patients: A randomized, controlled 
trial. Crit Care 2010;14:R18. 
 Muller L, Lefrant J-Y: Metabolic eff ects of plasma 
expanders. Transfusion Alternatives Transfusion 
Med 2010;11:10. 
 Perel P, Roberts I: Colloids versus crystalloids for fl uid 
resuscitation in critically ill patients. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2011;(3):CD000567. 
 Reinhart K, Takala J: Hydroxyethyl starches: what do 
we still know? Anesth Anal 2011;112:507. 
 Roche AM, Miller TE, Gan TJ: Goal-directed fl uid 
management with trans-oesophageal Doppler. Best 
Pract Res Clinical Anaesthesiol 2009;23:327. 
 Senagore AJ, Emery T, Luchtefeld M, et al: Fluid 
management for laparoscopic colectomy: A 
prospective, randomized assessment of goal-directed 
administration of balanced salt solution or hetastarch 
coupled with an enhanced recovery program. 
Dis Colon Rectum 2009;52:1935. 
 Society of Th oracic Surgeons Blood Conservation 
Guideline Task Force, Ferraris VA, Brown JR, et al: 
2011 update to the Society of Th oracic Surgeons and 
the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists blood 
conservation clinical practice guidelines. Ann Th orac 
Surg 2011;91:944. 
 Srinivasa S, Taylor MHG, Sammour T, et al: Oesophageal 
Doppler-guided fl uid administration in colorectal 
surgery: Critical appraisal of published clinical trials. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2011;55:4. 
 Svensen C: Intraoperative fl uid losses revisited. 
Transfusion Alternatives Transfusion Med 2010;11:85. 
 Tavernier B, Faivre S, Bourdon C: Hyperchloremic 
acidosis during plasma expansion. Transfusion 
Alternatives Transfusion Med 2010;11:3. 
 Vogt KN, Van Koughnett JA, Dubois L, et al: Th e use of 
trauma transfusion pathways for blood component 
transfusion in the civilian population: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis(*). Transfus Med 2012;22:156. 
 Chowdhury AB, Lobo DN: Fluids and gastrointestinal 
function. Curr Opin Clin Nutrition Metabolic Care 
2011;14:469. 
 Conte B, L’Hermite J, Ripart J, et al: Perioperative 
optimization of oxygen delivery. Transfusion 
Alternatives Transfusion Med 2010;11:22. 
 Coriat P: Editorial: Should we be more balanced, 
more ‘starched’ and more optimized? Transfusion 
Alternatives in Transfusion Medicine 2010;11:1. 
 Dalfi no L, Giglio MT, Puntillo F, et al: Haemodynamic 
goal-directed therapy and postoperative infections: 
Earlier is better. A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Crit Care 2011;15:R154. 
 Giglio MT, Marucci M, Testini M, et al: Goal-directed 
haemodynamic therapy and gastrointestinal 
complications in major surgery: A meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth 
2009;103:637. 
 Glance LG, Dick AW, Mukamel DB, et al: Association 
between intraoperative blood transfusion and 
mortality and morbidity in patients undergoing 
noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology 2011;114:283. 
 Gurgel ST, do Nascimento Jr P: Maintaining tissue 
perfusion in high-risk surgical patients: A systematic 
review of randomized clinical trials. Anesth Analg 
2011;112:1384. 
 Hartog CS, Bauer M, Reinhart K: Th e effi  cacy and safety 
of colloid resuscitation in the critically ill. Anesth 
Analg 2011;112:156. 
 Hiltebrand LB, Kimberger O, Arnberger M, et al: 
Crystalloids versus colloids for goal-directed fl uid 
therapy in major surgery. Crit Care 2009;13:R40. 
 Inghilleri G: Prediction of transfusion requirements in 
surgical patients: A review. Transfusion Alternatives 
Transfusion Med 2009;11:10. 
 Mayer J, Boldt J, Mengistu AM, et al: Goal-directed 
intraoperative therapy based on autocalibrated arterial 
pressure waveform analysis reduces hospital stay in 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1183
1183
 When there is no attempt to actively warm 
an anesthetized patient, core temperature 
usually decreases 1– 2°C during the ﬁ rst 
hour of general anesthesia (phase one), 
followed by a more gradual decline during 
the ensuing 3–4 h (phase two), eventually 
reaching a point of steady state.  
 In the normal, unanesthetized patient the 
hypothalamus maintains core body 
temperature within very narrow tolerances, 
termed the  interthreshold range, with the 
threshold for sweating and vasodilation 
at one extreme and the threshold for 
vasoconstriction and shivering at the other. 
 Anesthetics inhibit central thermoregulation 
by interfering with these hypothalamic 
reﬂ ex responses. 
 Postoperative hypothermia should be 
treated with a forced-air warming device, if 
available; alternately (but less satisfactorily) 
warming lights or heating blankets can be 
used to restore body temperature to normal. 
 Nearly 50% of patients who experience an 
episode of malignant hyperthermia (MH) 
have had at least one previous uneventful 
exposure to anesthesia during which they 
received a recognized triggering agent. Why 
MH fails to occur after every exposure to a 
triggering agent is unclear. 
 The earliest signs of an MH episode during 
anesthesia are succinylcholine-induced 
masseter muscle rigidity (MMR) or other 
1
2
3
4
5
6
muscle rigidity, tachycardia, and hypercarbia 
(due to increased CO 2 production). 
 Musculoskeletal diseases associated with 
a relatively high incidence of MH include 
central-core disease, multi-minicore 
myopathy, and King–Denborough syndrome. 
Duchenne’s and other muscular dystrophies, 
nonspeciﬁ c myopathies, and osteogenesis 
imperfecta have been associated with MH-
like symptoms in some reports; however, 
their association with MH is controversial. 
 Treatment of an MH episode is directed 
at terminating the episode and treating 
complications such as hyperthermia and 
acidosis. The mortality rate for MH, even 
with prompt treatment, ranges from 5% 
to 30%. First and most importantly, the 
triggering agent must be stopped; second, 
dantrolene must be given immediately. 
 Dantrolene, a hydantoin derivative, directly 
interferes with muscle contraction by 
inhibiting calcium ion release from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The dose is 
2.5 mg/kg intravenously every 5 min until 
the episode is terminated (upper limit, 
10 mg/kg). Dantrolene should be 
continued for 24 h after initial treatment. 
 Propofol, thiopental, etomidate, 
benzodiazepines, ketamine, opiates, 
droperidol, nitrous oxide, nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants, and all local anesthetics 
are nontriggering agents that are safe for 
use in MH-susceptible patients. 
7
8
9
10
 Thermoregulation, 
Hypothermia, & Malignant 
Hyperthermia 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
52
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
1184 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 THERMOREGULATION 
& HYPOTHERMIA 
Hypothermia, usually defi ned as a body tempera-
ture less than 36°C, occurs frequently during anes-
thesia and surgery. Unintentional perioperative 
hypothermia is more common in patients at the 
extremes of age, and in those undergoing abdominal 
surgery or procedures of long duration, especially 
with cold ambient operating room temperatures; it 
will occur in nearly every such patient unless steps 
are taken to prevent this complication. 
 Hypothermia 
reduces 
metabolic 
oxygen 
require ments and can be protective during cere-
bral or cardiac ischemia.  Nevertheless, hypother-
mia has multiple deleterious physiological eff ects 
( Table  52–1 ). In fact, unintended perioperative 
hypothermia has been associated with an increased 
mortality rate. 
 Core temperature is normally the same as the 
central venous blood temperature (except during 
periods of relatively rapid temperature change as can 
occur during extracorporeal perfusion).  When 
there is no attempt to actively warm an anes-
thetized patient, core temperature usually decreases 
1–2°C during the fi rst hour of general anesthesia 
(phase one), followed by a more gradual decline 
during the ensuing 3–4 h (phase two), eventually 
reaching a point of steady state (phase three). With 
general, epidural, or spinal anesthesia redistribution 
of heat from warm “central” compartments (eg, 
abdomen, thorax) to cooler peripheral tissues (eg, 
arms, legs) from anesthetic-induced vasodilation 
explains most of the initial decrease in temperature 
1
during phase one, with actual heat loss from the 
patient to the environment being a minor contribu-
tor. Continuous heat loss to the environment appears 
to be primarily responsible for the slower subse-
quent decline during phase two. At steady state, heat 
loss equals metabolic heat production ( Figure 52–1 ). 
 In the normal unanesthetized patient the 
hypothalamus maintains core body tempera-
ture within very narrow tolerances, termed the 
interthreshold range, with the threshold for sweating 
and vasodilation at one extreme and the threshold 
for vasoconstriction and shivering at the other. 
Increasing core temperature a fraction of a degree 
induces sweating and vasodilation, whereas a mini-
mally reduced core temperature triggers vasocon-
striction and shivering.  Anesthetic agents 
inhibit central thermoregulation by interfer-
ing with these hypothalamic refl ex responses. For 
example, isofl urane produces a dose-dependent 
decrease in the threshold temperature that triggers 
vasoconstriction (3°C decrease for each percent of 
inhaled isofl urane). Both general and regional 
anesthetics increase the interthreshold range, albeit 
by diff erent mechanisms. Spinal and epidural anes-
thetics, like general anesthetics, lead to hypothermia 
by causing vasodilation and internal redistribu-
tion  of heat. Th e accompanying thermoregulatory 
2
3
 TABLE 521 Deleterious eﬀ ects 
of hypothermia. 
 Cardiac arrhythmias and ischemia 
 Increased peripheral vascular resistance 
 “Left shift” of the hemoglobin–oxygen saturation curve 
 Reversible coagulopathy (platelet dysfunction) 
 Increased postoperative protein catabolism and stress 
response 
 Altered mental status 
 Impaired renal function 
 Delayed drug metabolism 
 Impaired wound healing 
 Increased risk of infection 
37
Temperature (C)
36
35
1
2
3
4
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
5
6
7
34
Time (hours of anesthesia)
 FIGURE 521  Unintentional hypothermia during 
general anesthesia follows a typical pattern: a steep drop 
in core temperature during the ﬁ rst hour (phase one, 
redistribution), followed by a gradual decline during the 
next 3–4 h (phase two, heat loss), eventually reaching a 
steady state (phase three, equilibrium). 
 
CHAPTER 52 Thermoregulation, Hypothermia, & Malignant Hyperthermia
1185
impairment from regional anesthetics that allows 
continued heat loss is likely due to altered percep-
tion by the hypothalamus of temperature in the 
anesthetized dermatomes rather than a central drug 
eff ect, as with general anesthetics. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 A cold ambient temperature in the operating room, 
prolonged exposure of a large wound, and the use 
of large amounts of room-temperature intravenous 
fl uids or high fl ows of unhumidifi ed gases can con-
tribute to hypothermia.  Prewarming the patient for 
half an hour with convective forced-air warming 
blankets prevents phase one hypothermia by elim-
inating the central–peripheral temperature gradi-
ent. Methods to minimize phase two hypothermia 
from heat loss during anesthesia include use of 
forced-air warming blankets and warm-water blan-
kets, heated humidifi cation of inspired gases, warm-
ing of intravenous fl uids, and increasing ambient 
operating room temperature. Passive insulators such 
as heated cotton blankets or so-called space blankets 
have limited utility unless virtually the entire body 
is covered. 
 Postoperative Considerations 
 Shivering can occur in postanesthesia care units 
(PACUs) or critical care units as a result of actual 
hypothermia or neurological aft ereff ects of general 
anesthetic agents. Shivering is also common imme-
diately postpartum. Shivering in such instances rep-
resents the body’s eff ort to increase heat production 
and raise body temperature and may be associated 
with intense vasoconstriction. Emergence from even 
brief general anesthesia is sometimes also associated 
with shivering. Although the shivering can be part 
of nonspecifi c neurological signs (posturing, clonus, 
or the Babinski sign) that are sometimes observed 
during emergence, shivering is most oft en associ-
ated with hypothermia and volatile anesthetics. 
Regardless of the mechanism, shivering appears to 
be more common aft er longer durations of surgery 
and the use of greater concentrations of a volatile 
agent. Occasionally it is intense enough to cause 
hyperthermia (38–39°C) and metabolic acidosis, 
both of which promptly resolve when the shivering 
stops. Both spinal and epidural anesthesia lower the 
shivering threshold and vasoconstrictive response 
to hypothermia; shivering may also be encountered 
in the PACU following regional anesthesia. Other 
causes of shivering should be excluded, such as sep-
sis, drug allergy, or a transfusion reaction. Intense 
shivering may increase oxygen consumption, CO 2
production, and cardiac output. Th ese physiologi-
cal eff ects are oft en poorly tolerated by patients with 
preexisting cardiac or pulmonary impairment. 
 Postoperative shivering may increase oxygen 
consumption as much as fi vefold, may decrease arte-
rial oxygen saturation, and may be associated with 
an increased risk of myocardial ischemia. Although 
postoperative shivering can be eff ectively treated 
with small intravenous doses of meperidine (12.5–
25 mg) in adults, the better option is to reduce the 
likelihood of shivering by maintaining normother-
mia. Shivering in intubated and mechanically venti-
lated patients can also be controlled with sedation 
and a muscle relaxant until normothermia is rees-
tablished and the eff ects of anesthesia have 
dissipated.  
 Postoperative hypothermia should be treated 
with a forced-air warming device, if available; 
alternately (but less satisfactorily) warming lights or 
heating blankets can be used to restore body temper-
ature to normal. Hypothermia has been associated 
with an increased incidence of myocardial ischemia, 
arrhythmias, increased transfusion requirements, 
and increased duration of muscle relaxant eff ects, 
the latter of which can be especially harmful in the 
recently extubated patient. 
 MALIGNANT HYPERTHERMIA 
 Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a rare (1:15,000 
in pediatric patients and 1:40,000 adult patients) 
genetic hypermetabolic muscle disease, the charac-
teristic phenotypical signs and symptoms of which 
most commonly appear with exposure to inhaled 
general anesthetics or succinylcholine (triggering 
agents). MH may occasionally present more than 
an hour aft er emergence from an anesthetic, and 
rarely may occur without exposure to known trig-
gering agents. Most cases have been reported in 
young males; almost none have been reported in 
infants, and few have been reported in the elderly. 
4
1186 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Nevertheless, all ages and both sexes may be aff ected. 
Th e incidence of MH varies greatly from country to 
country and even among diff erent geographic locali-
ties within the same country, refl ecting varying gene 
pools. Th e upper Midwest appears to have the great-
est incidence of MH in the United States. 
 Pathophysiology 
 A halogenated anesthetic agent alone may trigger an 
episode of MH ( Table 52–2 ). In many of the early 
reported cases, both succinylcholine and a haloge-
nated anesthetic agent were used. However, succi-
nylcholine is less frequently used in modern practice, 
and about half of the cases in the past decade were 
associated with volatile anesthetics as the only trig-
gering agents.  Nearly 50% of patients who 
experience an episode of MH have had at least 
one previous uneventful exposure to anesthesia dur-
ing which they received a recognized triggering 
agent. Why MH fails to occur aft er every exposure to 
a triggering agent is unclear. Investigations into the 
biochemical causes of MH reveal an uncontrolled 
increase in intracellular calcium in skeletal muscle. 
Th e sudden release of calcium from sarcoplasmic 
reticulum removes the inhibition of troponin, 
 resulting in sustained muscle contraction. Markedly 
increased adenosine triphosphatase activity results 
in an uncontrolled increase in aerobic and anaerobic 
metabolism. Th e hypermetabolic state markedly 
increases oxygen consumption and CO 2  production, 
producing severe lactic acidosis and hyperthermia. 
 One early focus of investigations into the mech-
anisms of MH has been the gene for the ryanodine 
(Ryr 1 ) receptor, located on chromosome 19. Ryr 1 is 
5
an ion channel responsible for calcium release from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum and it plays an impor-
tant role in muscle depolarization. Subsequent 
reports linked MH with mutations involving the 
sodium channel on chromosome 17. An autosomal 
recessive form of MH has been associated with the 
King–Denborough syndrome. Most patients with 
an episode of MH have a history of relatives with 
a similar episode or with an abnormal halothane– 
caff eine contracture test (see below). Th e complex-
ity of genetic inheritance patterns in families refl ects 
the fact that MH can be caused by mutations of one 
or more genes on more than one chromosome. To 
date genetic studies in humans have revealed at least 
fi ve diff erent chromosomes and more than 180 indi-
vidual mutations associated with MH. Genetic test-
ing, although available, currently screens for less 
than 20% of recognized mutations. A patient with a 
bona fi de clinical history of MH has about a 30–50% 
chance of testing positive. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Th e earliest signs of MH during anesthesia 
are succinylcholine-induced masseter muscle 
rigidity (MMR) or other muscle rigidity, tachycar-
dia, and hypercarbia (due to increased CO 2  pro-
duction) ( Table 52–3 ). Two or more of these signs 
greatly increase the likelihood of MH. Tachypnea 
is prominent when muscle relaxants are not used. 
Overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system 
produces tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension, 
and mottled cyanosis. Hyperthermia may be a late 
sign, but when it occurs, core temperature can rise 
as much as 1°C every 5 min. Generalized muscle 
rigidity is not consistently present. Hypertension 
may be rapidly followed by hypotension if cardiac 
depression occurs. Dark-colored urine refl ects myo-
globinemia and myoglobinuria. 
 Laboratory testing typically reveals mixed 
metabolic and respiratory acidosis with a marked 
base defi cit, hyperkalemia, hypermagnesemia, and 
reduced mixed-venous oxygen saturation. Some 
case reports describe isolated respiratory acido-
sis early in the course of an episode of MH. Serum 
ionized calcium concentration is variable: it may 
initially increase before a later decrease. Patients 
typically have increased serum myoglobin, creatine 
6
 TABLE 522 Drugs known to trigger 
malignant hyperthermia. 
Inhaled general anesthetics
 Ether 
 Halothane 
 Methoxyflurane 
 Enflurane 
 Isoflurane 
 Desflurane 
 Sevoflurane 
 Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants 
 Succinylcholine 
 
CHAPTER 52 Thermoregulation, Hypothermia, & Malignant Hyperthermia
1187
kinase (CK), lactic dehydrogenase, and aldolase lev-
els. When peak serum CK levels (usually 12–18 h 
aft er anesthesia) exceed 20,000 IU/L the diagnosis 
is strongly suspected. It should be noted that succi-
nylcholine administration to some normal patients 
without MH may cause serum myoglobin and CK 
levels to increase markedly. 
 Much of the problem in diagnosing MH arises 
from its variable presentation. Fever is an inconsis-
tent and oft en late-presenting sign. An unantici-
pated doubling or tripling of end-tidal CO 2 (in the 
absence of a ventilatory change) is one of the earliest 
and most sensitive indicators of MH. If the patient 
survives the fi rst few minutes, acute kidney failure 
and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) 
can rapidly ensue. Other complications of MH 
include cerebral edema with seizures and hepatic 
failure. Most MH deaths are due to DIC and organ 
failure due to delayed or no treatment with 
dantrolene. 
 Susceptibility to MH is increased in sev-
eral musculoskeletal diseases. Th ese include 
 central-core disease, multi-minicore myopathy, and 
7
King–Denborough syndrome. Th e latter syndrome 
is seen primarily in young boys who exhibit short 
stature, mental retardation, cryptorchidism, kypho-
scoliosis, pectus deformity, slanted eyes, low-set ears, 
webbed neck, and winged scapulae. Duchenne’s and 
other muscular dystrophies, nonspecifi c myopathies, 
heat stroke, and osteogenesis imperfecta have been 
associated with MH-like symptoms in some reports; 
however, their association with MH is controversial. 
Other possible clues to susceptibility include a fam-
ily history of anesthetic complications, or a history 
of unexplained fevers or muscular cramps. Th ere are 
several reports of MH episodes occurring in patients 
with a history of exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis. 
Prior uneventful anesthesia procedures and absence 
of a positive family history are notoriously unreli-
able predictors of lack of susceptibility to MH. Any 
patient who develops MMR during induction of 
anesthesia should be considered potentially suscep-
tible to MH. 
 Intraoperative Considerations 
 Treatment of an MH episode is directed at 
terminating the episode and treating com-
plications such as hyperthermia and acidosis. Th e 
mortality rate for MH, even with prompt treat-
ment, ranges from 5% to 30%.  Table 52-4 illustrates 
8
 TABLE 523 Signs of malignant 
hyperthermia. 
 Markedly increased metabolism 
 Increased CO 2 production 
 Increased oxygen consumption 
 Reduced mixed venous oxygen tension 
 Metabolic acidosis 
 Cyanosis 
 Mottling 
 Increased sympathetic activity 
 Tachycardia 
 Hypertension 
 Arrhythmias 
 Muscle damage 
 Masseter spasm 
 Generalized rigidity 
 Increased serum creatine kinase 
 Hyperkalemia 
 Hypernatremia 
 Hyperphosphatemia 
 Myoglobinemia 
 Myoglobinuria 
 Hyperthermia 
 Fever 
 Sweating 
TABLE 524 Protocol for immediate 
treatment of malignant hyperthermia.
 1. Discontinue volatile anesthetic and succinylcholine. 
Notify the surgeon. Call for help. 
 2. Mix dantrolene sodium with sterile distilled water and 
administer 2.5 mg/kg intravenously as soon as possible. 
 3. Administer bicarbonate for metabolic acidosis 
 4. Institute cooling measures (lavage, cooling blanket, cold 
intravenous solutions). 
 5. Treat severe hyperkalemia with dextrose, 25–50 g 
intravenously, and regular insulin, 10–20 units 
intravenously (adult dose). 
 6. Administer antiarrhythmic agents if needed despite 
correction of hyperkalemia and acidosis 
 7. Monitor end-tidal CO 2 tension, electrolytes blood gases, 
creatine kinase, serum myoglobin, core temperature, 
urinary output, and color, coagulation status  
 8. If necessary, consult on-call physicians at the 24-hour 
MHAUS hotline,  1-800-644-9737. 
Data from the MHAUS protocol available at  http://www.mhaus.org/nf/
Shop/EmergencyTherapyMHPosterSample.gif .
1188 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
a standard protocol for management of MH. First 
and most importantly, the triggering agent must be 
stopped and dantrolene must be given immediately. 
 A. Acute Treatment Measures 
 Volatile agents and succinylcholine must be dis-
continued immediately. Even trace amounts of 
anesthetics absorbed by soda lime, breathing tubes, 
and breathing bags may be detrimental. Th e patient 
should be hyperventilated with 100% oxygen to 
minimize the eff ects of uncontrolled CO 2 produc-
tion and increased oxygen consumption. 
 B. Dantrolene Therapy 
 Th e mainstay of therapy for MH is immediate 
administration of intravenous dantrolene.  Dan-
trolene, a hydantoin derivative, directly inter-
feres with muscle contraction by binding the Ryr 1
receptor channel and inhibiting calcium ion release 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Th e dose is 2.5 
mg/kg intravenously every 5 min until the episode is 
terminated (upper limit, 10 mg/kg). Dantrolene is 
packaged as 20 mg of lyophilized powder to be dis-
solved in 60 mL of sterile water. Depending on the 
dose required and drug formulation used, reconsti-
tution can be time consuming.  An assistant may be 
needed. A new formulation is available that recon-
stitutes in about one third the time (20 versus 86 s) 
required for the older formulation. Th e eff ective 
half-life of dantrolene is about 6 h. 
 Aft er initial control of symptoms, 1 mg/kg of 
dantrolene intravenously is recommended every 6 h 
for 24–48 h to prevent relapse (MH can recur within 
24 h of an initial episode). Dantrolene is a relatively 
safe drug that is also used to decrease temperature 
in patients with thyroid “storm” and neuroleptic 
malignant syndrome. Although its use in chronic 
therapy for spastic disorders has been associated 
with hepatic dysfunction, the most serious com-
plication following acute administration is general-
ized muscle weakness that may result in respiratory 
insuffi  ciency or aspiration pneumonia. Dantrolene 
can cause phlebitis in small peripheral veins and 
should be given through a central venous line if one 
is available. Th e safety and effi  cacy of dantrolene 
therapy mandate its immediate use in this poten-
tially life-threatening situation. Following adminis-
tration of dantrolene, most patients revert to normal 
9
acid–base status promptly and no further pharma-
cological treatment is necessary. 
 C. Correction of Acid–Base/
Electrolyte Imbalances 
 Persisting metabolic acidosis should be treated 
with intravenous sodium bicarbonate, recogniz-
ing that this treatment will worsen the hypercarbia. 
Hyperkalemia should be treated with glucose, insu-
lin, and diuresis. Th ere is no useful role for intrave-
nous calcium in this setting. Antiarrhythmic agents, 
vasopressors, and inotropes should be administered, 
if indicated. Calcium channel blockers should not 
be given to patients receiving dantrolene because 
this combination appears to promote hyperkalemia. 
Furosemide may be used to establish diuresis and 
prevent acute kidney failure, which may develop as a 
consequence of myoglobinuria. Dantrolene contains 
a considerable amount of mannitol (3 g per 20-mg 
bottle); thus furosemide or bumetanide should be 
used in preference to mannitol for diuresis. 
 D. Cooling the Patient 
 If fever is present, cooling measures should be insti-
tuted immediately. Surface cooling with ice packs 
over major arteries, cold air convection, and cooling 
blankets are used. Iced saline lavage of the stomach 
and any open body cavities (eg, in patients under-
going abdominal surgery) should also be instituted. 
Use of hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass may 
be appropriate if other measures fail. 
 E. Management of the Patient with 
Isolated Masseter Muscle Spasm 
 MMR, or trismus, is a forceful contraction of the 
jaw musculature that prevents full mouth open-
ing. Th is contrasts with incomplete jaw relaxation, 
which is a fairly common fi nding. Both myotonia 
and MH can cause masseter spasm. Th e two disor-
ders can be diff erentiated by the medical history, 
neurological examination, and electromyography. 
Th e historical incidence of MMR following admin-
istration of succinylcholine with halothane in pedi-
atric patients at some medical centers was higher 
than 1%. Isolated MMR occurs in only 15–30% 
of true MH episodes. Moreover, less than 50% of 
patients in whom MMR develops prove to be sus-
ceptible to MH by muscle testing. In the past, the 
 
CHAPTER 52 Thermoregulation, Hypothermia, & Malignant Hyperthermia 
1189 
consensus of clinicians was to assume that any 
occurrence of MMR was diagnostic of MH and to 
postpone elective surgery. However, if there is no 
other sign of MH, and if monitoring and treatment 
capabilities are readily available, many anesthesi-
ologists now advocate allowing surgery to continue 
using safe (nontriggering) anesthetic agents. Serum 
CK levels should be followed for 24 h aft er an epi-
sode of MMR, because an elevation of this enzyme 
may indicate an underlying myopathy. 
 Postoperative Considerations 
 A. Conﬁ rmation of the Diagnosis 
 Patients who have survived an unequivocal episode 
of MH are considered susceptible; in these patients a 
muscle biopsy need not be performed for diagnosis. 
If the diagnosis remains in doubt postoperatively, 
a fresh biopsy specimen of living skeletal muscle is 
obtained and exposed to a caff eine, halothane, or 
combination caff eine–halothane bath. Th e halo-
thane–caff eine contracture test may have a 10–20% 
false-positive rate, but the false-negative rate is 
close to zero. Because of the relative complexity of 
this test, only a few centers worldwide perform it. 
If the halothane–caff eine contracture test is posi-
tive, genetic counseling and testing of family mem-
bers are appropriate. Baseline CK may be elevated 
chronically in 50–70% of people at risk for MH, but 
the only reliable way to diagnose MH susceptibility 
is by muscle testing. 
 Both European and North American MH regis-
tries have been established to help physicians iden-
tify and treat patients with suspected MH, as well 
as provide standardization between testing centers. 
Th e Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the 
United States (MHAUS, telephone 1-800-986-4287) 
operates a 24-hour hotline (1-800-644-9737) and a 
web site ( http://www.mhaus.org ).  
 1. Diff erential diagnosis —Several disorders may 
superfi cially resemble MH ( Table 52–5 ). However, 
MH is associated with greater degrees of metabolic 
acidosis and venous desaturation than any of these 
other conditions. In current practice, the most 
common condition confused with MH is hypercar-
bia from CO 2 insuffl  ation for laparoscopy, with or 
without subcutaneous emphysema. Th is condition 
can result in an unexpected increase in end-tidal 
CO 2 with accompanying tachycardia. Surgery and 
anesthesia can precipitate thyroid storm in undiag-
nosed or poorly controlled hyperthyroid patients. 
Th e signs of thyroid storm include tachycardia, 
tachyarrhythmias (particularly atrial fi brillation), 
hyperthermia (oft en ≥40°C), hypotension, and in 
some cases congestive heart failure. In contrast to 
MH, hypokalemia is very common. Also unlike 
the typical intraoperative presentation of MH, thy-
roid storm generally develops postoperatively (see 
 Chapter 34 ). Pheochromocytoma is associated with 
dramatic increases in heart rate and blood pressure 
but not with an increase in CO 2 production, end-
tidal CO 2 , or temperature (see  Chapter 34 ). Car-
diac arrhythmias or ischemia may also be promi-
nent. Rarely such patients may have hyperthermia 
(>38°C), which is generally thought to be due to 
increased heat production from catecholamine-
mediated increases in metabolic rate together with 
decreased heat elimination from intense vasocon-
striction. Sepsis shares several characteristics with 
MH, including fever, tachypnea, tachycardia, and 
metabolic acidosis (see  Chapter 57 ). Sepsis can be 
diffi  cult to diagnose if there is no obvious primary 
site of infection. 
 Less commonly, drug-induced hyperthermia 
may be encountered in the perioperative period. In 
these cases, the drugs appear to markedly increase 
serotonin activity in the brain, causing hyperther-
mia, confusion, shivering, diaphoresis, hyperrefl exia, 
and myoclonus. Drug combinations associated with 
this “serotonin syndrome” include monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and meperidine, and 
 TABLE 525 Diﬀ erential diagnosis of 
hyperthermia in the intraoperative and 
immediate postoperative periods. 
 Malignant hyperthermia 
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome 
 Thyroid storm 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Drug-induced hyperthermia 
 Serotonin syndrome 
 Iatrogenic hyperthermia 
 Brainstem/hypothalamic injury 
 Sepsis 
 Transfusion reaction 
1190 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
MAOIs and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs). Hyperthermia can also be caused by some 
illicit drugs, including 3,4-methylenedioxymetham-
phetamine (MDMA or “ecstasy’), “crack” cocaine, 
amphetamines, phencyclidine (PCP), and lysergic 
acid diethylamine (LSD). 
 Iatrogenic hyperthermia is not uncommon, 
particularly in pediatric patients. Common sources 
of excessive heat in the operating room include 
humidifi ers on ventilators, warming blankets, heat 
lamps, and increased ambient temperature. Injuries 
to the brainstem, hypothalamus, or nearby regions 
can be associated with marked hyperthermia. 
 2. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) —
Th is syndrome is characterized by hyperthermia, 
muscle rigidity with extrapyramidal signs (dyskine-
sia), altered consciousness, and autonomic lability 
in patients receiving antidopaminergic agents. Th e 
syndrome is caused by an imbalance of neurotrans-
mitters in the central nervous system. It can occur 
either during drug therapy with antidopaminergic 
agents (eg, phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thio-
xanthenes, or metoclopramide) or less commonly 
following the withdrawal of dopaminergic agonists 
(levodopa or amantadine) in patients with Parkin-
son’s disease. Th us, it appears to involve abnormal 
central dopaminergic activity, as opposed to the al-
tered peripheral calcium release seen in MH. Th ese 
diff ering mechanisms probably explain why nonde-
polarizing relaxants reverse the rigidity of NMS, but 
not the rigidity associated with MH. 
 NMS does not appear to be inherited and typi-
cally takes hours to weeks to develop; the majority 
of episodes develop within 2 weeks of a dose adjust-
ment. Hyperthermia generally tends to be mild, and 
appears to be proportional to the amount of rigidity. 
Autonomic dysfunction results in tachycardia, labile 
blood pressure, diaphoresis, increased secretions, 
and urinary incontinence. Muscle rigidity can pro-
duce dyspnea and respiratory distress and, together 
with the increased secretions, can promote aspiration 
pneumonia. CK levels are typically elevated; some 
patients may develop rhabdomyolysis resulting in 
myoglobinemia, myoglobinuria, and kidney failure. 
 Mild forms of NMS promptly resolve aft er 
withdrawal of the causative drug (or reinstitution of 
antiparkinsonian therapy). Initial treatment of more 
severe forms of NMS should include oxygen therapy 
and endotracheal intubation for respiratory distress 
or altered consciousness. Marked muscle rigidity can 
be controlled with muscle paralysis, dantrolene, or a 
dopaminergic agonist (amantadine, bromocriptine, 
or levodopa), depending on the severity and acuity 
of the syndrome. Resolution of the muscle rigidity 
usually decreases body temperature. 
 Th is syndrome is considered a separate entity 
from MH; nevertheless some clinicians believe that 
NMS may predispose patients to MH and recom-
mend that patients with NMS should not receive 
succinylcholine or a volatile anesthetic. In contrast 
to patients with NMS, patients susceptible to MH 
can safely receive phenothiazines. 
 B. Prophylaxis, Postanesthesia 
Care, and Discharge 
 Propofol, etomidate, benzodiazepines, ket-
amine, thiopental, methohexital, opiates, 
droperidol, nitrous oxide, nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants, and all local anesthetics are nontrigger-
ing agents that are safe for use in MH-susceptible 
patients. An adequate supply of dantrolene should 
always be available wherever general anesthesia is 
provided. Prophylactic administration of intrave-
nous dantrolene to susceptible patients is not nec-
essary if a nontriggering anesthetic is administered. 
 For MH-susceptible patients, the consensus 
is that the vaporizers should be removed from the 
anesthesia workstation (or fi xed in an “off ” position) 
and the machine should be fl ushed with 10 L/min of 
fresh gas (air or oxygen) for at least 5 min. Th is step 
should reduce concentrations of volatile anesthetics 
to less than 1 part per million. Additionally, the CO 2
absorbent and circle system (or other anesthetic cir-
cuit), hoses should be changed. 
 MH-susceptible patients who have under-
gone an uneventful procedure with a nontrigger-
ing anesthetic can be discharged from the PACU 
or ambulatory surgery unit when they meet 
standard criteria. Th ere are no reported cases of 
MH-susceptible patients experiencing MH aft er 
receiving a nontriggering anesthetic during unevent-
ful surgery. 
10
 
CHAPTER 52 Thermoregulation, Hypothermia, & Malignant Hyperthermia 
1191 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Benca J, Hogan K: Malignant hyperthermia, coexisting 
disorders, and enzymopathies: Risks and management 
options. Anesth Analg 2009;109:1049. 
 Kelly FE, Nolan JP: Th e eff ects of mild induced 
hypothermia on the myocardium: A systematic 
review. Anaesthesia 2010;65:505. 
 Kim TW, Nemergut ME: Preparation of 
modern anesthesia workstations for malignant 
hyperthermia-susceptible patients: A review 
of past and present practice. Anesthesiology 
2011;114:205. 
 Klingler W, Rueff ert H, Lehmann-Horn F, et al: Core 
myopathies and risk of malignant hyperthermia. 
Anesth Analg 2009;109:1167. 
 Mackensen GB, McDonagh DL, Warner DS: 
Perioperative hypothermia: Use and therapeutic 
implications. J Neurotrauma 2009;26:342.  
 Parness J, Bandschapp O, Girard T: Th e myotonias and 
susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia. Anesth 
Analg 2009;109:1054. 
 Sessler DI: Temperature monitoring and perioperative 
thermoregulation. Anesthesiology 2008;109:318. 
 WEB SITES 
 Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland 
 http://www.aagbi.org/ 
 Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United 
States.  http://www.mhaus.org/ 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1193
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 The ﬁ t, previously well-nourished patient 
undergoing elective surgery could be fasted 
for up to a week postoperatively without 
apparent adverse eﬀ ect on outcomes, 
provided that ﬂ uid and electrolyte needs are 
met. On the other hand, it is well established 
in multiple studies that malnourished patients 
beneﬁ t from nutritional repletion via either 
enteral or parenteral routes prior to surgery. 
 The indications for total parenteral nutrition 
(TPN) are narrow, including those patients 
who cannot absorb enteral solutions (small 
bowel obstruction, short gut syndrome, 
etc.); partial parenteral nutrition may be 
indicated to supplement enteral nutrition 
(EN), when EN cannot fully provide for 
nutritional needs. 
 TPN will generally require a venous access 
line with its catheter tip in the superior vena 
1
2
3
cava. The line or port through which the TPN 
solution will be infused should be dedicated 
to this purpose, if at all possible, and strict 
aseptic techniques should be employed for 
insertion and care of the catheter. 
 In the patient with critical illness, 
discontinuing an EN infusion may require 
multiple potentially dangerous adjustments 
in insulin infusions and maintenance 
of intravenous ﬂ uid rates. Meanwhile, 
the evidence is sparse that EN infusions 
delivered through an appropriately-sited 
gastrointestinal feeding tube increases the 
risk of aspiration pneumonitis. 
 Regardless of whether the TPN infusion 
is continued, reduced, replaced with 
10% dextrose, or stopped, blood glucose 
monitoring will be needed during all but 
short, minor surgical procedures. 
4
5
 Issues related to nutrition tend to be far removed 
from the usual concerns of the surgical anesthesi-
ologist. On the other hand, appropriate nutritional 
support has been recognized in recent years to be of 
key importance for favorable outcomes in patients 
with critical illness, a large fraction of whom will 
require surgical services. Severe malnutrition causes 
widespread organ dysfunction and increases peri-
operative morbidity and mortality rates. Nutritional 
repletion may improve wound healing, restore 
immune competence, and reduce morbidity and 
mortality rates in critically ill patients. Th is chapter 
does not provide a complete review of nutrition in 
the patient undergoing surgery or with critical ill-
ness, but rather off ers the framework for providing 
basic nutritional support in such patients. We con-
sider, for example, whether enteral nutrition (EN) or 
parenteral nutrition (PN) will best meet the needs 
of an individual patient. Th is chapter also briefl y 
reviews the conditions under which the ongoing 
nutritional needs of patients may come into confl ict 
with anesthetic preferences and dogmas, such as the 
duration that patients must not receive EN before 
undergoing general anesthesia. 
53
 Nutrition in Perioperative 
& Critical Care 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S  
1194 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
If starvation is prolonged, the brain, kidneys, and 
muscle also begin to utilize ketone bodies effi  ciently. 
 Th e previously well-nourished patient under-
going elective surgery could be fasted for up 
to a week postoperatively without apparent adverse 
eff ect on outcomes, provided fl uid and electro-
lyte needs are met. Th e usefulness of nutritional 
repletion in the immediate postoperative period is 
not well defi ned, but likely relates to the degree of 
malnutrition, number of nutrient defi ciencies, and 
severity of the illness/injury. Moreover, the optimal 
timing and amount of nutrition support following 
acute illness remain unknown. On the other hand, 
malnourished patients may benefi t from nutritional 
repletion prior to surgery. 
 Modern surgical practice has evolved to an expec-
tation of an accelerated recovery. Accelerated recov-
ery programs generally include early enteral feeding, 
even in patients undergoing surgery on the gastroin-
testinal tract, so prolonged periods of postoperative 
starvation are no longer common practice. All well-
nourished patients should receive nutritional support 
aft er 5 days of postsurgical starvation, and those with 
ongoing critical illness or severe malnutrition should 
be given nutritional support immediately. Th e mal-
nourished patient presents a diff erent set of issues, 
and such patients may benefi t from both preoperative 
and early postoperative feeding. Clearly, the healing 
of wounds requires energy, protein, lipids, electro-
lytes, trace elements, and vitamins. Depletion of any 
of these substrates may delay wound healing and pre-
dispose to complications, such as infection. Nutrient 
depletion may also delay optimal muscle functioning, 
which is important for supporting increased respira-
tory demands and early mobilization of the patient. 
 Th e resting metabolic rate can be measured 
(but oft en inaccurately) using indirect calorimetry 
(known as a metabolic cart) or by estimating energy 
expenditure using standard nomograms (such as the 
Harris–Benedict equation), yielding an approxima-
tion of daily energy requirements. Alternatively, a 
simple and practical approach assumes that patients 
require 25–30 kcal/kg daily. Th e weight is usually 
taken as the ideal body weight or adjusted body 
weight. Even though nutritional requirements can 
increase greatly above basal levels with certain condi-
tions (eg, burns), the more oft en relevant reason for 
1
 BASIC NUTRITIONAL NEEDS 
 Maintenance of normal body mass, composition, 
structure, and function requires the periodic intake of 
water, energy substrates, and specifi c nutrients. Nutri-
ents that cannot be synthesized from other nutrients 
are characterized as “essential.” Remarkably, relatively 
few essential nutrients are required to form the thou-
sands of compounds that make up the body. Known 
essential nutrients include 8–10 amino acids, 2 fatty 
acids, 13 vitamins, and approximately 16 minerals. 
 Energy is normally derived from dietary or 
endogenous carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Meta-
bolic breakdown of these substrates yields the ade-
nosine triphosphate required for normal cellular 
function. Dietary fats and carbohydrates normally 
supply most of the body’s energy requirements. 
Dietary proteins provide amino acids for protein 
synthesis; however, when their supply exceeds 
requirements, amino acids also function as energy 
substrates. Th e metabolic pathways of carbohydrate, 
fat, and amino acid substrates overlap, such that 
some interconversions can occur through metabolic 
intermediates (see  Figure 32–4 ). Excess amino acids 
can therefore be converted to carbohydrate or fatty 
acid precursors. Excess carbohydrates are stored 
as glycogen in the liver and skeletal muscle. When 
glycogen stores are saturated (200–400 g in adults), 
excess carbohydrate is converted to fatty acids and 
stored as triglycerides, primarily in fat cells. 
 During starvation, the protein content of essen-
tial tissues is spared. As blood glucose concentration 
begins to fall during fasting, insulin secretion 
decreases, and counterregulatory hormones, such as 
glucagon, increase. Hepatic and, to a lesser extent, 
renal glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis are 
enhanced. As glycogen supplies are depleted (within 
24 h), gluconeogenesis (from amino acids) becomes 
increasingly important. Only neural tissue, renal 
medullary cells, and erythrocytes continue to utilize 
glucose—in eff ect, sparing tissue proteins. Lipolysis 
is enhanced, and fats become the principal energy 
source. Glycerol from the triglycerides enters the gly-
colytic pathway, and fatty acids are broken down to 
acetylcoenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). Excess acetyl-CoA 
results in the formation of ketone bodies (ketosis). 
Some fatty acids can contribute to gluconeogenesis. 
 
CHAPTER 53 Nutrition in Perioperative & Critical Care
1195
be used when EN is not indicated, not tolerated, or 
insuffi  cient. 
 Th ere was a time when nearly every physician 
who took care of critically ill patients was in the 
position of frequently ordering TPN for patients. 
Th is is no longer the case, given that EN is now so 
much more widely employed. As a consequence, 
many hospitals and health systems insist that a 
nutrition support team take responsibility for those 
rarer patients who require TPN.  
 In general, patients with critical illness should 
undergo whatever initial hemodynamic resuscita-
tion they require before initiation of nutritional 
support (either EN or PN). Absorption, distribu-
tion, and metabolism of nutrients require tissue 
blood fl ow, oxygen, and carbon dioxide removal. 
Adequate tissue blood fl ow requires an adequately 
resuscitated patient. Nutrient delivery to ischemic 
tissues may cause tissue damage by increasing car-
bon dioxide and oxidant production while consum-
ing energy. Patients with critical illness who require 
EN will usually require placement of a feeding tube. 
Feeding tubes may be placed into the stomach in 
patients with adequate gastric emptying and low 
risk of aspiration. In patients with delayed gastric 
emptying or those at high risk of aspiration, feeding 
tubes are best placed into the small intestine. Ide-
ally, the tip of such tubes will be sited within the 
small intestine, either by transpyloric placement of 
a nasoenteral tube or directly into the jejunum dur-
ing abdominal surgery (via a percutaneous route), 
reducing the likelihood of gastric distention and 
regurgitation. Patients who are unable to eat, but 
require EN over long periods of time, will oft en 
undergo percutaneous endoscopic placement of 
gastrostomy (PEG) tubes (the tips of such tubes can 
be placed distal to the pylorus). One should con-
fi rm that the tips of all feeding tubes are appropri-
ately placed before initiating feeds to reduce the 
likelihood that EN solutions will be accidentally 
infused, say, into the tracheobronchial tree or 
abdominal cavity. 
 TPN will generally require that a venous 
access line be placed with the catheter tip in 
the superior vena cava. Peripheral PN can support 
the nutritional requirements of the patient, but 
necessitates the use of larger volumes of fl uids due 
3
determining the daily requirements is to ensure that 
patients are not unnecessarily overfed. In this regard, 
obese patients require adjusting the body weight 
based on the degree of obesity to prevent overfeeding. 
 HOW TO FEED THE PATIENT 
 Aft er total parenteral nutrition (TPN) was estab-
lished as a feasible approach for feeding patients 
lacking a functional gut, physicians extended the 
practice of TPN to many circumstances where 
“logic” and “clinical experience” suggested that it 
would be better than EN. For example, one such 
indication was in the patient with acute pancreatitis, 
where, in the 1970s, many clinicians thought that a 
period of TPN would put the gut and pancreas at 
“rest,” allowing for resolution of pain and weight 
loss. Unfortunately, “logic” and “clinical experience” 
were incorrect. Now, the worldwide consensus 
expressed in clinical practice guidelines is that 
patients with acute pancreatitis (and indeed all oth-
ers with functioning guts) will have worse outcomes 
if TPN is provided, rather than EN. Today, the 
indications for TPN are narrow and include 
patients who cannot absorb enteral solutions (small 
bowel obstruction, short gut syndrome, etc.); partial 
PN may be indicated to supplement EN, in cases in 
which EN cannot fully provide for nutritional needs. 
In the latter circumstance, recent evidence suggests 
that the decision to add supplemental PN should be 
made only aft er a week’s time in previously well-
nourished patients. Earlier initiation of supplemen-
tary PN in previously well-nourished patients, as 
had been supported by 2009 European guidelines, 
resulted in worse outcomes in a large randomized 
clinical trial; however, these results are not fi rmly 
established, as smaller randomized clinical trials 
have suggested fi ndings to the contrary. Th e diver-
gent results from these recent trials may be associ-
ated with the type of parenteral formulations being 
used, types of patients being studied, timing of par-
enteral nutritional administration, and treatment in 
the control groups. Th us, further studies are needed 
to better defi ne patients that may benefi t from PN, as 
well as the optimal timing of nutritional support and 
formulations for feeding. In short, EN should be the 
primary mode of nutritional support, and PN should 
2
1196 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
(specifi cally arginine and “fi sh” oil) to EN may 
reduce the risk of infection and reduce the length 
of hospital stay in high-risk surgical patients. Simi-
larly, current guidelines for perioperative PN also 
advocate the inclusion of n-3 fatty acids. Th ere is 
some evidence that inclusion of long-chain n-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFAs), long-
chain monounsaturated fatty acids (found in olive 
oil), or medium-chain fatty acids may be preferable 
to the use of solutions (such as soy bean-derived 
lipids) that are rich in longer chain n-6 PUFA. 
However, such solutions (although widely available 
outside of the United States) are not approved for 
use in the United States. 
to the requirement for lower osmolarities than used 
with central PN and increases the risk of phlebitis. 
Th e line or port through which the TPN solution 
will be infused should be dedicated to this pur-
pose, if at all possible, and strict aseptic techniques 
should be employed for insertion and care of the 
catheter.  
 COMPLICATIONS OF 
NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT 
 Diarrhea is a common problem with enteral feed-
ings and may be related to either hyperosmolarity 
of the solution or lactose intolerance. Gastric disten-
tion is another complication that increases the risk 
of regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration; the use 
of duodenal or jejunostomy tubes should decrease 
the likelihood of gastric distention. Complications 
of TPN are either metabolic or related to central 
venous access  ( Table 53–1 ). Bloodstream infections 
associated with central and peripheral venous lines 
remain a major concern, particularly in the patient 
with critical illness and immunocompromised 
states. 
 Overfeeding with excess amounts of glucose 
can increase energy requirements and production 
of carbon dioxide; the respiratory quotient can be 
>1 because of lipogenesis. Overfeeding can lead 
to reversible cholestatic jaundice. Mild elevations 
of serum transaminases and alkaline phosphatase 
may refl ect fatty infi ltration of the liver as a result of 
overfeeding. 
 SPECIFIC NUTRIENTS 
 Certain nutrients have been associated with 
improved outcomes. Surgery and anesthesia are 
well-recognized inducers of infl ammation, produc-
ing changes in local (near the wound) and plasma 
concentrations of neurohormones, cytokines, and 
other mediators. Many investigators have hypoth-
esized that adverse neurohormonal and infl am-
matory responses to surgery and anesthesia can be 
ameliorated through specifi c diets. Several clini-
cal trials (and a recent meta-analysis) suggest that 
the addition of “immunomodulating” nutrients 
 TABLE 531 Complications of total 
parenteral nutrition. 
 Catheter-related complications 
 Pneumothorax 
 Hemothorax 
 Chylothorax 
 Hydrothorax 
 Air embolism 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Thrombosis of central vein 
 Bloodstream infection 
 Metabolic complications 
 Azotemia 
 Hepatic dysfunction 
 Cholestasis 
 Hyperglycemia 
 Hyperosmolar coma 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis 
 Excessive CO 2 production 
 Hypoglycemia (due to interruption of infusion) 
 Metabolic acidosis or alkalosis 
 Hypernatremia 
 Hyperkalemia 
 Hypokalemia 
 Hypocalcemia 
 Hypophosphatemia 
 Hyperlipidemia 
 Pancreatitis 
 Fat embolism syndrome 
 Anemia
 Iron 
 Vitamin D, K, or B-12 deficiency 
 Essential fatty acid deficiency 
 Hypervitaminosis A 
 Hypervitaminosis D 
 
CHAPTER 53 Nutrition in Perioperative & Critical Care
1197
adverse outcomes from aspiration pneumonitis. 
Moreover, there is abundant evidence that adminis-
tering a preoperative carbohydrate “load” to nondia-
betic patients shortly before surgery will have the 
salutary metabolic eff ect of increasing plasma insu-
lin concentrations and decreasing postoperative 
insulin resistance. Such preoperative carbohydrate 
loading is not nearly as commonplace as we believe 
it should be. 
 TPN AND SURGERY 
 Patients who receive TPN oft en require surgical 
procedures. Metabolic abnormalities are relatively 
common, and, ideally, should be corrected preop-
eratively. For example, hypophosphatemia is a seri-
ous and oft en unrecognized complication that can 
contribute to postoperative muscle weakness and 
respiratory failure. 
 When TPN infusions are suddenly stopped or 
decreased 
perioperatively, 
hypoglycemia 
may 
develop. Frequent measurements of blood glucose 
concentration are therefore required in such 
instances during general anesthesia. Conversely, if 
the TPN solution is continued unchanged, excessive 
hyperglycemia resulting in hyperosmolar nonke-
totic coma or ketoacidosis (in patients with diabe-
tes) is also possible. Th e neuroendocrine stress 
response to surgery frequently aggravates glucose 
intolerance.  Regardless of whether the TPN 
infusion is continued, reduced, replaced with 
10% dextrose, or stopped, blood glucose monitoring 
will be needed during all but short, minor surgical 
procedures. 
 GUIDELINES 
 American Dietetic Association. Critical illness evidence-
based nutrition practice guideline. Available at:  http://
www.guidelines.gov/content.aspx?id=12818&search=a
da+critical+illness+nutrition . 
 American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) 
Institute on “Management of Acute Pancreatitis” 
Clinical Practice and Economics Committee; 
AGA Institute Governing Board: AGA Institute 
medical position statement on acute pancreatitis. 
Gastroenterology. 2007;132:2019. 
5
 In the past, it was customary to individualize 
TPN solutions for each patient. Currently, there 
is little evidence that this is necessary, except in 
patients who cannot handle a sodium load (eg, those 
with severe heart failure). Adjustments may also be 
made in patients requiring renal replacement ther-
apy; however, in most cases, this is not necessary. 
Similarly, except in patients who are already suff er-
ing from hepatic encephalopathy, most patients with 
liver disease can safely receive standard amino acid 
solutions. Th us, most patients receiving EN and PN 
can be safely managed with standardized nutritional 
formulations. Both EN and PN standardized for-
mulations are available in ready-to-use formats that 
decrease preparation times and reduce contamina-
tion risks during formulation. 
 ENTERAL NUTRITION AND 
 NIL PER  OS RULES PRIOR 
TO ELECTIVE SURGERY 
 Long before the recognition by Mendelsohn of the 
problem posed by aspiration pneumonitis, anesthe-
siologists were reluctant to anesthetize patients 
scheduled for elective surgery if they had not been 
fasted overnight. Over time, the duration of obliga-
tory time of no solid food  per os has steadily declined, 
particularly in infants and young children.  In 
the patient with critical illness, discontinuing 
an EN infusion may require multiple potentially 
dangerous adjustments in insulin infusions and 
maintenance of intravenous fl uid rates. Meanwhile, 
the evidence is sparse that EN infusions delivered 
through an appropriately sited gastrointestinal feed-
ing tube increases the risk of aspiration pneumoni-
tis. It is also relatively easy to empty the stomach 
immediately prior to anesthesia and surgery using 
5–10  minutes of intermittent suction through a 
nasogastric tube. Th erefore, current guidelines and 
current published evidence support continuing EN 
infusions (particularly when they are delivered dis-
tal to the pylorus) perioperatively and intraopera-
tively. Similarly, allowing preoperative patients to 
consume clear liquids, as desired, up to the time of 
surgery seems to have no infl uence on the risk of 
4
1198 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Braga M, Ljungqvist O, Soeters P, et al: ESPEN Guidelines 
on Parenteral Nutrition: surgery. Clin Nutr 2009;28:378. 
 Weimann A, Braga M, Harsanyi L, et al: ESPEN 
Guidelines on Enteral Nutrition: surgery including 
organ transplantation. Clin Nutr 2006;25:224. 
 SUGGESTED READING
Awad S, Lobo DN: Metabolic conditioning to attenuate 
the adverse eff ects of perioperative fasting and 
improve patient outcomes. Curr Opin Clin Nutr 
Metab Care 2012;15:194-200.
 Marik PE, Zaloga GP: Immunonutrition in high-
risk surgical patients: a systematic review and 
analysis of the literature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 
2010;34:378. 
 Marik PE, Zaloga GP: Meta-analysis of parenteral 
nutrition versus enteral nutrition in patients with 
acute pancreatitis. BMJ 2004;328:1407. 
Tilg H: Diet and intestinal immunity. N Engl J Med 
2012;366:181-183.
 Zaloga GP: Parenteral nutrition in adult inpatients with 
functioning gastrointestinal tracts: assessment of 
outcomes. Lancet 2006;367:1101. 
 1199
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
54
 The rate of anesthetic complications will 
never be zero. All anesthesia practitioners, 
irrespective of their experience, abilities, 
diligence, and best intentions, will 
participate in anesthetics that are 
associated with patient injury.  
 Malpractice occurs when four 
requirements have been met: (1) the 
practitioner must have a duty to the 
patient; (2) there must have been a breach 
of duty (deviation from the standard of 
care); (3) the patient (plaintiﬀ ) must have 
suﬀ ered an injury; and (4) the proximate 
cause of the injury must have been the 
practitioner’s deviation from the standard 
of care. 
 Anesthetic mishaps can be categorized 
as preventable or unpreventable. Of 
the preventable incidents, most involve 
human error, as opposed to equipment 
malfunctions. 
 The relative decrease in death attributed 
to respiratory rather than cardiovascular 
damaging events has been attributed to 
the increased use of pulse oximetry and 
capnometry. 
 Many anesthetic fatalities occur only after 
a series of coincidental circumstances, 
misjudgments, and technical errors coincide 
(mishap chain). 
1
2
3
4
5
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Despite diﬀ ering mechanisms, anaphylactic 
and anaphylactoid reactions are typically 
clinically indistinguishable and equally 
life-threatening. 
 True anaphylaxis due to anesthetic agents 
is rare; anaphylactoid reactions are much 
more common. Muscle relaxants are the 
most common cause of anaphylaxis during 
anesthesia. 
 Patients with spina biﬁ da, spinal cord 
injury, and congenital abnormalities of the 
genitourinary tract have a very increased 
incidence of latex allergy. The incidence of 
latex anaphylaxis in children is estimated 
to be 1 in 10,000. 
 Although there is no clear evidence that 
exposure to trace amounts of anesthetic 
agents presents a health hazard to 
operating room personnel, the United 
States Occupational Health and Safety 
Administration continues to set maximum 
acceptable trace concentrations of less 
than 25 ppm for nitrous oxide and 0.5 ppm 
for halogenated anesthetics (2 ppm if the 
halogenated agent is used alone). 
 Hollow (hypodermic) needles pose a greater 
risk than do solid (surgical) needles because 
of the potentially larger inoculum. The use 
of gloves, needleless systems, or protected 
needle devices may decrease the incidence 
of some (but not all) types of injury. 
6
7
8
9
10
 Anesthetic Complications 
—Continued next page
1200 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
1
 Th e rate of anesthetic complications will never 
be zero. All anesthesia practitioners, irrespec-
tive of their experience, abilities, diligence, and best 
intentions, will participate in anesthetics that are as-
sociated with patient injury. Moreover, unexpected 
adverse perioperative outcomes can lead to litigation, 
even if those outcomes did not directly arise from an-
esthetic mismanagement. Th is chapter reviews man-
agement approaches to complications secondary to 
anesthesia and discusses medical malpractice and 
legal issues from an American (USA) perspective. 
Readers based in other countries may not fi nd this 
section to be as relevant to their practices. 
 LITIGATION AND ANESTHETIC 
COMPLICATIONS 
 All anesthesia practitioners will have patients with 
adverse outcomes, and in the USA most anesthesi-
ologists will at some point in their career be involved 
to one degree or another in malpractice litigation. 
Consequently, all anesthesia staff  should expect 
litigation to be a part of their professional lives and 
acquire suitably solvent medical malpractice insur-
ance with coverage appropriate for the community 
in which they practice. 
 When unexpected events occur, anesthesia staff  
must generate an appropriate diff erential diagnosis, 
seek necessary consultation, and execute a treat-
ment plan to mitigate (to the greatest degree possi-
ble) any patient injury. Appropriate documentation 
in the patient record is helpful, as many adverse 
outcomes will be reviewed by facility-based and 
practice-based quality assurance and performance 
improvement authorities. Deviations from accept-
able practice will likely be noted in the practitioner’s 
quality assurance fi le. Should an adverse outcome 
lead to litigation, the medical record documents 
the practitioner’s actions at the time of the incident. 
Oft en years pass before litigation proceeds to the 
point where the anesthesia provider is asked about 
the case in question. Although memories fade, a 
clear and complete anesthesiology record can pro-
vide convincing evidence that a complication was 
recognized and appropriately treated. 
 A lawsuit may be fi led, despite a physician’s best 
eff orts to communicate with the patient and family 
about the intraoperative events, management deci-
sions, and the circumstances surrounding an adverse 
event. It is oft en not possible to predict which cases 
will be pursued by plaintiff s! Litigation may be pur-
sued when it is clear (at least to the defense team) 
that the anesthesia care conformed to standards, 
and, conversely, that suits may not be fi led when 
there is obvious anesthesia culpability. Th at said, 
anesthetics that are followed by unexpected death, 
paralysis, or brain injury of young, economically 
productive individuals are particularly attractive to 
plaintiff ’s lawyers. When a patient has an unexpect-
edly poor outcome, one should expect litigation 
irrespective of one’s “positive” relationship with the 
patient or the injured patient’s family or guardians. 
 Malpractice occurs when four requirements 
are met: (1) the practitioner must have a duty 
to the patient; (2) there must have been a breach of 
duty (deviation from the standard of care); (3) the 
patient (plaintiff ) must have suff ered an injury; and 
(4) the proximate cause of the injury must have been 
the practitioner’s deviation from the standard of care. 
A duty is established when the practitioner has an 
obligation to provide care (doctor–patient relation-
ship). Th e practitioner’s failure to execute that duty 
2
Continued—
 Anesthesiology is a high-risk medical 
specialty for substance abuse. 
 The three most important methods of 
minimizing radiation doses are limiting total 
11
12
exposure time during procedures, 
using proper barriers, and maximizing 
one’s distance from the source of 
radiation. 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1201 
constitutes a breach of duty. Injuries can be physi-
cal, emotional, or fi nancial. Causation is established; 
if but for the breach of duty, the patient would not 
have experienced the injury. When a claim is meri-
torious, the tort system attempts to compensate the 
injured patient and/or family members by awarding 
them monetary damages.  
 Being sued is stressful, regardless of the per-
ceived “merits” of the claim. Preparation for defense 
begins before an injury has occurred. Anesthesiol-
ogy staff  should carefully explain the risks and bene-
fi ts of the anesthesia options available to the patient. 
Th e patient grants informed consent following a 
discussion of the risks and benefi ts. Informed con-
sent does not consist of handing the patient a form 
to sign. Informed consent requires that the patient 
understand the choices being presented. As previ-
ously noted, appropriate documentation of patient 
care activities, diff erential diagnoses, and thera-
peutic interventions helps to provide a defensible 
record of the care that was provided, resistant to 
the passage of time and the stress of the litigation 
experience. 
 When an adverse outcome occurs, the hospital 
and/or practice risk management group should be 
immediately notifi ed. Likewise, one’s liability insur-
ance carrier should be notifi ed of the possibility of a 
claim for damages. Some policies have a clause that 
disallows the practitioner from admitting errors to 
patients and families. Consequently, it is important 
to know and obey the institution’s and insurer’s 
approach to adverse outcomes. Nevertheless, most 
risk managers advocate a frank and honest disclo-
sure of adverse events to patients or approved family 
members. It is possible to express sorrow about an 
adverse outcome without admitting “guilt.” Ideally, 
such discussions should take place in the presence of 
risk management personnel and/or a departmental 
leader. 
 It must never be forgotten that the tort system 
is designed to be adversarial. Unfortunately, this 
makes every patient a potential courtroom adver-
sary. Malpractice insurers will hire a defense fi rm 
to represent the anesthesia staff  involved. Typically, 
multiple practitioners and the hospitals in which 
they work will be named to involve the maximal 
number of insurance policies that might pay in the 
event of a plaintiff ’s victory, and to ensure that the 
defendants cannot choose to attribute “blame” for 
the adverse event to whichever person or entity 
was not named in the suit. In some systems (usu-
ally when everyone in a health system is insured 
by the same carrier), all of the named entities are 
represented by one defense team. More commonly, 
various insurers and attorneys represent specifi c 
practitioners and institutional providers. In this 
instance, those involved may defl ect and diff use 
blame from themselves and focus blame on others 
also named in the action. One should not discuss 
elements of any case with anyone other than a risk 
manager, insurer, or attorney, as other conversations 
are not protected from discovery. Discovery is the 
process by which the plaintiff ’s attorneys access the 
medical records and depose witnesses under oath 
to establish the elements of the case: duty, breach, 
injury, and causation. False testimony can lead to 
criminal charges of perjury. 
 Oft entimes, expediency and fi nancial risk expo-
sure will argue for settlement of the case. Th e prac-
titioner may or may not be able to participate in 
this decision depending upon the insurance policy. 
Settled cases are reported to the National Practitio-
ner Data Bank and become a part of the physician’s 
record. Moreover, malpractice suits, settlements, and 
judgments must be reported to hospital authorities 
as part of the credentialing process. When apply-
ing for licensure or hospital appointment, all such 
actions must be reported. Failure to do so can lead 
to adverse consequences. 
 Th e litigation process begins with the delivery 
of a summons indicating that an action is pending. 
Once delivered, the anesthesia defendant must con-
tact his or her malpractice insurer/risk management 
department, who will appoint legal counsel. Counsel 
for both the plaintiff  and defense will identify “inde-
pendent experts” to review the cases. Th ese “experts” 
are paid for their time and expenses and can arrive at 
dramatically diff erent assessments of the case mate-
rials. Following review by expert consultants, the 
plaintiff ’s counsel may depose the principal actors 
involved in the case. Providing testimony can be 
stressful. Generally, one should follow the advice of 
one’s defense attorney. Oft entimes, plaintiff ’s attor-
neys will attempt to anger or confuse the deponent, 
1202 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
hoping to provoke a response favorable to the claim. 
Most defense attorneys will advise their clients to 
answer questions as literally and simply as possible, 
without off ering extraneous commentary. Should 
the plaintiff ’s attorney become abusive, the defense 
attorney will object for the record. However, deposi-
tions, also known as “examinations before trial,” are 
not held in front of a judge (only the attorneys, the 
deponent, the court reporter[s], and [sometimes] 
the videographer are present). Obligatory small 
talk oft en occurs among the attorneys and the court 
reporters. Th is is natural and should not be a source 
of anxiety for the defendant, because in most locali-
ties, the same plaintiff ’s and defense attorneys see 
each other regularly. 
 Following discovery, the insurers, plaintiff s, and 
defense attorneys will “value” the case and attempt to 
monetize the damages. Items, such as pain and suf-
fering, loss of consortium with spouses, lost wages, 
and many other factors, are included in determining 
what the injury is worth. Also during this period, 
the defense attorney may petition the court to grant 
defendants a “summary judgment,” dismissing the 
defendant from the case if there is no evidence of 
malpractice elicited during the discovery process. At 
times, the plaintiff ’s attorneys will dismiss the suit 
against certain named individuals aft er they have 
testifi ed, particularly when their testimony impli-
cates other named defendants. 
 Settlement negotiations will occur in nearly 
every action. Juries are unpredictable, and both 
parties are oft en hesitant to take a case to trial. 
Th ere are expenses associated with litigation, and, 
consequently, both plaintiff  and defense attorneys 
will try to avoid uncertainties. Many anesthesia 
providers will not want to settle a case because 
the settlement must be reported. Nonetheless, an 
award in excess of the insurance policy maximum 
may (depending on the jurisdiction) place the 
personal assets of the defendant providers at risk. 
Th is underscores the importance of our advice 
to all practitioners (not only those involved in a 
lawsuit) to assemble their personal assets (house, 
retirement fund, etc.) in a fashion that makes per-
sonal asset confi scation diffi  cult in the event of a 
negative judgment. One should remember that an 
adverse judgment may arise from a case in which 
most anesthesiologists would fi nd the care to meet 
acceptable standards! 
 When a case proceeds to trial, the fi rst step is 
jury selection in the process of  voir dire —from the 
French—“to see, to say.” In this process, attorneys 
for the plaintiff  and defendant will use various pro-
fi ling techniques to attempt to identify (and remove) 
jurors who are less likely to be sympathetic to their 
case, while keeping the jurors deemed most likely 
to favor their side. Each attorney is able to strike a 
certain number of jurors from the pool because they 
perceive an inherent bias. Th e jurors will be ques-
tioned about such matters as their educational level, 
history of litigation themselves, professions, and so 
forth. 
 Following empanelment, the case is presented 
to the jury. Each attorney attempts to educate the 
jurors—who usually have limited knowledge of 
healthcare (physicians and nurses will usually be 
struck from the jury)—as to the standard of care for 
this or that procedure and how the defendants did 
or did not breach their duty to the patient to uphold 
those standards. Expert witnesses will attempt to 
defi ne what the standard of care is for the commu-
nity, and the plaintiff  and defendant will present 
experts with views that are favorable to their respec-
tive cause. Th e attorneys will attempt to discredit 
the opponent’s experts and challenge their opinions. 
Exhibits are oft en used to explain to the jury what 
should or should not have happened and why the 
injuries for which damages are being sought were 
caused by the practitioner’s negligence. 
 Aft er the attorneys conclude their closing 
remarks, the judge will “charge” the jurors with their 
duty and will delineate what they can consider in 
making their judgment. Once a case is in the hands 
of a jury, anything can happen. Many cases will set-
tle during the course of the trial, as neither party 
wishes to be subject to the arbitrary decisions of an 
unpredictable jury. Should the case not settle, the 
jurors will reach a verdict. When a jury determines 
that the defendants were negligent and negligence 
was the cause of the plaintiff ’s injuries, the jury 
will determine an appropriate award. If the award 
is so egregiously large that it is inconsistent with 
awards for similar injuries, the judge may reduce its 
amount. Of course, following any verdict, there are 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1203 
 ADVERSE ANESTHETIC 
OUTCOMES 
 Incidence 
 Th ere are several reasons why it is diffi  cult to 
accurately measure the incidence of adverse 
 anesthesia-related outcomes. First, it is oft en diffi  cult 
to determine whether the cause of a poor outcome is 
the patient’s underlying disease, the surgical proce-
dure, or the anesthetic management. In some cases, 
all three factors contribute to a poor outcome. Clini-
cally important measurable outcomes are relatively 
rare aft er elective anesthetics. For example, death is 
a clear endpoint, and perioperative deaths do occur 
with some regularity. But, because deaths attribut-
able to anesthesia are much rarer, a very large series 
of patients must be studied to assemble conclusions 
that have statistical signifi cance. Nonetheless, many 
studies have attempted to determine the incidence 
of complications due to anesthesia. Unfortunately, 
studies vary in criteria for defi ning an anesthesia-
related adverse outcome and are limited by retro-
spective analysis. 
 Perioperative mortality is usually defi ned as 
death within 48 hr of surgery. It is clear that most 
perioperative fatalities are due to the patient’s preop-
erative disease or the surgical procedure. In a study 
conducted between 1948 and 1952, anesthesia mor-
tality in the United States was approximately 5100 
deaths per year or 3.3 deaths per 100,000 popula-
tion. A review of cause of death fi les in the United 
States showed that the rate of anesthesia-related 
deaths was 1.1/1,000,000 population or 1 anesthetic 
death per 100,000 procedures between 1999 and 
2005 ( Figure 54–1 ). Th ese results suggest a 97% 
decrease in anesthesia mortality since the 1940s. 
However, a 2002 study reported an estimated rate 
of 1 death per 13,000 anesthetics. Due to diff erences 
in methodology, there are discrepancies in the lit-
erature as to how well anesthesiology is doing in 
achieving safe practice. In a 2008 study of 815,077 
patients (ASA class 1, 2, or 3) who underwent elec-
tive surgery at US Department of Veterans Aff airs 
hospitals, the mortality rate was 0.08% on the day 
of surgery. Th e strongest association with periop-
erative death was the type of surgery ( Figure 54–2 ). 
Other factors associated with increased risk of death 
numerous appeals that may be fi led. It is important 
to note that appeals typically do not relate to the 
medical aspects of the case, but are fi led because the 
trial process itself was somehow fl awed. 
 Unfortunately, a malpractice action can take 
years to reach a conclusion. Consultation with a 
mental health professional may be appropriate for 
the defendant when the litigation process results in 
unmanageable stress, depression, increased alcohol 
consumption, or substance abuse. 
 Determining what constitutes the “standard 
of care” is increasingly complicated. In the United 
Sates, the defi nition of “standard of care” is made 
separately by each state. Th e standard of care is NOT 
necessarily “best practices” or even the care that 
another physician would prefer. Generally, the stan-
dard of care is met when a patient receives care that 
other reasonable physicians in similar circumstances 
would regard as adequate. Th e American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) has published standards, 
and these provide a basic framework for routine 
anesthetic practice (eg, monitoring). Increasingly, a 
number of “guidelines” have been developed by the 
multiple specialty societies to identify best practices 
in accordance with assessments of the evidence in the 
literature. Th e increasing number of guidelines prof-
fered by the numerous anesthesia and other societ-
ies and their frequent updating can make it diffi  cult 
for clinicians to stay abreast of the changing nature 
of practice. Th is is a particular problem when two 
societies produce confl icting guidelines on the same 
topic using the same data. Likewise, the information 
upon which guidelines are based can range from 
randomized clinical trials to the opinion of “experts” 
in the fi eld. Consequently, guidelines do not hold the 
same weight as standards. Guidelines produced by 
reputable societies will generally include an appro-
priate disclaimer based on the level of evidence used 
to generate the guideline. Nonetheless, plaintiff ’s 
attorneys will attempt to use guidelines to establish 
a “standard of care,” when, in fact, clinical guide-
lines are prepared to assist in guiding the delivery 
of therapy. However, if deviation from guidelines is 
required for good patient care, the rationale for such 
actions should be documented on the anesthesia 
record, as plaintiff ’s attorneys will attempt to use the 
guideline as a  de facto standard of care. 
1204 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 FIGURE 541  Annual in-hospital anesthesia-related 
deaths rates per million hospital surgical discharges and 
95% conﬁ dence intervals by age, United States, 1999-2005. 
 (Reproduced, with permission, from Li G, Warner M, Lang B, et al: 
Epidemiology of anesthesia-related mortality in the United States 
1999-2005. Anesthesiology 2009;110:759.) 
25
20
15
Deaths/million surgical discharges
Age (years)
0–4
5–14
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
≥85
10
5
0
 FIGURE 542  Total number of deaths by type of surgery in Veterans Aﬀ airs hospitals.  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Bishop M, Souders J, Peterson C, et al: Factors associated with unanticipated day of surgery deaths in Department of Veterans Aﬀ airs hospitals. 
Anesth Analg 2008;107:1924.) 
Spine
Intracranial
Urologic
Abdominal
Head/Neck
Other Vasc.
Aortic
Thoracic
Bone
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Number of deaths
included dyspnea, reduced albumin concentrations, 
increased bilirubin, and increased creatinine con-
centrations. A subsequent review of the 88 deaths 
that occurred on the surgical day noted that 13 of 
the patients might have benefi tted from better anes-
thesia care, and estimates suggest that death might 
have been prevented by better anesthesia practice in 
1 of 13,900 cases. Additionally, this study reported 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications
1205
that the immediate postsurgical period tended to 
be the time of unexpected mortality. Indeed, oft en 
missed opportunities for improved anesthetic care 
occur following complications when “failure to res-
cue” contributes to patient demise. 
 American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Closed 
Claims Project 
 Th e goal of the ASA Closed Claims Project is to 
identify common events leading to claims in anes-
thesia, patterns of injury, and strategies for injury 
prevention. It is a collection of closed malpractice 
claims that provides a “snapshot” of anesthesia liabil-
ity rather than a study of the incidence of anesthetic 
complications, as only events that lead to the fi ling 
of a malpractice claim are considered. Th e Closed 
Claims Project consists of trained physicians who 
review claims against anesthesiologists represented 
by some US malpractice insurers. Th e number of 
claims in the database continues to rise each year as 
new claims are closed and reported. Th e claims are 
grouped according to specifi c damaging events and 
complication type. Closed Claims Project analyses 
have been reported for airway injury, nerve injury, 
awareness, and so forth. Th ese analyses provide 
insights into the circumstances that result in claims; 
however, the incidence of a complication cannot 
be determined from closed claim data, because we 
know neither the actual incidence of the complica-
tion (some with the complication may not fi le suit), 
nor how many anesthetics were performed for which 
the particular complication might possibly develop. 
Other similar analyses have been performed in the 
United Kingdom, where National Health Service 
(NHS) Litigation Authority claims are reviewed. 
 Causes 
 Anesthetic mishaps can be categorized as 
preventable or unpreventable. Examples of 
the latter include sudden death syndrome, fatal 
idiosyncratic drug reactions, or any poor outcome 
that occurs despite proper management. How-
ever, studies of anesthetic-related deaths or near 
misses suggest that many accidents are prevent-
able. Of these preventable incidents, most involve 
human error ( Table 54–1 ), as opposed to equipment 
3
malfunctions ( Table 54–2 ). Unfortunately, some 
rate of human error is inevitable, and a prevent-
able accident is not necessarily evidence of incom-
petence. During the 1990s, the top three causes for 
claims in the ASA Closed Claims Project were death 
(22%), nerve injury (18%), and brain damage (9%). 
In a 2009 report based on an analysis of NHS liti-
gation records, anesthesia-related claims accounted 
for 2.5% of total claims fi led and 2.4% of the value 
of all NHS claims. Moreover, regional and obstetri-
cal anesthesia were responsible for 44% and 29%, 
respectively, of  anesthesia-related claims fi led. Th e 
authors of the latter study noted that there are two 
ways to examine data related to patient harm: critical 
incident and closed claim analyses. Clinical (or criti-
cal) incident data consider events that either cause 
harm or result in a “near-miss.” Comparison between 
clinical incident datasets and closed claims analyses 
demonstrates that not all critical events generate 
claims and that claims may be fi led in the absence of 
negligent care. Consequently, closed claims reports 
must always be considered in this context. 
 MORTALITY AND 
BRAIN INJURY 
 Trends in anesthesia-related death and brain dam-
age have been tracked for many years. In a Closed 
Claims Project report examining claims in the 
 TABLE 541 Human errors that may lead 
to preventable anesthetic accidents. 
 Unrecognized breathing circuit disconnection 
 Mistaken drug administration 
 Airway mismanagement 
 Anesthesia machine misuse 
 Fluid mismanagement 
 Intravenous line disconnection 
 TABLE 542 Equipment malfunctions that 
may lead to preventable anesthetic accidents. 
 Breathing circuit 
 Monitoring device 
 Ventilator 
 Anesthesia machine 
 Laryngoscope 
1206 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
period between 1975 and 2000, there were 6750 
claims ( Figure 54–3A and  B ), 2613 of which were 
for brain injury or death. Th e proportion of claims 
for brain injury or death was 56% in 1975, but had 
decreased to 27% by 2000. Th e primary pathological 
mechanisms by which these outcomes occurred 
were related to cardiovascular or respiratory prob-
lems. Early in the study period, respiratory-related 
damaging events were responsible for more than 
50% of brain injury/death claims, whereas cardio-
vascular-related damaging events were responsible 
for 27% of such claims; however, by the late 1980s, 
the percentage of damaging events related to respi-
ratory issues had decreased, with both respiratory 
and cardiovascular events being equally likely to 
contribute to severe brain injury or death. Respira-
tory damaging events included diffi  cult airway, 
esophageal intubation, and unexpected extubation. 
Cardiovascular damaging events were usually multi-
factorial. Closed claims reviewers found that anes-
thesia care was substandard in 64% of claims in 
which respiratory complications contributed to 
brain injury or death, but in only 28% of cases in 
which the primary mechanism of patient injury was 
cardiovascular in nature. Esophageal intubation, 
premature extubation, and inadequate ventilation 
were the primary mechanisms by which less than 
optimal anesthetic care was thought to have contrib-
uted to patient injury related to respiratory events. 
 Th e relative decrease in causes of death being 
attributed to respiratory rather cardiovascular 
damaging events during the review period was 
attributed to the increased use of pulse oximetry and 
capnometry. Consequently, if expired gas analysis 
was judged to be adequate, and a patient suff ered 
brain injury or death, a cardiovascular event was 
more likely to be considered causative. 
 A 2010 study examining the NHS Litiga-
tion Authority dataset noted that airway-related 
claims led to higher awards and poorer outcomes 
than did nonairway-related claims. Indeed, airway 
manipulation and central venous catheterization 
claims in this database were most associated with 
patient death. Trauma to the airway also generates 
signifi cant claims if esophageal or tracheal rupture 
occur. Postintubation mediastinitis should always 
4
 FIGURE 543  A: The total number of claims by the 
year of injury. Retrospective data collection began in 
1985. Data in this analysis includes data collected through 
December 2003.  B: Claims for death or permanent brain 
damage as percentage of total claims per year by year of 
injury. (Reproduced, with permission, from Cheney FW, Domino KB, 
Caplan RA, Posner KL: Nerve injury associated with anesthesia: a closed 
claims analysis. Anesthesiology 1999;90:1062.) 
1995
1990
1985
400
# of claims per year
A
B
300
200
100
0
1980
1975
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
2000
p<0.01 over years (logistic regression)
% per year
60
40
20
0
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1207 
be considered whenever there are repeated unsuc-
cessful airway manipulations, as early intervention 
presents the best opportunity to mitigate any inju-
ries incurred. 
 VASCULAR CANNULATION 
 Claims related to central venous access in the ASA 
database were associated with patient death 47% of 
the time and represented 1.7% of the 6449 claims 
reviewed. Complications secondary to guidewire or 
catheter embolism, tamponade, bloodstream infec-
tions, carotid artery puncture, hemothorax, and pneu-
mothorax all contributed to patient injury. Although 
guidewire and catheter embolisms were associated 
with generally lower level patient injuries, these com-
plications were generally attributed to substandard 
care. Tamponade claims following line placement 
were oft en for patient death. Th e authors of a 2004 
closed claims analysis recommended reviewing the 
chest radiograph following line placement and repo-
sitioning lines found in the heart or at an acute angle 
to reduce the likelihood of tamponade. Brain damage 
and stroke are associated with claims secondary to 
carotid cannulation. Multiple confi rmatory methods 
should be used to ensure that the internal jugular and 
not the carotid artery is cannulated. 
 Claims related to peripheral vascular can-
nulation in the ASA database accounted for 2% of 
6849 claims, 91% of which were for complications 
secondary to the extravasation of fl uids or drugs 
from peripheral intravenous catheters that resulted 
in extremity injury ( Figure 54–4 ). Air embolisms, 
infections, and vascular insuffi  ciency secondary to 
arterial spasm or thrombosis also resulted in claims. 
Of interest, intravenous catheter claims in patients 
who had undergone cardiac surgery formed the 
largest cohort of claims related to peripheral intrave-
nous catheters, most likely due to the usual practice 
of tucking the arms alongside the patient during the 
procedure, placing them out of view of the anesthe-
sia providers. Radial artery catheters seem to gen-
erate few closed claims; however, femoral artery 
catheters can lead to greater complications and 
potentially increased liability exposure. 
 OBSTETRIC ANESTHESIA 
 Both critical incident and closed claims analyses 
have been reported regarding complications and 
mortality related to obstetrical anesthesia. 
 In 
a 
study 
reviewing 
anesthesia-related 
maternal mortality in the United States using the 
Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System, which 
collects data on all reported deaths causally related 
to pregnancy, 86 of the 5946 pregnancy-related 
deaths reported to the Centers for Disease Control 
were thought to be anesthesia related or approxi-
mately 1.6% of total pregnancy related-deaths in 
the period 1991–2002. Th e anesthesia mortality 
rate in this period was 1.2 per million live births, 
compared with 2.9 per million live births in the 
 FIGURE 544  Injuries related to 
IV catheters (n = 127).  (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Bhananker S, Liau D, Kooner P, 
et al: Liability related to peripheral venous and 
arterial catheterization: a closed claims analysis. 
Anesth Analg 2009;109:124.) 
Swelling/
inflammation/
infection
17%
Nerve damage
17%
Skin slough
or necrosis
28%
Burns from
treatment of
IV infiltration
3%
Fasciotomy scar
16%
Frivolous
6%
Miscellaneous
6%
Air embolism
8%
1208 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
period 1979–1990. Th e decline in anesthesia-
related maternal mortality may be secondary to the 
decreased use of general anesthesia in parturients, 
reduced concentrations of bupivacaine in epidur-
als, improved airway management protocols and 
devices, and greater use of incremental (rather than 
bolus) dosing of epidural catheters. 
 In a 2009 study examining the epidemiology of 
anesthesia-related complications in labor and deliv-
ery in New York state in the period 2002–2005, an 
anesthesia-related complication was reported in 
4438 of 957,471 deliveries (0.46%). Th e incidence 
of complications was increased in patients under-
going cesarean section, those living in rural areas, 
and those with other medical conditions. Complica-
tions of neuraxial anesthesia (eg, postdural puncture 
headache) were most common, followed by sys-
temic complications, including aspiration or cardiac 
events. Other reported problems related to anes-
thetic dose administration and unintended over-
dosages.  African American women and those aged 
40–55 years were more likely to experience systemic 
complications, whereas Caucasian women and those 
aged 30–39 were more likely to experience compli-
cations related to neuraxial anesthesia. 
 ASA Closed Claims Project analyses were 
reported in 2009 for the period 1990–2003. Four 
hundred twenty-six claims from this period were 
compared with 190 claims in the database prior to 
1990. Aft er 1990, the proportion of claims for mater-
nal or fetal demise was lower than that recorded 
prior to 1990. Aft er 1990, the number of claims for 
maternal nerve injury increased. In the review of 
claims in which anesthesia was thought to have con-
tributed to the adverse outcome, anesthesia delay, 
poor communication, and substandard care were 
thought to have resulted in poor newborn outcomes. 
Prolonged attempts to secure neuraxial blockade in 
the setting of emergent cesarean section can contrib-
ute to adverse fetal outcome. Additionally, the closed 
claims review indicated that poor communication 
between the obstetrician and the anesthesiologist 
regarding the urgency of newborn delivery was 
likewise thought to have contributed to newborn 
demise and neonatal brain injury. 
 Maternal death claims were secondary to airway 
diffi  culty, maternal hemorrhage, and high neuraxial 
blockade. Th e most common claim associated with 
obstetrical anesthesia was related to nerve injury 
following regional anesthesia. Nerve injury can be 
secondary to neuraxial anesthesia and analgesia, 
but also due to obstetrical causes. Early neurological 
consultation to identify the source of nerve injury is 
suggested to discern if injury could be secondary to 
obstetrical rather than anesthesia interventions. 
 REGIONAL ANESTHESIA 
 In a closed claims analysis, peripheral nerve blocks 
were involved in 159 of the 6894 claims analyzed. 
Peripheral nerve block claims were for death (8%), 
permanent injuries (36%), and temporary inju-
ries (56%). Th e brachial plexus was the most com-
mon location for nerve injury. In addition to ocular 
injury, cardiac arrest following retrobulbar block 
contributed to anesthesiology claims. Cardiac arrest 
and epidural hematomas are two of the more com-
mon damaging events leading to severe injuries 
related to regional anesthesia. Neuraxial hematomas 
in both obstetrical and nonobstetrical patients were 
associated with coagulopathy (either intrinsic to the 
patient or secondary to medical interventions). In 
one study, cardiac arrest related to neuraxial anes-
thesia contributed to roughly one-third of the death 
or brain damage claims in both obstetrical and non-
obstetrical patients. Accidental intravenous injec-
tion and local anesthesia toxicity also contributed to 
claims for brain injury or death. 
 Nerve injuries constitute the third most com-
mon source of anesthesia litigation. A retrospec-
tive review of patient records and a claims database 
showed that 112 of 380,680 patients (0.03%) expe-
rienced perioperative nerve injury. Patients with 
hypertension and diabetes and those who were 
smokers were at increased risk of developing peri-
operative nerve injury. Perioperative nerve injuries 
may result from compression, stretch, ischemia, 
other traumatic events, and unknown causes. 
Improper positioning can lead to nerve compres-
sion, ischemia, and injury, however not every nerve 
injury is the result of improper positioning. Th e care 
received by patients with ulnar nerve injury was 
rarely judged to be inadequate in the ASA Closed 
Claims database. Even awake patients undergoing 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1209 
spinal anesthesia have been reported to experience 
upper extremity injury. Moreover, many peripheral 
nerve injuries do not become manifest until more 
than 48 hr aft er anesthesia and surgery, suggest-
ing that some nerve damage that occurs in surgical 
patients may arise from events taking place aft er the 
patient leaves the operating room setting. 
 PEDIATRIC ANESTHESIA 
 In a 2007 study reviewing 532 claims in pediatric 
patients aged <16 years in the ASA Closed Claims 
database from 1973–2000 ( Figure 54–5 ), a decrease 
in the proportion of claims for death and brain dam-
age was noted over the three decades. Likewise, the 
percentage of claims related to respiratory events 
also was reduced. Compared with before 1990, the 
percentage of claims secondary to respiratory events 
decreased during the years 1990–2000, account-
ing for only 23 % of claims in the latter study years 
compared with 51% of claims in the 1970s. More-
over, the percentage of claims that could be avoided 
by better monitoring decreased from 63% in the 
1970s to 16% in the 1990s. Death and brain dam-
age constitute the major complications for which 
claims are fi led. In the 1990s, cardiovascular events 
joined respiratory complications in sharing the pri-
mary causes of pediatric anesthesia litigation. In 
the study mentioned above, better monitoring and 
newer airway management techniques may have 
reduced the incidence of respiratory events leading 
to litigation-generating complications in the latter 
years of the review period. Additionally, the possi-
bility of a claim being fi led secondary to death or 
brain injury is greater in children who are in ASA 
classes 3, 4, or 5. 
 In a review of the Pediatric Perioperative 
Cardiac Arrest Registry, which collects informa-
tion from about 80 North American institutions 
that provide pediatric anesthesia, 193 arrests were 
reported in children between 1998 and 2004. Dur-
ing the study period, 18% of the arrests were “drug 
related,” compared with 37% of all arrests during the 
years 1994–1997. Cardiovascular arrests occurred 
most oft en (41%), with hypovolemia and hyperka-
lemia being the most common causes. Respiratory 
arrests (27%) were most commonly associated with 
laryngospasm. Central venous catheter placement 
with resultant vascular injury also contributed to 
some perioperative arrests. Arrests from cardio-
vascular causes occurred most frequently during 
surgery, whereas arrests from respiratory causes 
tended to occur aft er surgery. Th e reduced use of 
halothane seems to have decreased the incidence 
of arrests secondary to medication administration. 
However, hyperkalemia and electrolyte disturbances 
 FIGURE 545  Trends over time. 
Outcome, type of event, and prevention by 
better monitoring. Years are grouped for 
illustration.  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Jimenez N, Posner K, Cheney F, et al: An update on 
pediatric anesthesia liability: a closed claims analysis. 
Anesth Analg 2007;104:147.) 
90%
1973–1976
1977–1978
1979–1980
1981–1982
1983–1984
1985–1986
1987–1988
1989–1990
1991–1992
1993–1994
1995–1996
1997–2000
80%
% of alms in time period
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
Death or permanent brain damage
Preventable by monitoring
Respiratory events
Cardiovascular events
20%
10%
0%
1210 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
associated with transfusion and hypovolemia also 
contribute to sources of cardiovascular arrest in chil-
dren perioperatively. 
 A review of data from the Pediatric Periopera-
tive Cardiac Arrest Registry with a focus on chil-
dren with congenital heart disease found that such 
children were more likely to arrest perioperatively 
secondary to a cardiovascular cause. In particular, 
children with a single ventricle were at increased risk 
of perioperative arrest. Children with aortic stenosis 
and cardiomyopathy were similarly found to be at 
increased risk of cardiac arrest perioperatively. 
 OUT OF THE OPERATING ROOM 
ANESTHESIA AND MONITORED 
ANESTHESIA CARE 
 Review of the ASA Closed Claims Project database 
indicates that anesthesia at remote (out of the oper-
ating room) locations poses a risk to patients sec-
ondary to hypoventilation and excessive sedation. 
Remote location anesthesia care was more likely than 
operating room anesthesia care to involve a claim for 
death (54% vs 29%, respectively). Th e endoscopy 
suite and cardiac catheterization laboratory were 
the most frequent locations from which claims were 
generated. Monitored Anesthesia Care (MAC) was 
the most common technique employed in these 
claims. Overwhelmingly, adverse respiratory events 
were most frequently responsible for the injury. 
 An analysis of the ASA Closed Claims Project 
database focusing on MAC likewise revealed that 
oversedation and respiratory collapse most fre-
quently lead to claims. Claims for burn injuries suf-
fered in operating room fi res were also found in the 
database. Supplemental oxygen, draping, pooling of 
fl ammable antiseptic preparatory solutions, and sur-
gical cautery combine to produce the potential for 
operating room fi res. 
 EQUIPMENT PROBLEMS 
 “Equipment problems” is probably a misnomer; 
the ASA Closed Claims Project review of 72 claims 
involving gas delivery systems found that equipment 
 misuse was three times more common than equip-
ment  malfunction . Th e majority (76%) of adverse 
outcomes associated with gas delivery problems were 
either death or permanent neurological damage. 
 Errors in drug administration also typically 
involve human error. It has been suggested that as 
many as 20% of the drug doses given to hospitalized 
patients are incorrect. Errors in drug administration 
account for 4% of cases in the ASA Closed Claims 
Project, which found that errors resulting in claims 
were most frequently due to either incorrect dosage 
or unintentional administration of the wrong drug 
(syringe swap). In the latter category, accidental 
administration of epinephrine proved particularly 
dangerous. 
 Another type of human error occurs when the 
most critical problem is ignored because attention is 
inappropriately focused on a less important  problem 
or an incorrect solution (fi xation error). Serious 
anesthetic mishaps are oft en associated with distrac-
tions and other factors ( Table 54–3 ). Th e impact of 
most equipment failures is decreased or avoided 
when the problem is identifi ed during a routine 
 preoperative checkout performed by adequately 
trained personnel.  Many anesthetic fatalities 
occur only aft er a series of coincidental cir-
cumstances, misjudgments, and technical errors 
coincide ( mishap chain). 
 Prevention 
 Strategies to reduce the incidence of serious anes-
thetic complications include better monitoring and 
anesthetic techniques, improved education, more 
5
 TABLE 543 Factors associated with human 
errors and equipment misuse. 
Factor
Example
Inadequate 
preparation
No machine checkout or preoperative 
evaluation; haste and carelessness; 
production pressure
Inadequate 
experience and 
training
Unfamilarity with anesthetic 
technique or equipment
Environmental 
limitations
Inability to visualize surgical field: 
poor communication with surgeons
Physical and 
emotional factors
Fatigue; distraction caused by 
personal problems
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1211 
comprehensive protocols and standards of prac-
tice, and active risk management programs. Better 
monitoring and anesthetic techniques imply more 
comprehensive monitoring and ongoing patient 
assessments and better designed anesthesia equip-
ment and workspaces. Th e fact that most accidents 
occur during the maintenance phase of  anesthesia—
rather than during induction or emergence—implies 
a failure of vigilance. 
 Inspection, palpation, percussion, and ausculta-
tion of the patient provide important information. 
Instruments should supplement (but never replace) 
the anesthesiologist’s own senses. To minimize 
errors in drug administration, drug syringes and 
ampoules in the workspace should be restricted to 
those needed for the current specifi c case. Drugs 
should be consistently diluted to the same concen-
tration in the same way for each use, and they should 
be clearly labeled. Computer systems for scanning 
bar-coded drug labels are available that may help to 
reduce medication errors. Th e conduct of all anes-
thetics should follow a predictable pattern by which 
the anesthetist actively surveys the monitors, the 
surgical fi eld, and the patient on a recurrent basis. In 
particular, patient positioning should be frequently 
reassessed to avoid the possibility of compression 
or stretch injuries. When surgical necessity requires 
patients to be placed in positions where harm may 
occur or when hemodynamic manipulations (eg, 
deliberate hypotension) are requested or required, 
the anesthesiologist should note on the record the 
surgical request and remind the surgeon of any 
potential risks to the patient. 
 QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
 Risk management and continuous quality improve-
ment programs at the departmental level may 
reduce anesthetic morbidity and mortality rates 
by addressing monitoring standards, equipment, 
practice guidelines, continuing education, quality 
of care, and staffi  ng issues. Specifi c responsibilities 
of peer review committees include identifying (and, 
ideally, preventing) potential problems, formulat-
ing and periodically revising departmental policies, 
ensuring the availability of properly functioning 
anesthetic equipment, enforcing standards required 
for clinical privileges, and evaluating the appro-
priateness and quality of patient care. A quality 
improvement system impartially and continuously 
reviews complications, compliance with standards, 
and quality indicators. 
 AIRWAY INJURY 
 Th e daily insertion of endotracheal tubes, laryn-
geal mask airways, oral/nasal airways, gastric tubes, 
transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) probes, 
esophageal (bougie) dilators, and emergency air-
ways all involve the risk of airway structure damage. 
Common morbid complaints, such as sore throat 
and dysphagia, are usually self-limiting, but may 
also be nonspecifi c symptoms of more ominous 
complications. 
 Th e most common persisting airway injury is 
dental trauma. In a retrospective study of 600,000 
surgical cases, the incidence of injury requiring den-
tal intervention and repair was approximately 1 in 
4500. In most cases, laryngoscopy and endotracheal 
intubation were involved, and the upper incisors 
were the most frequently injured. Major risk fac-
tors for dental trauma included tracheal intubation, 
preexisting poor dentition, and patient character-
istics associated with diffi  cult airway management 
(including limited neck motion, previous head and 
neck surgery, craniofacial abnormalities, and a his-
tory of diffi  cult intubation). 
 Other types of airway trauma are rare. Although 
there are scattered case reports in the literature, the 
most comprehensive analysis was performed by the 
ASA Closed Claims Project. Th is report describes 
266 claims, of which the least serious were temporo-
mandibular joint (TMJ) injuries that were all asso-
ciated with otherwise uncomplicated intubations 
and occurred mostly in females younger than age 
60 years. Approximately 25% of these patients had 
previous TMJ disease. Laryngeal injuries included 
vocal cord paralysis, granuloma, and arytenoid dis-
location. Most tracheal injuries were associated with 
emergency surgical tracheotomy, but a few were 
related to endotracheal intubation. Some injuries 
occurred during seemingly easy, routine intuba-
tions. Proposed mechanisms include excessive tube 
movement in the trachea, excessive cuff  infl ation 
1212 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
leading to pressure necrosis, and inadequate relax-
ation. Esophageal perforations contributed to death 
in 5 of 13 patients. Esophageal perforation oft en 
presents with delayed-onset subcutaneous emphy-
sema or pneumothorax, unexpected febrile state, 
and sepsis. Pharyngoesophageal perforation is asso-
ciated with diffi  cult intubation, age over 60 years, 
and female gender. As in tracheal perforation, signs 
and symptoms are oft en delayed in onset. Initial sore 
throat, cervical pain, and cough oft en progressed 
to fever, dysphagia, and dyspnea, as mediastinitis, 
abscess, or pneumonia develop. Mortality rates of 
up to 50% have been reported aft er esophageal per-
foration, with better outcomes attributable to rapid 
detection and treatment. 
 Minimizing the risk of airway injury begins 
with the preoperative assessment. A thorough air-
way examination will help to determine the risk 
for diffi  culty Documentation of current dentition 
(including dental work) should be included. Many 
practitioners believe preoperative consent should 
include a discussion of the risk of dental, oral, vocal 
cord, and esophageal trauma in every patient who 
could potentially need any airway manipulation. If 
a diffi  cult airway is suspected, a more detailed dis-
cussion of risks (eg, emergency tracheotomy) is 
appropriate. In such cases, emergency airway sup-
plies and experienced help should be available. Th e 
ASA algorithm for diffi  cult airway management is a 
useful guide. Aft er a diffi  cult intubation, one should 
seek latent signs of esophageal perforation and have 
an increased level of suspicion for airway trauma. 
When intubation cannot be accomplished by routine 
means, the patient or guardian should be informed 
to alert future anesthesia providers of potential air-
way diffi  culty. 
 Emergent nonoperating room intubations pres-
ent unique challenges. In a review of 3423 out of the 
operating room intubations, 10% were considered to 
be “diffi  cult,” and 4% of these intubations were asso-
ciated with some form of complication, including 
aspiration, esophageal intubation, or dental injury. 
In this report, intubation bougies were employed in 
56% of diffi  cult intubations. Th e increased availabil-
ity of video laryngoscopes and bougies have made 
emergent intubations less stressful and less likely to 
be unsuccessful. 
 PERIPHERAL NERVE INJURY 
 Nerve injury is a complication of being hospital-
ized, with or without surgery, regional, or general 
anesthesia. Peripheral nerve injury is a frequent 
and vexing problem. In most cases, these injuries 
resolve within 6–12 weeks, but some are permanent. 
Because peripheral neuropathies are commonly 
associated (oft en incorrectly!) with failures of patient 
positioning, a review of mechanisms and prevention 
is necessary. 
 Th e most commonly injured peripheral nerve 
is the ulnar nerve ( Figure 54–6 ). In a retrospective 
study of over 1 million patients, ulnar neuropathy 
(persisting for more than 3 months) occurred in 
approximately 1 in 2700 patients. Of interest, ini-
tial symptoms were most frequently noted more 
than 24 hr aft er a surgical procedure. Risk factors 
included male gender, hospital stay greater than 
14 days, and very thin or obese body habitus. More 
than 50% of these patients regained full sensory and 
motor function within 1 yr. Anesthetic technique 
was not implicated as a risk factor; 25% of patients 
with ulnar neuropathy underwent monitored care 
or lower extremity regional technique. Th e ASA 
Closed Claims Project fi ndings support most of 
these results, including the delayed onset of symp-
toms and the lack of relationship between anesthe-
sia technique and injury. Th is study also noted that 
many neuropathies occurred despite notation of 
extra padding over the elbow area, further negat-
ing compression as a possible mechanism of injury. 
Finally, the ASA Closed Claims Project investigators 
found no deviation from the standard of care in the 
majority of patients who manifested nerve damage 
perioperatively. 
 The Role of Positioning 
 Other peripheral nerve injuries seem to be more 
closely related to positioning or surgical procedure. 
Th ey may involve the peroneal nerve, the brachial 
plexus, or the femoral and sciatic nerves. External 
pressure on a nerve could compromise its perfusion, 
disrupt its cellular integrity, and eventually result in 
edema, ischemia, and necrosis. Pressure injuries are 
particularly likely when nerves pass through closed 
compartments or take a superfi cial course (eg, the 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1213 
peroneal nerve around the fi bula). Lower extremity 
neuropathies, particularly those involving the pero-
neal nerve, have been associated with such factors as 
extreme degrees (high) and prolonged (greater than 
2 h) durations of the lithotomy position. But, these 
nerve injuries also sometimes occur when such con-
ditions are not present. Other risk factors for lower 
extremity neuropathy include hypotension, thin 
body habitus, older age, vascular disease, diabetes, 
and cigarette smoking. An axillary (chest) “roll” is 
commonly used to reduce pressure on the inferior 
shoulder of patients in the lateral decubitus position. 
Th is roll should be located caudad to the axilla to 
prevent direct pressure on the brachial plexus and 
large enough to relieve any pressure from the mat-
tress on the lower shoulder. 
 Th e data are convincing that some periph-
eral nerve injuries are not preventable. Th e risk 
of peripheral neuropathy should be included in 
discussions leading to informed consent. When 
reasonable, patients with contractures (or other 
causes of limited fl exibility) can be positioned before 
induction of anesthesia to check for feasibility and 
discomfort. Final positioning should be evaluated 
prior to draping. In most circumstances, the head 
and neck should be kept in a neutral position. Shoul-
der braces to support patients maintained in a Tren-
delenberg position should be avoided if possible, 
and shoulder abduction and lateral rotation should 
be minimized. Th e upper extremities should not be 
extended greater than 90° at any joint. (Th ere should 
be no continuous external compression on the knee, 
ankle, or heel.) Although injuries may still occur, 
additional padding may be helpful in vulnerable 
areas. Documentation should include information 
on positioning, including the presence of padding. 
Finally, patients who complain of sensory or motor 
dysfunction in the postoperative period should be 
 FIGURE 546  A: Pronation of the forearm can cause 
external compression of the ulnar nerve in the cubital 
tunnel.  B: Forearm supination avoids this problem. 
(Modiﬁ ed and reproduced, with permission, from Wadsworth TG: The 
cubital tunnel and the external compression syndrome. Anesth Analg 
1974;53:303.) 
Medial epicondyle
Arcuate ligament
Humerus
Ulnar nerve
Olecranon process
Pronation
Supination
A
B
1214 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
reassured that this is usually a temporary condition. 
Motor and sensory function should be documented. 
When symptoms persist for more than 24 hr, the 
patient should be referred to a neurologist (or a 
physiatrist or hand surgeon) who is knowledgeable 
about perioperative nerve damage for evaluation. 
Physiological testing, such as nerve conduction and 
electromyographic studies, can be useful to docu-
ment whether nerve damage is a new or chronic 
condition. In the latter case, fi brillations will be 
observed in chronically denervated muscles. 
 Complications Related to Positioning 
 Changes of body position have physiological con-
sequences that can be exaggerated in disease states. 
General and regional anesthesia may limit the car-
diovascular response to such a change. Even posi-
tions that are safe for short periods may eventually 
lead to complications in persons who are not able 
to move in response to pain. For example, the alco-
holic patient who passes out on a hard fl oor or a park 
bench may awaken with a brachial plexus injury. 
Similarly, regional and general anesthesia abolish 
protective refl exes and predispose patients to injury. 
 Complications of postural hypotension, the 
most common physiological consequence of posi-
tioning, can be minimized by avoiding abrupt or 
extreme position changes (eg, sitting up quickly), 
reversing the position if vital signs deteriorate, keep-
ing the patient well hydrated, and having vasoac-
tive drugs available to treat hypotension. Whereas 
maintaining a reduced level of general anesthesia 
will decrease the likelihood of hypotension, light 
general anesthesia will increase the likelihood that 
movement of the endotracheal tube during posi-
tioning will cause the patient to cough and become 
hypertensive. 
 Many complications, including air embolism, 
blindness from sustained pressure on the globe, and 
fi nger amputation following a crush injury, can be 
caused by improper patient positioning ( Table 54–4 ). 
Th ese complications are best prevented by evaluat-
ing the patient’s postural limitations during the pre-
anesthetic visit; padding pressure points, susceptible 
nerves, and any area of the body that will  possibly 
be in contact with the operating table or its attach-
ments; avoiding fl exion or extension of a joint to its 
limit; having an awake patient assume the position 
 TABLE 544 Complications associated with patient positioning. 
Complication
Position
Prevention
Venous air embolism
Sitting, prone, reverse 
Trendelenburg
Maintain adequate venous pressure; ligate “open” veins 
Alopecia
Supine, lithotomy, 
Trendelenburg
Avoid prolonged hypotension, padding, and occasional head turning.
Backache
Any
Lumbar support, padding, and slight hip flexion.
Extremity compartment 
syndromes
Especially lithotomy
Maintain perfusion pressure and avoid external compression.
Corneal abrasion
Any, but especially prone
Taping and/or lubricating eye.
Digit amputation
Any
Check for protruding digits before changing table configuration.
Nerve palsies
 Brachial plexus
Any
Avoid stretching or direct compression at neck, shoulder, or axilla.
 Common peroneal
Lithotomy, lateral 
decubitus
Avoid sustained pressure on lateral aspect of upper fibula.
 Radial
Any
Avoid compression of lateral humerus.
 Ulnar
Any
Avoid sustained pressure on ulnar groove.
Retinal ischemia
Prone, sitting
Avoid pressure on globe.
Skin necrosis
Any
Avoid sustained pressure over bony prominences.
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1215 
to ensure comfort; and understanding the poten-
tial complications of each position. Monitors must 
oft en be disconnected during patient repositioning, 
making this a time of greater risk for unrecognized 
hemodynamic derangement. 
 Compartment syndromes can result from 
hemorrhage into a closed space following a vascu-
lar puncture or prolonged venous outfl ow obstruc-
tion, particularly when associated with hypotension. 
In severe cases, this may lead to muscle necrosis, 
myoglobinuria, and renal damage, unless the pres-
sure within the extremity compartment is relieved 
by surgical decompression (fasciotomy) or in the 
abdominal compartment by laparotomy. 
 AWARENESS 
 A continuing series of media reports have imprinted 
the fear of awareness under general anesthesia into 
the psyche of the general population. Accounts of 
recall and helplessness while paralyzed have made 
unconsciousness a primary concern of patients 
undergoing general anesthesia. When unintended 
intraoperative awareness does occur, patients may 
exhibit symptoms ranging from mild anxiety to 
posttraumatic stress disorder (eg, sleep disturbances, 
nightmares, and social diffi  culties). 
 Although the incidence is diffi  cult to measure, 
approximately 2% of the closed claims in the ASA 
Closed Claims Project database relate to awareness 
under anesthesia. Analysis of the NHS Litigation 
Authority database from 1995–2007 revealed that 
19 of 93 relevant claims were for “awake paralysis.” 
Clearly, awareness is of great concern to patients and 
may lead to litigation. Certain types of surgeries are 
most frequently associated with awareness, includ-
ing those for major trauma, obstetrics, and major 
cardiac procedures. In some instances, awareness 
may result from the reduced depth of anesthesia that 
can be tolerated by the patient. In early studies, recall 
rates for intraoperative events during major trauma 
surgery have been reported to be as frequent as 43%; 
the incidence of awareness during cardiac surgery 
and cesarean sections is 1.5% and 0.4%, respectively. 
As of 1999, the ASA Closed Claims Project reported 
79 awareness claims; approximately 20% of the 
claims were for awake paralysis, and the remainder 
of the claims were for recall under general anesthe-
sia. Most claims for awake paralysis were thought 
to be due to errors in drug labeling and administra-
tion, such as administering paralytics before induc-
ing narcosis. Since the 1999 review, another 71 cases 
have appeared in the database. Claims for recall were 
more likely in women undergoing general anesthesia 
without a volatile agent. Patients with long term sub-
stance abuse may have increased anesthesia require-
ments which if not met can lead to awareness. 
 Other specifi c causes of awareness include inad-
equate inhalational anesthetic delivery (eg, from 
vaporizer malfunction) and medication errors. Some 
patients may complain of awareness, when, in fact, 
they received regional anesthesia or monitored anes-
thesia care; thus, anesthetists should make sure that 
patients have reasonable expectations when regional 
or local techniques are employed. Likewise, patients 
requesting regional or local anesthesia because they 
want to “see it all” and/ or “stay in control” oft en can 
become irate when sedation dulls their memory of 
the perioperative experience. In all cases, frank dis-
cussion between anesthesia staff  and the patient is 
necessary to avoid unrealistic expectations. 
 Some clinicians routinely discuss the possibil-
ity of intraoperative recall and the steps that will be 
taken to minimize it as part of the informed consent 
for general anesthesia. Th is makes particular sense 
for those procedures in which recall is more likely. It 
is advisable to also remind patients who are under-
going monitored anesthesia care with sedation that 
awareness is expected. Volatile anesthetics should 
be administered at a level consistent with amne-
sia. If this is not possible, benzodiazepines (and/or 
scopolamine) can be used. Movement of a patient 
may indicate inadequate anesthetic depth. Docu-
mentation should include end-tidal concentrations 
of anesthetic gases (when available) and dosages of 
amnesic drugs. Use of a bispectral index scale (BIS) 
monitor or similar monitors may be helpful although 
randomized clinical trials have failed to demonstrate 
a reduced incidence of awareness with use of BIS 
when compared with a group receiving appropriate 
concentrations of volatile agents. Finally, if there is 
evidence of intraoperative awareness during post-
operative rounds, the practitioner should obtain a 
detailed account of the experience, answer patient 
1216 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
questions, be very empathetic, and refer the patient 
for psychological counseling if appropriate. 
 EYE INJURY 
 A wide range of conditions from simple corneal 
abrasion to blindness have been reported. Corneal 
abrasion is by far the most common and transient 
eye injury. Th e ASA Closed Claims Project identifi ed 
a small number of claims for abrasion, in which the 
cause was rarely identifi ed (20%) and the incidence 
of permanent injury was low (16%). It also identifi ed 
a subset of claims for blindness that resulted from 
patient movement during ophthalmological surgery. 
Th ese cases occurred in patients receiving either 
general anesthesia or monitored anesthesia care. 
 Although the cause of corneal abrasion may not 
be obvious, securely closing the eye lids with tape 
aft er loss of consciousness (but prior to intubation) 
and avoiding direct contact between eyes and oxy-
gen masks, drapes, lines, and pillows (particularly 
during monitored anesthesia care, in transport, 
and in nonsupine positions) can help to minimize 
the possibility of injury. Adequate anesthetic depth 
(and, in most cases, paralysis) should be maintained 
to prevent movement during ophthalmological sur-
gery under general anesthesia. In patients scheduled 
for MAC, the patient must understand that move-
ment under monitored care is hazardous and, thus, 
that only minimal sedation may be administered to 
ensure that he or she can cooperate. 
 Ischemic optic neuropathy (ION) is a devas-
tating perioperative complication. ION is now the 
most common cause of postoperative vision loss. 
Postoperative vision loss is most commonly reported 
aft er cardiopulmonary bypass, radical neck dissec-
tion, and spinal surgeries in the prone position. 
Both preoperative and intraoperative factors may 
be contributory. Many of the case reports implicate 
preexisting hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery 
disease, and smoking, suggesting that preoperative 
vascular abnormalities may play a role. Intraopera-
tive deliberate hypotension and anemia have also 
been implicated (in spine surgery), perhaps because 
of their potential to reduce oxygen delivery. Finally, 
prolonged surgical time in positions that compro-
mise venous outfl ow (prone, head down, compressed 
abdomen) have also been found to be factors in spine 
surgery. Symptoms are usually present immediately 
upon awakening from anesthesia, but have been 
reported up to 12 days postoperatively. Such symp-
toms range from decreased visual acuity to complete 
blindness. Analysis of case records submitted to the 
ASA Postoperative Vision Loss Registry revealed 
that vision loss was secondary to ION in 83 of 
93 cases. Instrumentation of the spine was associ-
ated with ION when surgery lasted more than 6 hr 
and blood loss was more than 1 L. ION can occur in 
patients whose eyes are free of pressure secondary to 
the use of pin fi xation, indicating that direct pressure 
on the eye is not required to produce ION. 
 Increased venous pressure in patients in the 
Trendelenberg position may reduce blood fl ow to 
the optic nerve. 
 It is diffi  cult to formulate recommendations 
to prevent this complication because risk factors 
for ION are oft en unavoidable. Steps that might be 
taken include: (1) limiting the degree and duration 
of hypotension during controlled (deliberate) hypo-
tension, (2) administering a transfusion to severely 
anemic patients who seem to be at risk of ION, and 
(3) discussing with the surgeon the possibility of 
staged operations in high-risk patients to limit pro-
longed procedures. 
 Of note, postoperative vision loss can be caused 
by other mechanisms as well, including angle closure 
glaucoma or embolic phenomenon to the cortex or 
retina. Immediate evaluation is advised. 
 CARDIOPULMONARY ARREST 
DURING SPINAL ANESTHESIA 
 Sudden cardiac arrest during an otherwise routine 
administration of spinal anesthetics is an uncom-
mon complication. Th e initial published report was 
a closed claims analysis of 14 patients who expe-
rienced cardiac arrest during spinal anesthesia. 
Th e cases primarily involved young (average age 
36 years), relatively healthy (ASA physical status 
I–II) patients who were given appropriate doses of 
local anesthetic that produced a high dermatomal 
level of block prior to arrest (T4 level). Respiratory 
insuffi  ciency with hypercarbia due to sedatives was 
thought to be a potential contributing factor. Th e 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1217 
average time from induction of spinal anesthesia to 
arrest was 36 min, and, in all cases, arrest was pre-
ceded by a gradual decline in heart rate and blood 
pressure. Just prior to arrest, the most common signs 
were bradycardia, hypotension, and cyanosis. Treat-
ment consisted of ventilatory support, ephedrine, 
atropine, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (average 
duration 10.9 min), and epinephrine. Despite these 
interventions, 10 patients remained comatose and 
4 patients regained consciousness with signifi cant 
neurological defi cits. A subsequent study concluded 
that such arrests had little relationship to sedation, 
but were related more to extensive degrees of sym-
pathetic blockade, leading to unopposed vagal tone 
and profound bradycardia. Rapid appropriate treat-
ment of bradycardia and hypotension is essential to 
minimize the risk of arrest. Early treatment of bra-
dycardia with atropine may prevent a downward 
spiral. Stepwise doses of ephedrine, epinephrine, 
and other vasoactive drugs should be given to treat 
hypotension. If cardiopulmonary arrest occurs, ven-
tilatory support, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
and full resuscitation doses of atropine and epineph-
rine should be administered without delay. 
 HEARING LOSS 
 Perioperative hearing loss is usually transient and 
oft en goes unrecognized. Th e incidence of low- 
frequency hearing loss following dural puncture may 
be as high as 50%. It seems to be due to cerebrospinal 
fl uid leak, and, if persistent, can be relieved with an 
epidural blood patch. Hearing loss following general 
anesthesia can be due to a variety of causes and is 
much less predictable. Mechanisms include middle 
ear barotrauma, vascular injury, and ototoxicity of 
drugs (aminoglycosides, loop diuretics, nonsteroidal 
antiinfl ammatory drugs, and antineoplastic agents). 
Hearing loss following cardiopulmonary bypass is 
usually unilateral and is thought to be due to embo-
lism and ischemic injury to the organ of Corti. 
 ALLERGIC REACTIONS 
 Hypersensitivity (or allergic) reactions are exagger-
ated immunological responses to antigenic stimula-
tion in previously sensitized persons. Th e antigen, or 
allergen, may be a protein, polypeptide, or smaller 
molecule. Moreover, the allergen may be the sub-
stance itself, a metabolite, or a breakdown product. 
Patients may be exposed to antigens through the 
respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, eyes, skin 
and from previous intravenous, intramuscular, or 
peritoneal exposure. 
 Anaphylaxis occurs when infl ammatory agents 
are released from basophils and mast cells as a result 
of an antigen interacting with the immunoglobulin 
(Ig) E. Anaphylactoid reactions manifest themselves 
in the same manner as anaphylactic reactions, but 
are not the result of an interaction with IgE. Direct 
activation of complement and IgG-mediated com-
plement activation can result in similar infl amma-
tory mediator release and activity. 
 Depending on the antigen and the immune sys-
tem components involved, hypersensitivity reactions 
are classically divided into four types ( Table 54–5 ). 
In many cases, an allergen (eg, latex) may cause 
more than one type of hypersensitivity reaction. 
Type I reactions involve antigens that cross-link 
IgE antibodies, triggering the release of infl amma-
tory mediators from mast cells. In type II reactions, 
 complement-fi xing (C1-binding) IgG antibodies 
bind to antigens on cell surfaces, activating the classic 
complement pathway and lysing the cells. Examples 
of type II reactions include hemolytic transfusion 
reactions and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. 
Type III reactions occur when antigen–antibody 
 TABLE 545 Hypersensitivity reactions. 
 Type I (immediate)
  Atopy 
  Urticaria—angioedema 
  Anaphylaxis 
 Type II (cytotoxic)
  Hemolytic transfusion reactions 
  Autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
  Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
 Type III (immune complex)
  Arthus reaction 
  Serum sickness 
  Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
 Type IV (delayed, cell-mediated)
  Contact dermatitis 
  Tuberculin-type hypersensitivity 
  Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
1218 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
(IgG or IgM) immune complexes are deposited in 
tissues, activating complement and generating che-
motactic factors that attract neutrophils to the area. 
Th e activated neutrophils cause tissue injury by 
releasing lysosomal enzymes and toxic products. 
Type III reactions include serum sickness reactions 
and acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Type IV 
reactions, oft en referred to as delayed hypersensitiv-
ity reactions, are mediated by CD4 + T lymphocytes 
that have been sensitized to a specifi c antigen by 
prior exposure. Prior TH1 response causes expres-
sion of a T-cell receptor protein that is specifi c for 
the antigen. Reexposure to the antigen causes these 
lymphocytes to produce lymphokines—interleukins 
(IL), interferon (IFN), and tumor necrosis factor-γ 
(TNF-γ)—that attract and activate infl ammatory 
mononuclear cells over 48–72 hr. Production of IL-1 
and IL-6 by antigen-processing cells amplifi es clonal 
expression of the specifi c sensitized T cells and 
attracts other types of T cells. IL-2 secretion trans-
forms CD8 + cytotoxic T cells into killer cells; IL-4 
and IFN-γ cause macrophages to undergo epithe-
lioid transformation, oft en producing granuloma. 
Examples of type IV reactions are those associated 
with tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, schistosomiasis, 
and hypersensitivity pneumonitis and some autoim-
mune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis and 
Wegener’s granulomatosis. 
 1. Immediate Hypersensitivity 
Reactions 
 Initial exposure of a susceptible person to an antigen 
induces CD4 + T cells to lymphokines that activate 
and transform specifi c B lymphocytes into plasma 
cells, producing allergen-specifi c IgE antibodies 
( Figure 54–7 ). Th e Fc portion of these antibodies 
then associates with high affi  nity receptors on the 
cell surface of tissue mast cells and circulating baso-
phils. During subsequent reexposure to the antigen, 
it binds the Fab portion of adjacent IgE antibodies 
on the mast cell surface, inducing degranulation and 
release of infl ammatory lipid mediators and addi-
tional cytokines from the mast cell. Th e end result 
is the release of histamine, tryptase, proteoglycans 
(heparin and chondroitin sulfate), and carboxy-
peptidases. Prostaglandin (mainly prostaglandin 
D 2 ) and leukotriene (B 4 , C 4 , D 4 , E 4 , and platelet-
activating factor) synthesis is also increased. Th e 
combined eff ects of these mediators can produce 
arteriolar vasodilatation, increased vascular perme-
ability, increased mucus secretion, smooth muscle 
contraction, and other clinical manifestations of 
type I reactions. 
 Type I hypersensitivity reactions are classifi ed 
as atopic or nonatopic. Atopic disorders typically 
aff ect the skin or respiratory tract and include aller-
gic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, and allergic asthma. 
Nonatopic hypersensitivity disorders include urti-
caria, angioedema, and anaphylaxis; when these 
reactions are mild, they are confi ned to the skin 
(urticaria) or subcutaneous tissue (angioedema), 
but when they are severe, they become generalized 
and a life-threatening medical emergency (ana-
phylaxis). Urticarial lesions are characteristically 
well-circumscribed skin wheals with raised ery-
thematous borders and blanched centers; they are 
intensely pruritic. Angioedema presents as deep, 
nonpitting cutaneous edema from marked vasodi-
latation and increased permeability of subcutaneous 
blood vessels. When angioedema is extensive, it can 
be associated with large fl uid shift s; when it involves 
the pharyngeal or laryngeal mucosa, it can rapidly 
compromise the airway. 
 2. Anaphylactic Reactions 
 Anaphylaxis is an exaggerated response to an 
allergen (eg, antibiotic) that is mediated by a type 
I hypersensitivity reaction. Th e syndrome appears 
within minutes of exposure to a specifi c antigen in 
a sensitized person and characteristically presents as 
acute respiratory distress, circulatory shock, or both. 
Death may occur from asphyxiation or irreversible 
circulatory shock. Th e incidence of anaphylactic 
reactions during anesthesia has been estimated at a 
rate of 1:3500 to 1:20000 anesthetics. Mortality from 
anaphylaxis can be as frequent as 4% of cases with 
brain injury, occurring in another 2% of surviving 
patients. A French study evaluating 789 anaphylactic 
and anaphylactoid reactions reported that the most 
common sources of perioperative anaphylaxis were 
neuromuscular blockers (58%), latex (17%), and 
antibiotics (15%). 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1219 
 FIGURE 547  A: Induction of IgE-mediated allergic 
sensitivity to drugs and other allergens.  B: Response of 
IgE-sensitized cells to subsequent exposure to allergens. 
Ig, immunoglobulin.  (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Katzung BG [editor]:  Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 8th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2001.) 
Macrophage
Free drug
Carrier
(eg, albumin)
Drugcarrier
complex
Mitosis
Reaginic (IgE)
antibody-forming
precursor cell
Prednisone
blocks
IgE antibody
producing cells
IgE reaginic
antibodies
Fixation of IgE
antibodies to
mast cells and
blood basophils
Binding of allergen to specific IgE antibody
on surface of mast cell induces mediator release
B
A
Degranulation and
mediator release
Isoproterenol, theophylline,
epinephrine, and cromolyn
partially block
Histamine, kinins,
leukotrienes (SRS),
prostaglandins, serotonin,
platelet-activating factor
Antihistamines
partially block
Smooth muscle
and other
end organs
 Th e most important mediators of anaphylaxis 
are histamine, leukotrienes, basophil kallikrein 
(BK-A,) and platelet-activating factor. Th ey increase 
vascular permeability and contract smooth muscle. 
H 1 -receptor activation contracts bronchial smooth 
muscle, whereas H 2 -receptor activation causes 
vasodilatation, enhanced mucus secretion, tachycar-
dia, and increased myocardial contractility. BK-A 
cleaves bradykinin from kininogen; bradykinin 
increases vascular permeability and vasodilatation 
and contracts smooth muscle. Activation of Hage-
man factor can initiate intravascular coagulation. 
1220 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis, neu-
trophil chemotactic factor, and leukotriene B 4 attract 
infl ammatory cells that mediate additional tissue 
injury. Angioedema of the pharynx, larynx, and 
trachea produce upper airway obstruction, whereas 
bronchospasm and mucosal edema result in lower 
airway obstruction. Histamine may preferentially 
constrict large airways, whereas leukotrienes pri-
marily aff ect smaller peripheral airways. Transuda-
tion of fl uid into the skin (angioedema) and viscera 
produces hypovolemia and shock, whereas arte-
riolar vasodilatation decreases systemic vascular 
resistance. Coronary hypoperfusion and arterial 
hypoxemia promote arrhythmias and myocardial 
ischemia. Leukotriene and prostaglandin media-
tors may also cause coronary vasospasm. Prolonged 
circulatory shock leads to progressive lactic acido-
sis and ischemic damage to vital organs.  Table 54–6
summarizes important manifestations of anaphylac-
tic reactions. 
Anaphylactoid reactions resemble anaphylaxis 
but do not depend on IgE antibody interaction with 
antigen. A drug can directly release histamine from 
mast cells (eg, urticaria following high-dose mor-
phine sulfate) or activate complement.  Despite 
diff ering mechanisms, anaphylactic and ana-
phylactoid reactions typically are clinically indistin-
guishable and equally life-threatening.  Table 54–7
lists common causes of anaphylactic and anaphylac-
toid reactions. 
 Factors that may predispose patients to these 
reactions include pregnancy, known atopy, and pre-
vious drug exposure. Such reactions are more com-
mon in younger than older patients. Laboratory 
identifi cation of patients who have experienced an 
adverse allergic reaction or who may be particularly 
6
 TABLE 546 Clinical manifestations 
of anaphylaxis. 
Organ System
Signs and Symptoms
Cardiovascular 
Hypotension,  1  tachycardia, arrhythmias
Pulmonary
Bronchospasm, 1  cough, dyspnea, 
pulmonary edema, laryngeal edema, 
hypoxia
Dermatological
Urticaria, 1  facial edema, pruritus
  1  Key signs during general anesthesia.
 TABLE 547 Causes of anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reactions. 
Anaphylactic reactions against 
polypeptides
Venoms (Hymenoptera, fire ant, snake, jellyfish)
Airborne allergens (pollen, molds, danders)
Foods (peanuts, milk, egg, seafood, grain)
Enzymes (trypsin, streptokinase, chymopapain, asparaginase)
Heterologous serum (tetanus antitoxin, antilymphocyte globulin, antivenin)
Human proteins (insulin, corticotropin, vasopressin, serum and seminal proteins)
Latex
Anaphylactic reactions against 
hapten carrier
Antibiotics (penicillin, cephalosporins, sulfonamides)
Disinfectants (ethylene oxide, chlorhexidine)
Local anesthetics (procaine)
Anaphylactoid reactions
Polyionic solutions (radiocontrast medium, polymyxin B)
Opioids (morphine, meperidine)
Hypnotics (propofol, thiopental)
Muscle relaxants (rocuronium, succinylcholine, cisatracurium)
Synthetic membranes (dialysis)
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Preservatives (sulfites, benzoates)
Protamine
Dextran
Steroids
Exercise
Idiopathic
Adapted and reproduced, with permission, from Bochner BS, Lichtenstein LM: N Engl J Med 1991;324:1786.
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications
1221
susceptible is oft en aided by intradermal skin testing, 
leukocyte or basophil degranulation testing (hista-
mine release test), or radio-allergosorbent testing 
(RAST). Th e latter is capable of measuring the level 
of drug-specifi c IgE antibody in the serum. Serum 
tryptase measurement is helpful in confi rming the 
diagnosis of an anaphylactic reaction. Prophylactic 
pretreatment with histamine receptor antagonists 
and corticosteroids decreases the severity of the 
reaction. Treatment must be immediate and tailored 
to the severity of the reaction ( Table 54–8 ). 
 3. Allergic Reactions 
to Anesthetic Agents 
 True anaphylaxis due to anesthetic agents is 
rare; anaphylactoid reactions are much more 
common. Risk factors associated with hypersensitiv-
ity to anesthetics include female gender, atopic his-
tory, preexisting allergies, and previous anesthetic 
exposures. Muscle relaxants are the most common 
cause of anaphylaxis during anesthesia, with an esti-
mated incidence of 1 in 6500 patients. Th ey account 
for almost 60% of perioperative anaphylactic reac-
tions. In many instances, there was no previous 
exposure to muscle relaxants. Investigators suggest 
that over-the-counter drugs, cosmetics, and food 
products, many of which contain tertiary or quater-
nary ammonium ions, can sensitize susceptible indi-
viduals. A French study found that, in decreasing 
order of frequency, rocuronium, succinylcholine, 
and atracurium were most oft en responsible; this 
likely refl ects the propensity to cause anaphylaxis, 
together with frequency of use. 
7
 Although rarer, hypnotic agents can also be 
responsible for some allergic reactions. Th e inci-
dence of anaphylaxis for thiopental and propofol 
is 1 in 30,000 and 1 in 60,000, respectively.  Allergic 
reactions to etomidate, ketamine, and benzodi-
azepines are exceedingly rare. True anaphylactic 
reactions due to opioids are far less common than 
nonimmune histamine release. Similarly, ana-
phylactic reactions to local anesthetics are much 
less common than vasovagal reactions, toxic reac-
tions to accidental intravenous injections, and side 
eff ects from absorbed or intravenously injected epi-
nephrine. IgE-mediated reactions to ester-type local 
anesthetics, however, are well described secondary 
to reaction to the metabolite, para-aminobenzoic 
acid, In contrast, true anaphylaxis due to amide-
type local anesthetics is very rare; in some instances, 
the preservative (paraben or methylparaben) was 
believed to be responsible for an apparent anaphy-
lactoid reaction to a local anesthetic. Moreover, the 
cross-reactivity between amide-type local anesthet-
ics seems to be low. Th ere are no reports of anaphy-
laxis to volatile anesthetics. 
 4. Latex Allergy 
 Th e severity of allergic reactions to latex-containing 
products ranges from mild contact dermatitis to life-
threatening anaphylaxis. Latex allergy is the second 
most common cause of anaphylaxis during anesthe-
sia. Most serious reactions seem to involve a direct 
IgE-mediated immune response to polypeptides in 
natural latex, although some cases of contact derma-
titis may be due to a type IV sensitivity reaction to 
chemicals introduced in the manufacturing process. 
Nonetheless, a relationship between the occurrence 
of contact dermatitis and the probability of future 
anaphylaxis has been suggested. Chronic exposure to 
latex and a history of atopy increases the risk of sen-
sitization. Healthcare workers and patients undergo-
ing frequent procedures with latex items (eg, 
repeated urinary bladder catheterization, barium 
enema examinations) should therefore be consid-
ered at increased risk.  Patients with spina 
bifi da, spinal cord injury, and congenital 
abnormalities of the genitourinary tract have an 
increased incidence of latex allergy. Th e incidence of 
8
 TABLE 548 Treatment of anaphylactic 
and anaphylactoid reactions. 
 Discontinue drug administration 
 Administer 100% oxygen 
 Epinephrine (0.01–0.5 mg IV or IM) 1 
 Consider intubation  
 Intravenous fluid bolus 
 Diphenhydramine (50–75 mg IV) 
 Ranitidine (150 mg IV) 
 Hydrocortisone (up to 200 mg IV) or methylprednisolone 
(1–2 mg/kg) 
 1  The dose and route of epinephrine depend on the severity of the 
reaction. An infusion of 1–5 mcg/min may be necessary in adults.
1222 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
latex anaphylaxis in children is estimated to be 1 in 
10,000. A history of allergic symptoms to latex 
should be sought in all patients during the preanes-
thetic interview. Foods that cross-react with latex 
include mango, kiwi, chestnut, avacado, passion 
fruit, and banana. 
 IL-18 and IL-13 single nucleotide polymor-
phisms may aff ect the sensitivity of individuals to 
latex and promote allergic responses. 
 Anaphylactic reactions to latex may be con-
fused with reactions to other substances (eg, drugs, 
blood products) because the onset of symptoms can 
be delayed for more than 1 hr aft er initial exposure. 
Treatment is the same as for other forms of anaphy-
lactic reactions. Skin-prick tests, intradermal tests, 
basophil histamine-release tests, and RAST have 
been used to evaluate high-risk patients. Prevent-
ing a reaction in sensitized patients includes phar-
macological prophylaxis and absolute avoidance 
of latex. Preoperative administration of H 1 and H 2 
histamine antagonists and steroids may provide 
some protection, although their use is controver-
sial. Although most pieces of anesthetic equipment 
are now latex-free, some may still contain latex 
(eg, gloves, tourniquets, some ventilator bellows, 
intravenous injection ports, and older reusable face 
masks). An allergic reaction has even been docu-
mented from inhalation of latex antigen contained 
within aerosolized glove powder. Manufacturers 
of latex-containing medical products must label 
their products accordingly.  Only devices specifi -
cally known not to contain latex (eg, polyvinyl or 
neoprene gloves, silicone endotracheal tubes or 
laryngeal masks, plastic face masks) can be used 
in latex-allergic patients. Rubber stoppers should 
be removed from drug vials prior to use, and injec-
tions should be made through plastic stopcocks, if 
latex has not been eliminated from containers and 
injection ports. 
 5. Allergies to Antibiotics 
 Many true drug allergies in surgical patients are due 
to antibiotics, mainly β-lactam antibiotics, such as 
penicillins and cephalosporins. Although 1% to 4% 
of β-lactam administrations result in allergic reac-
tions, only 0.004% to 0.015% of these reactions 
result in anaphylaxis. Up to 2% of the general 
population is allergic to penicillin, but only 0.01% 
of penicillin administrations result in anaphylaxis. 
Cephalosporin cross-sensitivity in patients with 
penicillin allergy is estimated to be 2% to 7%, but 
a history of an anaphylactic reaction to penicil-
lin increases the cross-reactivity rate up to 50%. 
Patients with a prior history of an anaphylactic 
reaction to penicillin should therefore not receive a 
cephalosporin. Although imipenem exhibits similar 
cross- sensitivity, aztreonam seems to be antigen-
ically distinct and reportedly does not cross-react 
with other β-lactams. Sulfonamide allergy is also 
relatively common in surgical patients. Sulfa drugs 
include sulfonamide antibiotics, furosemide, hydro-
chlorothiazide, and captopril. Fortunately, the fre-
quency of cross-reactivity among these agents is low. 
 Like cephalosporins, vancomycin is commonly 
used for antibiotic prophylaxis in surgical patients. 
Unfortunately, it is associated with adverse reac-
tions. An anaphylactoid-type reaction, “red man 
syndrome,” consists of intense pruritus, fl ushing, 
and erythema of the head and upper torso, oft en 
with arterial hypotension; this syndrome seems to 
be related to a rapid rate of administration more 
than to dose or allergy. Isolated systemic hypoten-
sion is a much more frequent side eff ect and seems 
to be primarily mediated by histamine release, 
because pretreatment with H 1 and H 2 antihistamines 
can prevent hypotension, even with rapid rates of 
administration. 
 Immunologic mechanisms are associated with 
other perioperative pathologies. Transfusion-related 
lung injury may be secondary to the activity of anti-
bodies in the donor plasma, producing a hyper-
sensitivity reaction that results in lung infi ltrates 
and respiratory failure. IgG antibody formation 
directed at heparin–PF4 complexes results in plate-
let activation, thrombosis, and heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia. 
 OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS 
IN ANESTHESIOLOGY 
 Anesthesiologists spend much of their workday 
exposed to anesthetic gases, low-dose ionizing 
radiation, electromagnetic fi elds, blood products, 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications
1223
and workplace stress. Each of these can contribute 
to negative health eff ects in anesthesia practitio-
ners. A 2000 paper compared the mortality risks of 
anesthesiologists and internists. Death from heart 
disease or cancer did not diff er between the groups; 
however, anesthesiologists had an increased rate 
of suicides and drug-related deaths  ( Table 54–9 ). 
Anesthesiologists also had a greater chance of death 
from external causes, such as boating, bicycling, and 
aeronautical accidents compared with internists. 
Nevertheless, both anesthesiologists and internists 
had lower mortality than the general population, 
likely due to their higher socioeconomic status. 
Anesthesiologists’ access to intravenous opioids 
likely contributes to a 2.21 relative risk for drug-
related deaths compared with that of internists. 
 1. Chronic Exposure 
to Anesthetic Gases 
 Th ere is no clear evidence that exposure to 
trace amounts of anesthetic agents presents a 
health hazard to operating room personnel. How-
ever, because previous studies examining this issue 
have yielded fl awed but confl icting results, the US 
Occupational Health and Safety Administration 
continues to set maximum acceptable trace concen-
trations of less than 25 ppm for nitrous oxide and 
0.5 ppm for halogenated anesthetics (2 ppm if the 
halogenated agent is used alone). Achieving these 
9
low levels depends on effi  cient scavenging equip-
ment, adequate operating room ventilation, and 
conscientious anesthetic technique. Most people 
cannot detect the odor of volatile agents at a concen-
tration of less than 30 ppm. If there is no functioning 
scavenging system, anesthetic gas concentrations 
reach 3000 ppm for nitrous oxide and 50 ppm for 
volatile agents. 
 Early studies indicated that female operating 
room staff  might be at increased risk of spontaneous 
abortion compared with other women. It is unclear 
if other factors related to operating room activ-
ity could also contribute to the possibly increased 
potential for pregnancy loss. 
 2. Infectious Diseases 
 Hospital workers are exposed to many infectious 
diseases prevalent in the community (eg, respiratory 
viral infections, rubella, and tuberculosis). 
 Herpetic whitlow is an infection of the fi nger 
with herpes simplex virus type 1 or 2 and usually 
involves direct contact of previously traumatized 
skin with contaminated oral secretions. Painful ves-
icles appear at the site of infection. Th e diagnosis is 
confi rmed by the appearance of giant epithelial cells 
or nuclear inclusion bodies in a smear taken from 
the base of a vesicle, the presence of a rise in herpes 
simplex virus titer, or identifi cation of the virus with 
antiserum. Treatment is conservative and includes 
 TABLE 549 Relative rate ratios for drug and suicide deaths comparing 
anesthesiologists with internists before and after January 1, 1987. 
Anesthesiologists 
( N )
Internists
( N )
RR1
95% CI
All drug-related deaths
<1987
36
14
2.65
1.42–4.91
≥1987
55
19
2.87
1.71–4.84
Drug-related suicides
<1987
16
11
1.48
0.69–3.20
≥1987
32
11
2.88
1.45–5.71
Suicides
<1987
41
33
1.25
0.79–1.97
≥1987
62
38
1.60
1.07–2.39
Cl, conﬁ dence interval.
1Ratio (RR) of anesthesiologists compared with internists for that time period, RR is adjusted for age, gender, and race.
Reproduced, with permission, from Alexander B, Checkoway H, Nagahama S, Domino K: Cause-speciﬁ c mortality risks 
of anesthesiologists.  Anesthesiology 2000;93:922.
1224 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
topical application of 5% acyclovir ointment. Pre-
vention involves wearing gloves when contacting 
oral secretions. Patients at risk of harboring the 
virus include those suff ering from other infections, 
immunosuppression, cancer, and malnutrition. Th e 
risk of this condition has virtually disappeared now 
that anesthesia personnel routinely wear gloves dur-
ing manipulation of the airway, which was not the 
case in the 1980s and earlier. 
 Viral DNA has been identifi ed in the smoke 
plume generated during laser treatment of condy-
lomata. Th e theoretical possibility of viral transmis-
sion from this source can be minimized by using 
smoke evacuators, gloves, and appropriate OSHA 
approved masks. 
 More disturbing is the potential of acquiring 
serious blood-borne infections, such as hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C, or human immunodefi ciency virus 
(HIV). Although parenteral transmission of these 
diseases can occur following mucous membrane, 
cutaneous, or percutaneous exposure to infected 
body fl uids, accidental injury with a needle contami-
nated with infected blood represents the most com-
mon occupational mechanism. Th e risk of 
transmission can be estimated if three factors are 
known: the prevalence of the infection within the 
patient population, the incidence of exposure (eg, 
frequency of needlestick), and the rate of serocon-
version aft er a single exposure. Th e seroconversion 
rate aft er a specifi c exposure depends on several fac-
tors, including the infectivity of the organism, the 
stage of the patient’s disease (extent of viremia), 
the size of the inoculum, and the immune status of 
the healthcare provider. Rates of seroconversion fol-
lowing a single needlestick are estimated to range 
between 0.3% and 30%.  Hollow (hypodermic) 
needles pose a greater risk than do solid (sur-
gical) needles because of the potentially larger inoc-
ulum. Th e use of gloves, needleless systems, or 
protected needle devices may decrease the incidence 
of some (but not all) types of injury. 
 Th e initial management of needlesticks 
involves cleaning the wound and notifying the 
appropriate authority within the health care facil-
ity. Aft er an exposure, anesthesia workers should 
report to their institution’s emergency or employee 
health department for appropriate counseling on 
10
postexposure prophylaxis options. All OR staff 
should be made aware of the institution’s employee 
health notifi cation pathway for needle stick and 
other injuries 
 Fulminant hepatitis B (1% of acute infections) 
carries a 60% mortality rate. Chronic active hepati-
tis (<5% of all cases) is associated with an increased 
incidence of cirrhosis of the liver and hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma. Transmission of the virus is primar-
ily through contact with blood products or body 
fl uids. Th e diagnosis is confi rmed by detection of 
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). Uncompli-
cated recovery is signaled by the disappearance 
of HBsAg and the appearance of antibody to the 
surface antigen (anti-HBs). A hepatitis B vaccine is 
available and is strongly recommended prophylac-
tically for anesthesia personnel. Th e appearance of 
anti-HBs aft er a three-dose regimen indicates suc-
cessful immunization. 
 Hepatitis C is another important occupational 
hazard in anesthesiology; 4% to 8% of hepatitis C 
infections occur in healthcare workers. Most (50% 
to 90%) of these infections lead to chronic hepatitis, 
which, although oft en asymptomatic, can progress 
to liver failure and death. In fact, hepatitis C is the 
most common cause of nonalcoholic cirrhosis in the 
United States. Th ere is currently no vaccine to pro-
tect against hepatitis C infection. 
 Anesthesia personnel seem to be at a low, but 
measureable, risk for the occupational contraction 
of HIV. Th e risk of acquiring HIV infection follow-
ing a single needlestick contaminated with blood 
from an HIV-infected patient has been estimated at 
0.4% to 0.5%. Because there are documented reports 
of transmission of HIV from infected patients to 
healthcare workers (including anesthesiologists), 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
proposed guidelines that apply to all categories of 
patient contact. Th ese universal precautions, which 
are equally valid for protection against hepatitis B or 
C infection, are as follows: 
•  No recapping and the immediate disposal 
of contaminated needles 
•  Use of gloves and other barriers during contact 
with open wounds and body fl uids 
•  Frequent hand washing 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications
1225
physician. Th ere remains controversy regarding the 
rate at which anesthesia staff  will experience recidi-
vism. Many experts argue for a “one strike and you’re 
out” policy for anesthesiology residents who abuse 
injectable drugs. Th e decision as to whether a fully 
trained and certifi ed physician who has been dis-
covered to abuse injectable drugs should return to 
anesthetic practice aft er completing a rehabilitation 
program varies and depends on the rules and tra-
ditions of the practice group, the medical center, 
the relevant medical licensing board, and the per-
ceived likelihood of recidivism. Physicians return-
ing to practice following successful completion of a 
program must be carefully monitored over the long 
term, as relapses can occur years aft er apparent suc-
cessful rehabilitation. Alcohol abuse is a common 
problem among physicians and nurses, and anes-
thesia personnel are no exception. Interventions for 
alcohol abuse, as is true for injectable drug abuse, 
must be carefully orchestrated. Guidance from the 
local medical society or licensing authority is highly 
recommended. 
 4. Ionizing Radiation Exposure 
 Th e use of imaging equipment (eg, fl uoroscopy) 
during surgery and interventional radiologic proce-
dures exposes the anesthesiologist to the potential 
risks of ionizing radiation.  Th e three most 
important methods of minimizing radiation 
doses are limiting total exposure time during pro-
cedures, using proper barriers, and maximizing the 
distance from the source of radiation. Anesthesiolo-
gists who routinely perform fl uoroscopic image 
guided invasive procedures should consider wearing 
protective eyeware incorporating radiation shield-
ing. Lead glass partitions or lead aprons with thyroid 
shields are mandatory protection for all personnel 
who are exposed to ionizing radiation. Th e inverse 
square law states that the dosage of radiation varies 
inversely with the square of the distance. Th us, the 
exposure at 4 m will be one-sixteenth that at 1 m. 
Th e maximum recommended occupational whole-
body exposure to radiation is 5 rem/yr. Th is can be 
monitored with an exposure badge. Th e health 
impact on operating room personnel of exposure to 
electromagnetic radiation remains unclear. 
12
•  Use of proper techniques for disinfection or the 
disposal of contaminated materials 
•  Particular caution by pregnant healthcare 
workers, and no contact with patients by workers 
who have exudative or weeping skin lesions 
 3. Substance Abuse 
 Anesthesiology is a high-risk medical spe-
cialty for substance abuse. Probable reasons 
for this include the stress of anesthetic practice and 
the easy availability of drugs with addiction poten-
tial (potentially attracting people at risk of addiction 
to the fi eld). Th e likelihood of developing substance 
abuse is increased by coexisting personal problems 
(eg, marital or fi nancial diffi  culties) or a family his-
tory of alcoholism or drug addiction. 
 Th e voluntary use of nonprescribed mood- 
altering pharmaceuticals is a disease. If left  untreated, 
substance abuse oft en leads to death from drug 
overdose—intentional or unintentional. One of the 
greatest challenges in treating drug abuse is identify-
ing the affl  icted individual, as denial is a consistent 
feature. Unfortunately, changes evident to an out-
side observer are oft en both vague and late: reduced 
involvement in social activities, subtle changes in 
appearance, extreme mood swings, and altered work 
habits. Treatment begins with a careful, well-planned 
intervention. Th ose inexperienced in this area would 
be well advised to consult with their local medical 
society or licensing authority about how to proceed. 
Th e goal is to enroll the individual in a formal reha-
bilitation program. Th e possibility that one may 
lose one’s medical license and be unable to return to 
practice provides powerful motivation. Some diver-
sion programs report a success rate of approximately 
70%; however, most rehabilitation programs report 
a recurrence rate of at least 25%. Long-term compli-
ance oft en involves continued participation in sup-
port groups (eg, Narcotics Anonymous), random 
urine testing, and oral naltrexone therapy (a long-
acting opioid antagonist). Eff ective prevention strat-
egies are diffi  cult to formulate; “better” control of 
drug availability is unlikely to deter a determined 
individual. It is unlikely that education about the 
severe consequences of substance abuse will bring 
new information to the potential drug-abusing 
11
1226 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 CASE DISCUSSION 
Unexplained Intraoperative 
Tachycardia & Hypertension 
 A 73-year-old man is scheduled for emergency 
relief of an intestinal obstruction from a sigmoid 
volvulus. The patient had a myocardial infarc-
tion 1 month earlier that was complicated by 
congestive heart failure. His blood pressure is 
160/90 mm Hg, pulse 110 beats/min, respiratory 
rate 22 breaths/min, and temperature 38.8°C. 
 Why is this case an emergency? 
 Strangulation of the bowel begins with venous 
obstruction, but can quickly progress to arterial 
occlusion, ischemia, infarction, and perforation. 
Acute peritonitis could lead to severe dehydration, 
sepsis, shock, and multiorgan failure. 
 What special monitoring is appropriate 
for this patient? 
 Because of the history of recent myocardial 
infarction and congestive heart failure, an arterial 
line would be useful. Transesophageal echocar-
diography and pulse contour analysis monitors of 
cardiac output could be used. Pulmonary arterial 
ﬂ otation catheters have often been used in the 
past, but they are associated with signiﬁ cant com-
plications and current evidence does not indicate 
that their use improves patient outcomes. Large 
ﬂ uid shifts should be anticipated. Furthermore, 
information regarding myocardial supply (diastolic 
blood pressure) and demand (systolic blood pres-
sure, left ventricular wall stress, and heart rate) 
should be continuously available. Central venous 
pressure may not track left atrial pressure in a 
patient with signiﬁ cant left ventricular dysfunction. 
 What cardiovascular medications might 
be useful during induction and maintenance 
of general anesthesia? 
 Drugs causing severe tachycardia or extremes 
in arterial blood pressure should be avoided. 
 During the laparotomy, gradual increases 
in heart rate and blood pressure are noted. 
ST-segment elevations appear on the electrocardio-
gram. A nitroglycerin infusion is started. The heart 
rate is now 130 beats/min, and the blood pressure 
is 220/140 mm Hg. The concentration of volatile 
anesthetic is increased, and metoprolol is adminis-
tered intravenously in 1-mg increments. This results 
in a decline in heart rate to 115 beats/min, with no 
change in blood pressure. Suddenly, the rhythm 
converts to ventricular tachycardia, with a profound 
drop in blood pressure. As amiodarone is being 
administered and the deﬁ brillation unit prepared, 
the rhythm degenerates into ventricular ﬁ brillation. 
 What can explain this series of events? 
 A diﬀ erential diagnosis of pronounced tachy-
cardia and hypertension might include pheochro-
mocytoma, malignant hyperthermia, or thyroid 
storm. In this case, further inspection of the nitro-
glycerin infusion reveals a labeling error: although 
the tubing was labeled “nitroglycerin,” the infusion 
bag was labeled “epinephrine.” 
 How does this explain the paradoxic response 
to metoprolol? 
 Metoprolol is a β 1 -adrenergic antagonist. It 
inhibits epinephrine’s β 1 -stimulation of heart rate, 
but does not antagonize α-induced vasoconstric-
tion. The net result is a decrease in heart rate, but a 
sustained increase in blood pressure. 
 What is the cause of the ventricular 
tachycardia? 
 An overdose of epinephrine can cause life-
threatening ventricular arrhythmias. In addition, 
if the central venous catheter was malpositioned, 
with its tip in the right ventricle, the catheter tip 
could have stimulated ventricular arrhythmias. 
 What other factors may have contributed to this 
anesthetic mishap? 
 Multiple factors will often combine to create an 
anesthetic misadventure. Incorrect drug labels are 
but one example of errors that can result in patient 
injury. Inadequate preparation, technical failures, 
knowledge deﬁ cits, and practitioner fatigue or 
distraction can all contribute to adverse outcomes. 
Careful adherence to hospital policies, checklists, 
patient identiﬁ cation procedures, and surgical and 
regional block timeouts can all help to prevent iat-
rogenic complications. 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1227 
 GUIDELINES
 Practice advisory for the prevention of perioperative 
peripheral neuropathies: a report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on prevention 
of peripheral neuropathies. Anesthesiology 
2000;92:1168. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Alexander B, Checkoway H, Nagahama S, Domino K: 
Cause-specifi c mortality risks of anesthesiologists. 
Anesthesiology 2000;93:922. 
 Berge E, Seppala M, Lanier W: Th e anesthesiology 
community’s approach to opioid and anesthetic 
abusing personnel: time to change course. 
Anesthesiology 2008;109:762. 
 Bhananker S, Posner K, Cheney F, et al: Injury and 
liability associated with monitored anesthesia care. 
Anesthesiology 2006;104:228. 
 Bhananker S, Liau D, Kooner P, et al: Liability 
related to peripheral venous and arterial 
catheterization; a closed claims analysis. Anesth 
Analg 2009;109:124. 
 Bishop M, Souders J, Peterson C, et al: Factors associated 
with unanticipated day of surgery deaths in 
Department of Veterans Aff airs hospitals. Anesth 
Analg 2008;107:1924. 
 Bowdle TA: Drug administration errors from 
the ASA closed claims project. ASA Newslett 
2003;67:11. 
 Brown RH, Schauble JF, Miller NR: Anemia and 
hypotension as contributors to perioperative loss of 
vision. Anesthesiology 1994;80:222. 
 Bryson E, Silverstein J: Addiction and substance abuse in 
anesthesiology. Anesthesiology 2008;109:905. 
 Caplan RA, Ward RJ, Posner K, Cheney FW: Unexpected 
cardiac arrest during spinal anesthesia: a closed claims 
analysis of predisposing factors. Anesthesiology 
1988;68:5. 
 Caplan RA, Vistica MF, Posner KL, Cheney FW: Adverse 
anesthetic outcomes arising from gas delivery 
equipment: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 
1997;87:741. 
 Chadwick HS: An analysis of obstetric anesthesia cases 
from the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
closed claims project database. Int J Obstet Anesth 
1996;5:258. 
 Cheesman K, Brady J, Flood P, Li G: Epidemiology 
of anesthesia-related complications in labor and 
delivery, New York state, 2002-2005. Anesth Analg 
2009;109:1174. 
 Cheney FW: Th e American Society of Anesthesiologists 
closed claims project: what have we learned, how has 
it aff ected practice, and how will it aff ect practice in 
the future? Anesthesiology 1999;91:552. 
 Cheney FW, Posner KL, Caplan RA, Gild WM: Burns 
from warming devices in anesthesia. Anesthesiology 
1994;80:806. 
 Cheney FW, Domino KB, Caplan RA, Posner KL: Nerve 
injury associated with anesthesia: a closed claims 
analysis. Anesthesiology 1999;90:1062. 
 Cheney F, Posner K, Lee L, et al: Trends in anesthesia-
related death and brain damage. Anesthesiology 
2006;105:1071. 
 Cook T, Bland L, Mihai R, Scott S: Litigation related to 
anaesthesia: an analysis of claims against the NHS in 
England 1995-2007. Anaesthesia 2009;64:706. 
 Cook T, Scott S, Mihai R: Litigation related to airway and 
respiratory complications of anaesthesia: an analysis 
of claims against the NHS in England 1995-2007. 
Anaesthesia 2010;65:556. 
 Coppieters MW, Van De Velde M, Stappaerts KH: 
Positioning in anesthesiology. Toward a better 
understanding of stretch-induced perioperative 
neuropathies. Anesthesiology 2002;97:75. 
 Cranshaw J, Gupta K, Cook T: Litigation related to 
drug errors in anaesthesia: an analysis of claims 
against the NHS in England 1995-2009. Anaesthesia 
2009;64:1317. 
 Crosby E: Medical malpractice and anesthesiology: 
literature review and role of the expert witness. 
Can J Anesth 2007;54:227. 
 Davies J, Posner K, Lee L, et al: Liability associated with 
obstetric anesthesia. Anesthesiology 2009;110:131. 
 Domino KB, Posner Kl, Caplan RA, Cheney FW: 
Awareness during anesthesia: a closed claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology 1999;90:1053. 
 Domino KB, Posner KL, Caplan RA, Cheney FW: Airway 
injury during anesthesia: a closed claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology 1999;91:1703. 
 Domino K, Bowdle T, Posner K, et al: Injuries and 
liability related to central vascular catheters. 
Anesthesiology 2004;100:1411. 
 Edbril SD, Lagasse RS: Relationship between malpractice 
litigation and human errors. Anesthesiology 
1999;91:848. 
 Fisher DM: New York State guidelines on the topical use 
of phenylephrine in operating rooms. Anesthesiology 
2000;92:858. 
 Fitzgibbon DR, Posner KL, Domino KB, et al: 
Chronic pain management: American Society 
of Anesthesiologists Closed Claims Project. 
Anesthesiology 2004;100:98. 
1228 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Gayer S: Prone to blindness: answers to postoperative 
visual loss. Anesth Analg 2011;112:11. 
 Ghoneim MM: Awareness during anesthesia. 
Anesthesiology 2000;92:597. 
 Gild WM, Posner KL, Caplan RA, Cheney FW: Eye 
injuries associated with anesthesia. Anesthesiology 
1992;76:204. 
 Hawkins J, Chang J, Palmer S, et al: Anesthesia-related 
maternal mortality in the United States: 1979-2002. 
Obstet Gynecol 2011;117:69. 
 Hepner DL, Castells MC: Anaphylaxis during the 
perioperative period. Anesth Analg 2003;97:1381. 
 Jimenez N, Posner K, Cheney F, et al: An update on 
pediatric anesthesia liability: a closed claims analysis. 
Anesth Analg 2007;104:147. 
 Lagasse R: Anesthesia safety: model or myth? 
Anesthesiology 2002;97:1336. 
 Lagasse R: To see or not to see. Anesthesiology 2006;
105:1971. 
 Lagasse R: Innocent prattle. Anesthesiology 
2009;110:698. 
 Lee LA: Postoperative visual loss data gathered and 
analyzed. ASA Newslett 2000;64:25. 
 Lee L, Posner K, DominoK, et al: Injuries associated 
with regional anesthesia in the 1980s and 1990s. 
Anesthesiology 2004;101:143. 
 Lee L, Posner K, Cheney F, et al: Complications 
associated with eye blocks and peripheral nerve 
blocks: an American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Closed Claims analysis. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2008;33:416. 
 Lee LA, Rothe S, Posner KL, et al: Th e American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Postoperative Visual Loss Registry: 
analysis of 93 spine surgery cases with postoperative 
visual loss. Anesthesiology 2006;105:652. 
 Lesser JB, Sanborn KV, Valskys R, Kuroda M: Severe 
bradycardia during spinal and epidural anesthesia 
recorded by an anesthesia information management 
system. Anesthesiology 2003;99:859. 
 Levy J, Adkinson N: Anaphylaxis during cardiac surgery: 
implications for clinicians. Anesth Analg 2008;106:392. 
 Li G, Warner M, Lang B, et al: Epidemiology of 
anesthesia related mortality in the United States 
1999-2005. Anesthesiology 2009;110:759. 
 Liang B: “Standards” of anesthesia: law and ASA 
guidelines. J Clin Anesth 2008;20:393. 
 Lineberger C: Impairment in anesthesiology: awareness 
and education. Int Anesth Clin 2008;46:151. 
 Marco A: Informed consent for surgical anesthesia care: 
has the time come for separate consent? Anesth Analg 
2009;110:280. 
 Martin L, Mhyre J, Shanks A, et al: 3,423 emergency 
tracheal intubations at a university hospital: airway 
outcomes and complications. Anesthesiology 
2011;114:42. 
 Martin JT: Compartment syndromes: concepts and 
perspectives for the anesthesiologist. Anesth Analg 
1992;75:275. 
 Metzner J, Posner K, Domino K: Th e risk and safety of 
anesthesia at remote locations: the US closed claims 
analysis. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:502. 
 Monitto C, Hamilton R, Levey E, et al: Genetic 
predisposition to natural rubber latex allergy diff ers 
between health care workers and high risk patients. 
Anesth Analg 2010;110:1310. 
 Morray JP, Geiduschek JM, Caplan RA: A comparison 
of pediatric and adult anesthesia closed malpractice 
claims. Anesthesiology 1993;78:461. 
 Newland MC, Ellis SJ, Lydiatt CA, et al: Anesthetic-
related cardiac arrest and its mortality. Anesthesiology 
2002;97:108. 
 Pollard JB: Cardiac arrest during spinal anesthesia: 
common mechanisms and strategies for prevention. 
Anesth Analg 2001;92:252. 
 Ramamoorthy C, Haberkern C, Bhananker S, et al: 
Anesthesia-related cardiac arrest in children with 
heart disease: data from the pediatric perioperative 
cardiac arrest (POCA) registry. Anesth Analg 
2010;110:1376. 
 Ranta SOV, Lauila R, Saario J, et al: Awareness with recall 
during general anesthesia: incidence and risk factors. 
Anesth Analg 1998;86:1084. 
 Roh J, Kim D, Lee S, et al: Intensity of extremely low 
frequency electromagnetic fi elds produced in 
operating rooms during surgery at the standing 
position of anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology 
2009;111:275. 
 Rose G, Brown R: Th e impaired anesthesiologist: not just 
about drugs and alcohol anymore. J Clin Anesthesiol 
2010;22:379. 
 Sharma AD, Parmley CL, Sreeram G, Grocott HP: 
Peripheral nerve injuries during cardiac surgery: risk 
factors, diagnosis, prognosis, and prevention. Anesth 
Analg 2000;91:1358. 
 Silverstein JH, Silva DA, Iberti TJ: Opioid addiction in 
anesthesiology. Anesthesiology 1993;79:354. 
 Sprung J, Bourke DL, Contreras MG, et al: 
Perioperative hearing impairment. Anesthesiology 
2003;98:241. 
 Tait AR: Occupational transmission of tuberculosis: 
implications for anesthesiologists. Anesth Analg 
1997;85:444. 
 
CHAPTER 54 Anesthetic Complications 
1229 
performance in the operating room environment. 
Anesthesiology 1990;73:995. 
 Welch M, Brummett C, Welch T, et al: Perioperative 
nerve injuries: a retrospective study of 380,680 
cases during a 10-year period at a single institution. 
Anesthesiology 2009;111:490. 
 Williams EL, Hart WM Jr, Tempelhoff  R: Postoperative 
ischemic optic neuropathy. Anesth Analg 
1995;80:1018. 
 Yuill G, Saroya D, Yuill S: A national survey of 
the provision for patients with latex allergy. 
Anaesthesiology 2003;58:775. 
 Warner MA, Warner ME, Martin JT: Ulnar 
neuropathy. Incidence, outcome, and risk factors 
in sedated or anesthetized patients. Anesthesiology 
1994;81:1332. 
 Warner MA, Warner DO, Harper CM: Lower extremity 
neuropathies associated with lithotomy positions. 
Anesthesiology 2000;93:938. 
 Warner ME, Benenfeld SM, Warner MA, et al: 
Perianesthetic dental injuries. Anesthesiology 
1999;90:1302. 
 Weinger MB, Englund CE: Ergonomic and human 
factors aff ecting anesthetic vigilance and monitoring 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1231
K E Y C O N C E P T S
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation 
 Martin Giesecke, MD and Srikanth Hosur, MBBS, MD 55
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiac care should be considered 
any time an individual cannot adequately 
oxygenate or perfuse vital organs—not only 
following cardiac or respiratory arrest. 
Regardless of which transtracheal jet 
ventilation system is chosen, it must be 
readily available, use low-compliance tubing, 
and have secure connections. 
Chest compressions and ventilation should 
not be delayed for intubation if a patent 
airway is established by a jaw-thrust 
maneuver. 
Attempts at intubation should not interrupt 
ventilation for more than 10 s. 
Chest compressions should be immediately 
initiated in the pulseless patient. 
Whether adult resuscitation is performed by a 
single rescuer or by two rescuers, two breaths 
are administered every 30 compressions 
(30:2), allowing 3–4 s for each two breaths. 
The cardiac compression rate should be 
100/min regardless of the number of rescuers. 
Health care personnel working in hospitals 
and ambulatory care facilities must be able 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
to provide early deﬁ brillation to collapsed 
patients with ventricular ﬁ brillation as soon 
as possible. Shock should be delivered within 
3 min (± 1 min) of arrest. 
Lidocaine, epinephrine, atropine, 
naloxone, and vasopressin, but not sodium 
bicarbonate, can be delivered via a catheter 
whose tip extends past the tracheal tube. 
Dosages 2–2½ times higher than 
recommended for intravenous use, diluted in 
10 mL of normal saline or distilled water, are 
recommended for adult patients. 
If intravenous cannulation is diﬃ  cult, 
an intraosseous infusion can provide 
emergency vascular access in children. 
Because carbon dioxide, but not 
bicarbonate, readily crosses cell membranes 
and the blood–brain barrier, the resulting 
arterial hypercapnia will cause intracellular 
tissue acidosis. 
A wide QRS complex following a pacing 
spike signals electrical capture, but 
mechanical (ventricular) capture must be 
conﬁ rmed by an improving pulse or blood 
pressure. 
8
9
10
11
 One goal of anesthesiology is to maintain the function 
of vital organ systems during surgery. It is not sur-
prising, therefore, that anesthesiologists have played 
a major role in the development of cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation techniques outside the operating room. 
 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiac care (CPR-ECC) should be considered 
any time an individual cannot adequately oxygenate 
or perfuse vital organs—not only following cardiac or 
respiratory arrest. 
1
1232 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Changes in drug recommendations are notable 
for exclusion of atropine in the settings of pulseless 
electrical activity (PEA) and asystole, addition of 
the use of chronotropic drug infusions as an alter-
native to pacing in unstable/symptomatic bradycar-
dia, and recommendation for use of adenosine in 
the management of wide-complex monomorphic 
tachycardia. 
 Th is chapter is not intended as a substitute for a 
formal course in either life support without the use of 
special equipment (Basic Life Support [BLS]) or with 
the use of special equipment and drugs (Advanced 
Cardiac Life Support [ACLS]). Th e recommenda-
tions described are for infants, children, and adults; 
resuscitation of neonates is discussed in  Chapter 42 . 
 AIRWAY 
 Although the  A of the mnemonic  ABC stands for 
 airway, it should also stand for the initial  assessment 
of the patient. Before CPR is initiated, unresponsive-
ness is established and the emergency response sys-
tem is activated. During low blood fl ow states such 
as cardiac arrest, oxygen delivery to the heart and 
brain is limited by blood fl ow rather than by arterial 
oxygen content; thus, in the new guidelines, greater 
emphasis is placed on immediate initiation of chest 
compressions than on rescuer breaths. 
 Th e patient is positioned supine on a fi rm sur-
face. Aft er initiation of chest compressions, the 
airway is evaluated. Th e airway is most commonly 
obstructed by posterior displacement of the tongue 
or epiglottis. If there is no evidence of cervical spine 
instability, a head-tilt chin-lift  should be tried fi rst 
( Figure 55–3 ). One hand (palm) is placed on the 
patient’s forehead applying pressure to tilt the head 
back while lift ing the chin with the forefi nger and 
index fi nger of the opposite hand. Th e jaw-thrust 
may be more eff ective in opening the airway and is 
executed by placing both hands on either side of the 
patient’s head, grasping the angles of the jaw, and 
lift ing. Basic airway management is discussed in 
detail in  Chapter 19 , and the trauma patient is con-
sidered in  Chapter 39 . 
 Any vomitus or foreign body visible in the 
mouth of an unconscious patient should be removed. 
If the patient is conscious or if the foreign body 
 Th is chapter presents an overview of the 
American Heart Association (AHA) and the Interna-
tional Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) 
Year 2010 recommendations for establishing and 
maintaining the ABCDs of cardiopulmonary resus-
citation: Airway, Breathing, Circulation, and Defi -
brillation ( Table 55–1 ,  Figures 55–1 and  55–2 ). 
Th e 2010 CPR-ECC guidelines have been updated 
with new evidence-based recommendations. Still of 
import to the layperson are that the pulse should not 
be checked, and chest compression without ventila-
tion may be as eff ective as compression with venti-
lation for the fi rst several minutes. If a lay rescuer is 
unwilling to perform mouth-to-mouth ventilation, 
chest compressions alone are preferred to doing 
nothing. For the health care provider, defi brillation 
using biphasic electrical current works best and tra-
cheal tube (TT) placement should be confi rmed with 
a quantitative capnographic waveform analysis. More 
importantly, in the new guidelines, emphasis has been 
placed on the quality and adequacy of compressions, 
minimizing interruption time of compressions and 
the preshock pause (the time taken from the last com-
pression to the delivery of shock). 
 Th e sequence of steps in resuscitation has been 
changed in the 2010 guidelines from  ABC (air-
way and breathing fi rst, before compression) to 
 CAB (compression fi rst, with airway and breath-
ing treated later). Emphasis has also been placed 
on physiological monitoring methods to optimize 
CPR quality and return of spontaneous circula-
tion (ROSC). Th e rule of tens and multiples can be 
applied: less than 10 s to check for pulse, less than 
10 s to place and secure the airway, target chest com-
pression adequacy to maintain end-tidal pressure of 
carbon dioxide (P etco 2 ) greater than 10, and tar-
get chest compression to maintain arterial diastolic 
blood pressure greater than 20 and central venous 
oxygen saturation (S cvo 2 ) greater than 30. 
 TABLE 551 Emergency cardiac care (ECC). 
1.   Recognition of impending event 
2.   Activation of emergency response system 
3.   Basic life support 
4.   Defibrillation 
5.   Ventilation 
6.   Pharmacotherapy 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1233 
Adult Cardiac Arrest
BLS algorithm
if appropriate
Precordial thump only if immediate
defibrillation not available
Attach defibrillator/monitor
Assess rhythm
Check pulse +/–
During CPR
CPR
2 minutes
Consider causes that are potentially reversible
CPR
2 minutes
Attempt
defibrillation × 1
as necessary
VF/VT
• Check electrode/paddle positions and contact
• Attempt to place, confirm, secure airway
• Attempt and verify IV access
• Patients with VF/VT refractory to initial shocks:
—  Epinephrine 1 mg IV, every 3 to 5 minutes
or
—  Vasopressin 40 U IV, single dose, 1 time only
• Patients with non-VF/VT rhythms:
—  Epinephrine 1 mg IV, every 3 to 5 minutes
• Consider: antiarrhythmics
• Search for and correct reversible causes
• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Hydrogen ion — acidosis
• Hyper-/hypokalemia, other metabolic
• Hypothermia
• “Tablets” (drug OD, accidents)
• Tamponade, cardiac
• Tension pneumothorax
• Thrombosis, coronary (ACS)
• Thrombosis, pulmonary (embolism)
Non-VF/VT
1
2
3
5,6
7
4
 FIGURE 551  Universal algorithm for adult 
emergency cardiac care. BLS, basic life support; 
VF/VT, ventricular ﬁ brillation and pulseless ventricular 
tachycardia; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
(Data from The American Heart Association BLS and ACLS Guidelines 
2010 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular 
care. Circulation 2010;122:S685.) 
1234 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
A  Airway Placement (<10 sec)
B  Breathing (confirm with wave capnography)
C  Circulation IV/IO access antiarrhythmics
D  Drugs and Differential  Diagnosis
• Epinephrine, 1 mg every 3 to 5   minutes
• Vasopressin, 40 units once only
• Amiodarone if resistant VT/VF
• Search and treat reversible causes
• Person collapses
• Possible cardiac arrest
• Assess unresponsiveness
Unresponsive
Not Breathing
No Pulse
Shock × 1
CPR
2 minutes
CPR
2 minutes
PEA or Asystole
Non-VF/VT
VF/VT
• Begin BLS Algorithm
• Activate emergency 
response system
• Call for defibrillator
1
• Assess pulse (<10 sec)
• Start compressions
• CPR with ratio 30:2
1
2
3
4,5
Check rhythm
 FIGURE 552  Comprehensive emergency 
cardiac care algorithm. BLS, basic life support; 
VF/VT, ventricular ﬁ brillation and pulseless ventricular 
tachycardia; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; 
CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (Data from The American 
Heart Association BLS and ACLS Guidelines 2010 for cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 
2010;122:S685.) 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1235 
to-face shield, or mouth-to-mask rescue breathing or 
by using a bag-mask device (see  Chapter 19 ). Breaths 
are delivered slowly (inspiratory time of ½–1  s) 
with a smaller tidal volume [V t ] (approximately 
700–1000 mL, smaller [400–600 mL] if supplemen-
tal O 2 is used) than was recommended in the past. 
 With positive-pressure ventilation, even with a 
small V t , gastric infl ation with subsequent regurgi-
tation and aspiration are possible. Th erefore, as soon 
as it is feasible, the airway should be secured with a 
TT, or, if that is not possible, an alternative airway 
should be inserted. Th ere is inadequate evidence 
to support the optimal timing of the placement of 
an artifi cial airway; however, chest compressions 
cannot be removed by a fi nger sweep, the Heimlich 
maneuver is recommended. Th is subdiaphragmatic 
abdominal thrust elevates the diaphragm, expelling 
a blast of air from the lungs that displaces the foreign 
body ( Figure 55–4 ). Complications of the Heimlich 
maneuver include rib fracture, trauma to the internal 
viscera, and regurgitation. A combination of back 
blows and chest thrusts is recommended to clear 
foreign body obstruction in infants ( Table 55–2 ). 
 If aft er opening the airway there is no evidence 
of adequate breathing, the rescuer should initiate 
assisted ventilation, by infl ating the victim’s lungs with 
each breath using mouth-to-mouth, mouth-to-nose, 
mouth-to-stoma, mouth-to-barrier device, mouth-
A
B
C
 FIGURE 553  Loss of consciousness is often 
accompanied by loss of submandibular muscle tone  (A) . 
Occlusion of the airway by the tongue can be relieved by 
a head-tilt chin-lift  (B) or a jaw-thrust  (C) . In patients with 
possible cervical spine injury, the angles of the jaw should 
be lifted anteriorly without hyperextending the neck.  
1236 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
and TTs, are discussed in  Chapter 19 . Of these, the 
LMA is increasingly preferred for in-hospital arrests. 
Th e 2010 CPR-ECC guidelines recommend a TT as 
the airway adjunct of choice if personnel skilled in 
placing it are available. 
 Independent of which airway adjunct is used, 
the guidelines state that rescuers must confi rm TT 
 TABLE 552 Summary of recommended basic life support techniques. 
Infant (1–12 mo)
Child (>12 mo)
Adult
Breathing rate
20 breaths/min
20 breaths/min
10–12 breaths/min  1  
Pulse check
Brachial
Carotid
Carotid
Compression rate
>100/min
100/min
100/min
Compression method
Two or three fingers
Heel of one hand
Hands interlaced
Compression/ventilation ratio
30:2
30:2
30:2
Foreign body obstruction
Back blows and chest thrusts
Heimlich maneuver
Heimlich maneuver
  1  Decrease to 8–10 breaths/min if the airway is secured with a tracheal tube.
A
B
 FIGURE 554  The Heimlich maneuver can be 
performed with the victim standing  (A) or lying down 
 (B) . The hands are positioned slightly above the navel 
and well below the xiphoid process and then pressed into 
the abdomen with a quick upward thrust. The maneuver 
may need to be repeated. 
should not be interrupted for more than 10 seconds 
to place any airway. Alternative airways include the 
esophageal–tracheal Combitube (ETC), laryngeal 
mask airway (LMA), pharyngotracheal lumen air-
way, King laryngeal tube, and cuff ed oropharyngeal 
airway. Th e ETC and LMA, along with oral and 
nasopharyngeal airways, face masks, laryngoscopes, 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1237
emphysema, mediastinal emphysema, bleeding, 
esophageal puncture, aspiration, and respiratory 
acidosis. Long-term complications include tracheo-
malacia, subglottic stenosis, and vocal cord changes. 
Cricothyrotomy is not generally recommended in 
children younger than 10 years of age. 
 Tracheotomy can be performed in a more con-
trolled environment aft er oxygenation has been 
restored by cricothyrotomy. A detailed description 
of tracheotomy, however, is beyond the scope of 
this text. 
 BREATHING 
 Assessment of spontaneous breathing should imme-
diately follow the opening or the establishment of 
the airway.  Chest compressions and ventila-
tion should not be delayed for intubation if a 
patent airway is established by a jaw-thrust maneu-
ver. Apnea is confi rmed by lack of chest movement, 
absence of breath sounds, and lack of airfl ow. 
Regardless of the airway and breathing methods 
employed, a specifi c regimen of ventilation has been 
proposed for the apneic patient. Initially, two breaths 
are slowly administered (2 s per breath in adults, 
1–1½ s in infants and children). If these breaths can-
not be delivered, either the airway is still obstructed 
and the head and neck need repositioning or a for-
eign body is present that must be removed. 
 Mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-mask (mouth-
to-barrier-device) rescue breathing should be insti-
tuted in the apneic patient, even in the hospital 
setting when the crash cart is on its way. Pinching the 
nose allows formation of an airtight seal between the 
rescuer’s lips and the outside of the victim’s mouth. 
Successful rescue breathing (700–1000 mL V t , 
8–10 times per minute in an adult with a secured air-
way and a ratio of 30 compressions to 2 ventilations 
if the airway is unsecured) is confi rmed by observ-
ing the chest rising and falling with each breath and 
hearing and feeling the escape of air during expira-
tion. Th e most common cause of inadequate mouth-
to-mouth ventilation is insuffi  cient airway control. 
Mouth-to-mouth-and-nose breathing is more eff ec-
tive in infants and small children than in adults. 
 A rescuer’s exhaled air has an oxygen concen-
tration of only 16–17% and contains signifi cant CO 2 . 
3
placement with a P etco 2 detector—an indicator, 
a capnograph, or a capnometric device. Th e best 
choice for confi rmation of TT placement is con-
tinuous capnographic waveform analysis. All con-
fi rmation devices are considered adjuncts to clinical 
conformation techniques (eg, auscultation). Once 
an artifi cial airway is successfully placed,  it must be 
carefully secured with a tie or tape (25% of airways 
are displaced during transportation). 
 Some causes of airway obstruction may not 
be relieved by conventional methods. Furthermore, 
tracheal intubation may be technically impos-
sible to perform (eg, severe facial trauma), or 
repeated attempts may be unwise (eg, cervical spine 
trauma). In these circumstances, cricothyrotomy 
or tracheotomy may be necessary. Cricothyrotomy 
involves placing a large intravenous catheter or a 
commercially available cannula into the trachea 
through the midline of the cricothyroid membrane 
( Figure 55–5 ). Proper location is confi rmed by aspi-
ration of air. A 12- or 14-gauge catheter requires a 
driving pressure of 50 psi to generate suffi  cient gas 
fl ow (for transtracheal jet ventilation). Th e catheter 
must be adequately secured to the skin, as the jet 
ventilation pressure can otherwise easily propel the 
catheter out of the trachea. 
 Various systems are available that connect a high-
pressure source of oxygen (eg, central wall oxygen, 
tank oxygen, or the anesthesia machine fresh gas out-
let) to the catheter ( Figure 55–6 ). A hand-operated 
jet injector or the oxygen fl ush valve of an anesthesia 
machine controls ventilation. Th e addition of a pres-
sure regulator minimizes the risk of barotrauma. 
 Regardless of which transtracheal jet ventila-
tion system is chosen, it must be readily avail-
able, use low-compliance tubing, and have secure 
connections. Direct connection of a 12- or 14-gauge 
intravenous catheter to the anesthesia circle system 
does not allow adequate ventilation because of the 
high compliance of the corrugated breathing tub-
ing and breathing bag. One cannot reliably deliver 
acceptable ventilation through a 12- or 14-gauge 
catheter with a self-infl ating resuscitation bag. 
 Adequacy of ventilation—particularly expira-
tion—is judged by observation of chest wall move-
ment and auscultation of breath sounds. Acute 
complications include pneumothorax, subcutaneous 
2
1238 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
contact should be immediately available everywhere 
in the hospital. Ventilation with a mask may be per-
formed more easily in some patients because the 
rescuer may be able to adjust the airway or make 
an airtight seal more eff ectively. Furthermore, some 
mouth-to-mask devices allow the delivery of supple-
mental oxygen. 
Supplemental oxygen, preferably 100%, should 
always be used if available. If supplemental oxygen is 
used, a smaller VT of 400–700 mL is recommended. 
 Mouth-to-mask or barrier device breathing has 
a hygienic advantage over mouth-to-mouth breath-
ing as the rescuer’s lips form a seal with an inter-
vening device. Devices that avoid mouth-to-mouth 
A  Locate the cricothyroid membrane.
Cricothyroid membrane
Trachea
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Aspirate air
14-gauge catheter
B  Puncture the membrane at the midline 
while stabilizing the trachea with the 
other hand. Proper location is confirmed 
by easy aspiration of air.
C Advance the catheter and withdraw 
the needle.
 FIGURE 555  Percutaneous cricothyrotomy with a 14-gauge over-the-needle intravenous catheter. 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1239
A ratio of 8–10 breaths/min in a secure airway should 
be maintained, as high respiratory rates can impede 
cardiac output in a cardiac arrest situation. 
 Th e ratio of physiological dead space to tidal 
volume (V d /V t ) refl ects the effi  ciency of CO 2 elimi-
nation. V d /V t increases during CPR as a result of 
low pulmonary blood fl ow and high alveolar pres-
sures. Th us, minute ventilation may need to be 
increased by 50–100% once circulation is restored as 
CO 2 from the periphery is brought back to the lungs. 
 CIRCULATION 
 Circulation takes precedence over airway and 
breathing in a cardiac arrest situation. In this 
scenario, as previously noted,  chest compres-
sions should begin prior to the initial breaths. Subse-
quent actions to assess circulation may then vary 
depending on whether the responder is a lay person 
5
 A self-infl ating bag-valve-mask device is 
described in  Chapter 3 (see the section on Resusci-
tation Breathing Systems). Th ese devices can be less 
eff ective than mouth-to-mask or bag-valve-TT venti-
lation because of the diffi  culty inexperienced person-
nel may have in maintaining an airway and seal with 
one hand and simultaneously delivering an adequate 
V t with the other. Use of cricoid pressure to prevent 
regurgitation during cardiac arrest resuscitation may 
be considered; however, there are no data to support 
its effi  cacy in this circumstance and its routine use is 
not recommended in the new guidelines. 
 Tracheal intubation should be attempted as soon 
as practical.  Attempts at intubation should not 
interrupt ventilation for more than 10 s. Aft er 
intubation, the patient can be ventilated with a self-
infl ating bag capable of delivering high oxygen con-
centrations. Because two hands are now available to 
squeeze the bag, ventilation should be satisfactory. 
4
Wall O2
O2 hose
Pressure
regulator
(0–50 psi)
Air hose
Low-compliance
tubing
14-gauge catheter
14-gauge catheter
Jet injector
Luer lock
connector
Low-compliance
tubing
15 mm ET tube adapter
from a 4 mm ET tube
Fresh gas
outlet of
anesthesia
machine
A
B
 FIGURE 556  A,B: Two systems for transtracheal jet 
ventilation after cricothyrotomy (see  Figure 55–5 ). A jet 
ventilator and pressure regulator (as shown in  A ) provide 
better control of the inspiratory cycle. Both systems use 
low-compliance tubing and a high-pressure source of 
oxygen. 
1240 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
(4–5 cm) in adults, 1–1½ in. (2–4 cm) in children, 
and then allowed to return to its normal position. 
For an infant, compressions ½–1 in. (1½–2½ cm) in 
depth are made with the middle and ring fi ngers on 
the sternum one fi nger-breadth below the nipple 
line. Compression and release times should be equal. 
 Whether adult resuscitation is performed by a 
single rescuer or by two rescuers, two breaths 
are administered every 30 compressions (30:2), 
allowing 3–4 s for the two breaths. Th e cardiac com-
pression rate should be 100/min regardless of the 
number of rescuers. A slightly higher compression 
rate of more than 100/min is suggested for infants, 
with two breaths delivered every 30 compressions. 
 Assessing the Adequacy 
of Chest Compressions 
 Cardiac output can be estimated by monitoring end-
tidal CO 2 (P etco 2 >10 mm Hg, S cvo 2 >30%) or 
arterial pulsations (with an arterial diastolic relax-
ation pressure >20 mm Hg). Arterial pulsations dur-
ing resuscitation are not a good measure of adequate 
chest compression; however, spontaneous arterial 
pulsations are an indicator of ROSC. Th ere is new 
emphasis in the 2010 guidelines on physiological 
parameters, such as P etco 2 , S cvo 2 , and diastolic 
arterial pressure, to assess the adequacy of chest 
compressions. 
 1.  P etco 2 —In an intubated patient, a P etco 2 greater 
than 10 mm Hg indicates good-quality chest com-
pressions; a P etco 2 less than 10 mm Hg has been 
shown to be a predictor of poor outcomes of CPR 
(decreased chance of ROSC). A transient increase in 
P etco 2 may be seen with administration of sodium 
bicarbonate; however, an abrupt and sustained rise 
of P etco 2 is an indicator of ROSC. 
 2. Coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) —Th is is the 
diff erence between the aortic diastolic pressure and 
the right atrial diastolic pressure. Arterial diastolic 
pressure in the radial, brachial, or femoral artery is 
a good indicator of CPP. Arterial diastolic pressure 
greater than 20 mm Hg is an indicator of adequate 
chest compressions. 
 3. S cvo 2 —An S cvo 2 less than 30% in the jugular vein 
is associated with poor outcomes. If the S cvo 2 is less 
than 30%, attempts to improve the quality of CPR, 
either by improving the quality of compressions or 
6
or health care provider. Although lay rescuers should 
assume that an unresponsive patient is in cardiac 
arrest and need not check pulse; health care provid-
ers should assess for presence or absence of a pulse. 
 Aft er successful delivery of two initial breaths 
(each 2 s in duration), circulation is rapidly assessed. 
If the patient has an adequate pulse (carotid artery 
in an adult or child, brachial or femoral artery in 
an infant) or blood pressure, breathing is continued 
at 10–12 breaths/min for an adult or a child older 
than 8 years, and 20 breaths/min for an infant or a 
child younger than 8 years of age ( Table 55–2 ). If 
the patient is pulseless or severely hypotensive, the 
circulatory system must be supported by a combi-
nation of external chest compressions, intravenous 
drug administration, and defi brillation when appro-
priate. Initiation of chest compressions is mandated 
by the inadequacy of peripheral perfusion, and drug 
choices and defi brillation energy levels oft en depend 
on electrocardiographic diagnosis of arrhythmias. 
 External Chest Compression 
 Chest compressions force blood to fl ow either by 
increasing intrathoracic pressure (thoracic pump) 
or by directly compressing the heart (cardiac pump). 
During CPR of short duration, the blood fl ow is cre-
ated more by the cardiac pump mechanism; as CPR 
continues, the heart becomes less compliant and the 
thoracic pump mechanism becomes more important. 
As important as the rate and force of compression 
are for maintaining blood fl ow, eff ective perfusion 
of the heart and brain is best achieved when chest 
compression consumes 50% of the duty cycle, with 
the remaining 50% devoted to the relaxation phase 
(allowing blood return into the chest and heart). 
 To perform chest compressions in the unre-
sponsive or pulseless patient, the xiphoid process is 
located and the heel of the rescuer’s hand is placed 
over the lower half of the sternum. Th e other hand is 
placed over the hand on the sternum with the fi ngers 
either interlaced or extended, but off  the chest. Th e 
rescuer’s shoulders should be positioned directly 
over the hands with the elbows locked into position 
and arms extended, so that the weight of the upper 
body is used for compressions. With a straight 
downward thrust, the sternum is depressed 1½–2 in. 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1241
 In many institutions, automated external defi -
brillators (AEDs) are available. Such devices are 
increasingly being used throughout the community 
by police, fi refi ghters, security personnel, sports 
marshals, ski patrol members, and airline fl ight 
attendants, among others. Th ey are placed in any 
public location where 20,000 or more people pass 
by every day. AEDs are technologically advanced, 
microprocessor-based devices that are capable of 
electrocardiographic analysis with very high specifi c-
ity and sensitivity in diff erentiating shockable from 
nonshockable rhythms. All AEDs manufactured 
today deliver some type of biphasic waveform shock. 
Compared with monophasic shocks, biphasic shocks 
deliver energy in two directions with equivalent effi  -
cacy at lower energy levels and possibly with less 
myocardial injury. Th ese devices deliver impedance-
compensating shocks employing either biphasic 
truncated exponential (BTE) or rectilinear (RBW) 
morphology. Biphasic shocks delivering low energy 
for defi brillation (120–200 joule [J]) have been found 
to be as or more eff ective than 200–360 J monophasic 
damped sine (MDS) waveform shocks. When using 
AEDs, one electrode pad is placed beside the upper 
right sternal border, just below the clavicle, and the 
other pad is placed just lateral to the left  nipple, with 
the top of the pad a few inches below the axilla. 
 A decrease in time delay between the last com-
pression and the delivery of a shock (the preshock 
pause) has received special emphasis in the new 
guidelines. Stacking shocks increases the time to 
next compression, and it has been noted that the fi rst 
shock is usually associated with a 90% effi  cacy. Th us, 
stacked shocks have been replaced by a recommen-
dation for a single shock, followed by immediate 
resumption of chest compressions. 
 For 
cardioversion 
of 
atrial 
fi brillation 
( Table 55–3 ), 120–200 J can be used initially with 
escalation if needed. For atrial fl utter or paroxys-
mal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT), an initial 
energy level of 50–100 J is oft en adequate. All mono-
phasic shocks should start with 200 J. 
 Ventricular tachycardia, particularly mono-
morphic ventricular tachycardia, responds well to 
shocks at initial energy levels of 100 J. For poly-
morphic ventricular tachycardia or for ventricular 
fi brillation, initial energy can be set at 120–200 J, 
through administration of medications, should be 
considered. 
 DEFIBRILLATION 
 Ventricular fi brillation develops most commonly in 
adults who experience nontraumatic cardiac arrest. 
Th e time from collapse to defi brillation is the most 
important determinant of survival. Th e chances for 
survival decline 7–10% for every minute without 
defi brillation ( Figure 55–7 ). Th erefore, patients who 
have cardiac arrest should be defi brillated at the ear-
liest possible moment.  Health care personnel 
working in hospitals and ambulatory care 
facilities must be able to provide early defi brillation 
to collapsed patients with ventricular fi brillation as 
soon as possible. Shock should be delivered within 
3 min (±1 min) of arrest. 
 Th ere is no defi nite relationship between the 
energy requirement for successful defi brillation and 
body size. A shock with too low an energy (current) 
level will not successfully defi brillate; conversely, 
too high an energy level may result in functional 
and morphological injury. Defi brillators deliver 
energy in either monophasic or biphasic waveforms. 
Increasingly, biphasic waveforms are recommended 
for cardioversion as they achieve the same degree of 
success but with less energy and theoretically less 
myocardial damage. 
7
 FIGURE 557  Success of deﬁ brillation versus time. 
The chance of successful deﬁ brillation of a patient in 
ventricular ﬁ brillation decreases 7–10% per minute. 
Time (min)
Survival
5
0
10
15
20
100%
1242 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
for intravenous use, diluted in 10 mL of normal 
saline or distilled water, are recommended for adult 
patients. Even though establishing reliable intrave-
nous access is a high priority, it  should not take pre-
cedence over initial chest compressions, airway 
management, or defi brillation. A preexisting inter-
nal jugular or subclavian line is ideal for venous 
access during resuscitation. If there is no central line 
access, an attempt should be made to establish 
peripheral intravenous access in either the antecubi-
tal or the external jugular vein. Peripheral intrave-
nous sites are associated with a signifi cant delay of 
1–2 min between drug administration and delivery 
to the heart, as peripheral blood fl ow is drastically 
reduced during resuscitation. Administration of 
drugs given through a peripheral intravenous line 
should be followed by an intravenous fl ush (eg, a 
20-mL fl uid bolus in adults) and/or elevation of the 
extremity for 10–20 s. Establishing central vein 
access can potentially cause interruption of CPR but 
should be considered if an inadequate response is 
seen to peripherally administered drugs. 
 If intravenous cannulation is diffi  cult, an 
intraosseous infusion can provide emergency 
vascular access in children. Th e success rate is lower 
in older children, but even in adults intraosseous 
cannulas have been successfully placed in the tibia 
and in the distal radius and ulna. A rigid 18-gauge 
spinal needle with a stylet or a small bone marrow 
trephine needle can be inserted into the distal femur 
or proximal tibia. If the tibia is chosen, a needle is 
inserted 2–3 cm below the tibial tuberosity at a 45° 
angle away from the epiphyseal plate ( Figure 55–8 ). 
Once the needle is advanced through the cortex, it 
should stand upright without support. Proper place-
ment is confi rmed by the ability to aspirate marrow 
through the needle and a smooth infusion of fl uid. 
A network of venous sinusoids within the medullary 
cavity of long bones drains into the systemic cir-
culation by way of nutrient or emissary veins. Th is 
route is very eff ective for administration of drugs, 
crystalloids, colloids, and blood and can achieve 
fl ow rates exceeding 100 mL/h under gravity. Much 
higher fl ow rates are possible if the fl uid is placed 
under pressure (eg, 300 mm Hg) with an infu-
sion bag. Th e onset of drug action may be slightly 
delayed compared with intravenous or tracheal 
9
depending upon the type of biphasic waveform being 
used. Stepwise increases in energy levels should be 
used if the fi rst shock fails, although some AEDs 
operate with a fi xed-energy protocol of 150 J with 
very high success in terminating ventricular fi brilla-
tion ( Table 55–3 ). 
 Cardioversion should be synchronized with the 
QRS complex and is recommended for hemody-
namically stable, wide-complex tachycardia requir-
ing cardioversion, PSVT, atrial fi brillation, and atrial 
fl utter. Polymorphic VT should be treated as VF 
with unsynchronized shocks. 
 Invasive Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation 
 Th oracotomy and open-chest cardiac massage are 
not part of routine CPR because of the high inci-
dence of severe complications. Nonetheless, these 
invasive techniques can be helpful in specifi c life-
threatening circumstances that preclude eff ective 
closed-chest massage. Possible indications include 
cardiac arrest associated with penetrating or 
blunt chest trauma, penetrating abdominal trauma, 
severe chest deformity, pericardial tamponade, or 
pulmonary embolism. 
 Intravenous Access 
 Some resuscitation drugs are fairly well absorbed 
following administration through a TT.  Lido-
caine, epinephrine, atropine, naloxone, and 
vasopressin (but  not sodium bicarbonate) can be 
delivered via a catheter whose tip extends past the 
TT. Dosages 2–2½ times higher than recommended 
8
 TABLE 553 Energy requirements for 
cardioversion using biphasic truncated 
exponential (BTE) or rectilinear morphology. 1 
Indications
Shocks (J)
Unstable atrial fibrillation
120–200
Unstable atrial flutter/tachycardia
50–100
Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
100
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia 
or ventricular fibrillation
120–200
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1243
variations in monitoring techniques (eg, lead sys-
tems, equipment). 
 Drug Administration 
 Many of the drugs administered during CPR have 
been described elsewhere in this text.  Table 55–4 sum-
marizes the cardiovascular actions, indications, and 
dosages of drugs commonly used during resuscitation. 
 Atropine is not included as a drug for PEA/
asystole in the new CPR-ECC guidelines; however, its 
use is retained for symptomatic bradycardia. Infu-
sions of chronotropic drugs (eg, dopamine, epineph-
rine, isoproterenol) can be considered as an alternative 
to pacing if atropine is ineff ective in the setting of 
symptomatic bradycardia. Calcium chloride, sodium 
bicarbonate, and bretylium are conspicuously absent 
from this table. Calcium (2–4 mg/kg of the chloride 
salt) is helpful in the treatment of documented hypo-
calcemia, hyperkalemia, hypermagnesemia, or a cal-
cium channel blocker overdose. When used, 10% 
calcium chloride can be given at 2–4 mg/kg every 
10 min. Sodium bicarbonate (0.5–1 mEq/kg) is not 
recommended in the guidelines and should be con-
sidered only in specifi c situations such as preexisting 
metabolic acidosis or hyperkalemia, or in the treat-
ment of tricyclic antidepressant or barbiturate over-
dose. Sodium bicarbonate elevates plasma pH by 
combining with hydrogen ions to form carbonic acid, 
which readily dissociates into carbon dioxide and 
water.  Because carbon dioxide, but not bicar-
bonate, readily crosses cell membranes and the 
blood–brain barrier, the resulting arterial hypercap-
nia will cause intracellular tissue acidosis. Although 
successful defi brillation is not related to  arterial pH, 
increased  intramyocardial carbon dioxide may reduce 
the possibility of cardiac resuscitation. Furthermore, 
bicarbonate administration can lead to detrimental 
alterations in osmolality and the oxygen–hemoglobin 
dissociation curve. Th erefore, eff ective alveolar venti-
lation and adequate tissue perfusion are the treat-
ments of choice for the respiratory and metabolic 
acidosis that accompany resuscitation. 
 Intravenous fl uid therapy with either colloid or 
balanced salt solutions is indicated in patients with 
intravascular volume depletion (eg, acute blood loss, 
diabetic ketoacidosis, thermal burns). Dextrose-
containing solutions may lead to a hyperosmotic 
10
administration. Th e intraosseous route may require 
a higher dose of some drugs (eg, epinephrine) 
than recommended for intravenous administra-
tion. Th e use of intraosseous infusion for induction 
and maintenance of general anesthesia, antibiotic 
therapy, seizure control, and inotropic support has 
been described. (Note that most studies have evalu-
ated the placement of intraosseous access in patients 
with intact hemodynamics or hypovolemic states, 
not in cardiac arrest situations.) Because of the risks 
of osteomyelitis and compartment syndrome, how-
ever, intraosseous infusions should be replaced by a 
conventional intravenous route as soon as possible. 
In addition, because of the theoretical risk of bone 
marrow or fat emboli, intraosseous infusions should 
be avoided if possible in patients with right-to-left  
shunts, pulmonary hypertension, or severe pulmo-
nary insuffi  ciency. 
 Arrhythmia Recognition 
 Successful pharmacological and electrical treatment 
of cardiac arrest ( Figure 55–9 ) depends on defi ni-
tive identifi cation of the underlying arrhythmia. 
Interpreting rhythm strips in the midst of a resus-
citation situation is complicated by artifacts and 
Patella
Tibial
tuberosity
Femur 
Epiphyseal
plate Medullary
sinusoids
Tibia
 FIGURE 558  Intraosseous infusions provide 
emergency access to the venous circulation in pediatric 
patients by way of the large medullary venous channels. 
The needle is directed away from the epiphyseal plate to 
minimize the risk of injury. 
CPR Quality
• Push hard (≥2 inches [5 cm]) and fast 
(≥100/min) and allow complete chest 
recoil
• Minimize interruptions in compressions
• Avoid excessive ventilation
• Rotate compressor every 2 minutes
• If no advanced airway,  
 
30:2 compression-ventilation ratio
• Quantitative waveform capnography
– If PETCO2 <10 mm Hg, attempt to 
improve CPR quality
• Intra-arterial pressure
– If relaxation phase (diastolic) 
pressure <20 mm Hg, attempt to 
improve CPR quality
Return of Spontaneous Circulation 
(ROSC)
• Pulse and blood pressure
• Abrupt sustained increase in PETCO2 
(typically ≥40 mm Hg)
• Spontaneous arterial pressure waves 
with intra-arterial monitoring
Shock Energy
• Biphasic: Manufacturer 
recommendation (e.g., initial dose of 
120–200 J); if unknown, use maximum 
available. Second and subsequent 
doses should be equivalent, and higher 
doses may be considered.
• Monophasic: 360 J
Drug Therapy
• Epinephrine IV/IO Dose:                     
1 mg every 3-5 minutes
• Vasopression IV/IO Dose:                 
40 units can replace first or second 
dose of epinephrine
• Amiodarone IV/IO Dose: 
 
First dose: 300 mg bolus 
 
Second dose: 150 mg
Advanced Airway
• Supraglottic advanced airway or 
endotracheal intubation
• Waveform capnography to confirm and 
monitor ET tube placement
• 8-10 breaths per minute with 
continuous chest compressions
Reversible Causes
• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Hydrogen ion (acidosis)
• Hypo-/hyperkalemia
• Hypothermia
• Tension pneuomothorax
• Tamponade, cardiac
• Toxins
• Thrombosis, pulmonary
• Thrombosis, coronary
Go to 5 or 7
1
2
3
5
7
4
6
10
11
No
No
Yes
Yes
12
8
9
Start CPR
• Give oxygen
• Attach 
monitor/defibrillator
Rhythm
shockable
• If no signs of return of spontaneous 
circulation (ROSC), go to 10 or 11
• If ROSC, go to Post-Cardiac Arrest Care
Asystole/PEA
Rhythm
shockable
Rhythm
shockable
CPR 2 min
• IV/IO access
• Epinephrine every 
3-5 min
• Consider advanced 
airway, capnography
CPR 2 min
• Treat reversible causes
VF/VT
Rhythm
shockable
Rhythm
shockable
CPR 2 min
• Epinephrine every 
3-5 min
• Consider advanced 
airway, capnography
CPR 2 min
• Amiodarone
• Treat reversible causes
CPR 2 min
• IV/IO access
Shout for Help/Activate Emergency Response
Adult Cardiac Arrest
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Shock
Shock
Shock
 FIGURE 559  Algorithm for treating ventricular 
ﬁ brillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia 
(VF/VT). Pulseless ventricular tachycardia should be 
treated in the same way as ventricular ﬁ brillation. 
Note: This ﬁ gure and Figures 55–1 and 55–2 emphasize 
the concept that rescuers and health care providers must 
assume that all unmonitored adult cardiac arrests are 
due to VF/VT. In each ﬁ gure, the ﬂ ow of the algorithm 
assumes that the arrhythmia is continuing. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Neumar RW, Otto CW, Link MS, et al: Part 8: 
Adult Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support: 2010 American Heart 
Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation 2012;122(18 Suppl 3):
S729-S767.) 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1245 
TABLE 554 Cardiovascular eﬀ ects, indications, and dosages of resuscitation drugs.1
Initial Dose
Drug
Cardiovascular Eﬀ ects
Indications
Adult
Pediatric
Comments
Adenosine
Slows AV nodal conduction
Narrow complex 
tachycardias, stable 
supraventricular 
tachycardia, and wide-
complex tachycardias 
if supraventricular in origin
6 mg over 1–3 s; 12 mg 
repeat dose
Initial dose 0.1–0.2 
mg/kg; subsequent 
doses doubled to 
maximum single 
dose of 12 mg
Recommended as diagnostic or 
therapeutic maneuver for 
supraventricular tachycardias; give 
as rapid IV bolus. Vasodilates, BP may 
decrease. Theoretical risk of angina, 
bronchospasm, proarrhythmic 
action. Drug–drug interaction with 
theophylline, dipyridamole.
Atropine
Anticholinergic 
(parasympatholytic). 
Increases sinoatrial node 
rate and automaticity; 
increases AV node 
conduction
Symptomatic brachycardia, 
AV block
0.5–1.0 mg repeated 
every 3–5 min
0.02 mg/kg
Repeat atropine doses every 5 min 
to a total dose of 3 mg in adults or 
0.5 mg in children, 1.0 mg in 
adolescents. The minimum pediatric 
dose is 0.1 mg. Do not use for 
infranodal (Mobitz II) block.
Epinephrine
α-Adrenergic effects increase 
myocardial and cerebral 
blood flow. β-Adrenergic 
effects may increase 
myocardial work and 
decrease subendocardial 
perfusion and cerebral blood 
flow
VF/VT, electromechanical 
dissociation, ventricular 
asystole, severe 
bradycardia unresponsive 
to atropine or pacing
Severe hypotension
1 mg IV
0.03 mcg/kg/min in 
an infusion increased 
to effect
Initial dose 0.01 
mg/kg IV; repeat 
same for 
subsequent 
doses or up to 
0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV
1 mcg/kg
Repeat doses every 3–5 min as 
necessary. An infusion of 
epinephrine (eg., 1 mg in 250 mL 
D5W or NS, 4 mcg/mL) can be 
titrated to effect in adults (1–4 mcg/
min) or children (0.1–1 mcg/kg/min). 
Administration down a tracheal tube 
requires higher doses (2–2.5 mg in 
adults, 0.1 mg/kg in children). 
High-dose epinephrine (0.1 mg/kg) 
in adults is recommended only after 
standard therapy has failed.
Lidocaine
Decreases rate of phase 4 
depolarization (decreases 
automaticity); depresses 
conduction in reentry 
pathways. Elevates VF 
threshold. Reduces disparity 
in action potential duration 
between normal and 
ischemic tissue. Reduces 
action potential and effective 
refractory period duration
VT that has not responded 
to defibrillation; 
premature ventricular 
contractions.
Use only as second-line 
therapy; thus, consider 
only if amiodarone is 
unavailable
1–1.5 mg/kg
1 mg/kg
Doses of 0.5–1.5 mg/kg can be 
repeated every 5–10 min to a total 
dose of 3 mg/kg. After infarction or 
successful resuscitation, a 
continuous infusion (eg, 1 g in 
500 mL D5W, 2 mg/mL) should be 
run at a rate of 20–50 mcg/kg/min 
(2–4 mg/min in most adults). 
Therapeutic blood levels are usually 
1.5–6 mcg/mL.
(continued)
1246 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Vasopressin
Nonadrenergic peripheral 
vasoconstrictor; direct 
stimulation of V1 receptors
Bleeding esophageal 
varices; adult shock-
refractory VF; hemodynamic 
support in vasodilatory 
(septic) shock
40 units IV, single dose, 
1 time only
Not recommended
Newly recommended as equivalent 
to epinephrine in VF and PEA; may 
be more effective in asystole; used 
only one time; has a 10–20 min 
half-life.
Procainamide Suppresses both atrial and 
ventricular arrhythmias
AF/flutter; preexcited atrial 
arrhythmias with rapid 
ventricular response; 
wide-complex tachycardia 
that cannot be 
distinguished as SVT 
or VT
20 mg/min until 
arrhythmia suppressed, 
hypotension develops, 
QRS complex increases by 
>50%, or total dose of 
17 mg/kg has infused. In 
urgent situation, 
50 mg/min may be used 
to maximum of 17 mg/kg. 
Maintenance infusion, 
1–4 mg/min
Loading dose: 15 mg/
kg; infusion over 
30–60 min; routine 
use in combination 
with drugs that 
prolong QT interval 
is not recommended
Contraindicated in overdose of 
tricyclic antidepressants or other 
antiarrhythmic drugs. Bolus doses 
can result in toxicity. Should not be 
used in preexisting QT prolongation 
or torsades de pointes. Blood levels 
should be monitored in patients 
with impaired renal function and 
when constant infusion >3 mg/min 
for >24 h.
Amiodarone
Complex drug with effects 
on sodium, potassium, and 
calcium channels as well as 
α- and β-adrenergic blocking 
properties
SVT with accessory pathway 
conduction; unstable VT 
and VF; stable VT, 
polymorphic VT, wide-
complex tachycardia of 
uncertain origin; AF/flutter 
with CHF; preexcited AF/
flutter; adjunct to electrical 
cardioversion in refractory 
PSVTs, atrial tachycardia, 
and AF
150 mg over 10 min, 
followed by 1 mg/min for 
6 h, then 0.5 mg/min, with 
supplementary infusion of 
150 mg as necessary up to 
2 g. For pulseless VT or VF, 
initial administration is 
300 mg rapid infusion 
diluted in 20–30 mL of 
saline or dextrose in water
5 mg/kg for pulseless 
VT/VF; for perfusing 
tachycardia loading 
dose, 5 mg/kg IV/IO; 
maximum dose, 
15 mg/kg/d
Antiarrhythmic of choice if cardiac 
function is impaired, EF <40%, or 
CHF. Routine use in combination 
with drugs prolonging QT interval is 
not recommended. Most frequent 
side effects are hypotension and 
bradycardia.
Verapamil
Calcium channel blocking 
agent used to slow 
conduction and increase 
refractoriness in AV node, 
terminating reentrant 
arrhythmias that require AV 
nodal conduction for 
continuation
Controls ventricular 
response rate in AF/flutter 
and MAT; rate control in AF; 
terminating narrow-
complex PSVT
2.5–5 mg IV over 2 min; 
without response, repeat 
dose with 5–10 mg every 
15–30 min to a max of 
20 mg
Use only in patients with narrow-
complex PSVT or supraventricular 
arrhythmia. Do not use in presence 
of impaired ventricular function 
or CHF
TABLE 554 Cardiovascular eﬀ ects, indications, and dosages of resuscitation drugs.1 (continued)
Initial Dose
Drug
Cardiovascular Eﬀ ects
Indications
Adult
Pediatric
Comments
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1247 
Diltiazem
Calcium channel blocking 
agent used to slow 
conduction and increase 
refractoriness in AV node, 
terminating reentrant 
arrhythmias that require AV 
nodal conduction for 
continuation
Slows conduction and 
increases refractoriness in 
AV node. May terminate 
reentrant arrhythmias. 
Controls ventricular 
response rate in AF/flutter 
and MAT
0.25 mg/kg, followed by 
second dose of 0.35 mg/
kg if necessary; 
maintenance infusion of 
5–15 mg/h in AF/flutter
May exacerbate CHF in severe LV 
dysfunction; may decrease 
myocardial contractility, but less 
so than verapamil.
Dobutamine
Synthetic catecholamine and 
potent inotropic agent with 
predominant β-adrenergic 
receptor-stimulating effects 
that increase cardiac 
contractility in a dose-
dependent manner, 
accompanied by a decrease 
in LV filling pressures.
Severe systolic heart failure
5–20 mcg/kg/min
Hemodynamic end points rather 
than specific dose is goal. Elderly 
have significantly reduced response. 
May induce or exacerbate 
myocardial ischemia with increases 
in heart rate.
Flecainide
Potent sodium channel 
blocker with significant 
conduction-slowing effects
AF/flutter, ventricular 
arrhythmias and 
supraventricular 
arrhythmias without 
structural heart disease, 
ectopic atrial heart disease, 
AV nodal reentrant 
tachycardia, SVTs associated 
with an accessory pathway, 
including preexcited AF
2 mg/kg at 10 mg/min 
(IV use not approved in 
the United States)
Should not be used in patients with 
impaired LV function, or when 
coronary artery disease is suspected.
Ibutilide
Short-acting antiarrhythmic, 
prolongs the action potential 
duration and increases 
refractory period
Acute conversion or adjunct 
to electrical cardioversion of 
AF/flutter of short duration
In patients >60 kg, 1 mg 
(10 mL) over 10 min; a 
second similar dose may 
be repeated in 10 min. In 
patients <60 kg, initial 
dose is 0.01 mg/kg
Patients should be monitored for 
arrhythmias for 4–6 h, and longer 
in those with hepatic dysfunction.
Magnesium
Hypomagnesemia associated 
with arrhythmias, cardiac 
insufficiency, and sudden 
death; can precipitate 
refractory VF; can hinder 
K+ replacement
Torsades de pointes with 
prolonged QT, even with 
normal serum levels of 
magnesium
1–2 g in 50–100 mL D5W 
over 15 min
500 mg/mL–IV/IO: 
25–50 mg/kg; 
maximum dose: 
2 g per dose
Rapid IV infusion for torsades 
de pointes or suspected 
hypomagnesemia not 
recommended in cardiac arrest 
except when arrhythmia suspected.
(continued)
1248 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Propafenone
Significant conduction 
slowing and negative 
inotropic effects. 
Nonselective β-adrenergic 
blocking properties
AF/flutter, ventricular 
arrhythmias and 
supraventricular 
arrhythmias without 
structural heart disease, 
ectopic atrial heart disease, 
AV nodal reentrant 
tachycardia, SVTs associated 
with an accessory pathway
2.0 mg/kg at 10 mg/min 
(IV use not approved in 
the United States)
Should be avoided with impaired LV 
function or when CAD suspected.
Sotalol
Prolongs action potential 
duration and increases 
cardiac tissue refractoriness. 
Nonselective β-adrenergic 
blocking properties
Preexcited AF/flutter, 
ventricular and 
supraventricular 
arrhythmias
1.0–1.5 mg/kg at a rate of 
10 mg/min 
Limited by need to be infused 
slowly.
1AV, atrioventricular; BP, blood pressure; VF, ventricular ﬁ brillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; AF, atrial ﬁ brillation; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; CHF, 
congestive heart failure; PSVT, paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia; IV/IO, intravenous/intraosseous; EF, ejection fraction; MAT, multifocal atrial tachycardia; LV, left ventricular; CAD, coronary 
artery disease.
TABLE 554 Cardiovascular eﬀ ects, indications, and dosages of resuscitation drugs.1 (continued)
Initial Dose
Drug
Cardiovascular Eﬀ ects
Indications
Adult
Pediatric
Comments
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1249
diuresis and may worsen neurological outcome. Th ey 
should be avoided unless hypoglycemia is suspected. 
Likewise, administration of free water (eg, D 5 W) may 
lead to cerebral edema. 
 Emergency Pacemaker Therapy 
 Transcutaneous cardiac pacing (TCP) is a noninva-
sive method of rapidly treating arrhythmias caused by 
conduction disorders or abnormal impulse. TCP is 
not routinely recommended in cardiac arrest. TCP 
use may be considered to treat asystole, bradycardia 
caused by heart block, or tachycardia from a reentrant 
mechanism. If there is concern about the use of atro-
pine in high-grade block, TCP is always appropriate. 
If the patient is unstable with marked bradycardia, 
TCP should be implemented immediately while 
awaiting treatment response to drugs. Th e pacer unit 
has become a built-in feature of some defi brillator 
models. Disposable pacing electrodes are usually 
positioned on the patient in an anterior–posterior 
manner. Th e placement of the negative electrode cor-
responds to a V 2 electrocardiograph position, whereas 
the positive electrode is placed on the left  posterior 
chest beneath the scapula and lateral to the spine. 
Note that this positioning does not interfere with pad-
dle placement during defi brillation. Failure to capture 
may be due to electrode misplacement, poor elec-
trode-to-skin contact, or increased transthoracic 
impedance (eg, barrel-shaped chest, pericardial eff u-
sion). Current output is slowly increased until the 
pacing stimuli obtain electrical and mechanical cap-
ture.  A wide QRS complex following a pacing 
spike signals  electrical capture, but  mechanical
(ventricular) capture must be confi rmed by an 
improving pulse or blood pressure. Conscious 
patients may require sedation to tolerate the discom-
fort of skeletal muscle contractions. Transcutaneous 
pacing can provide eff ective temporizing therapy 
until transvenous pacing or other defi nitive treatment 
can be initiated. TCP has many advantages over 
transvenous pacing because it can be used by almost 
all electrocardiogram providers and can be started 
quickly and conveniently at the bedside. 
 Precordial Thump 
 Th e precordial thump is to be considered only in 
witnessed, monitored unstable VT when a defi bril-
lator is not immediately available. 
11
 RECOMMENDED 
RESUSCITATION PROTOCOLS 
 A resuscitation team leader integrates the assess-
ment of the patient, including electrocardiographic 
diagnosis, with the electrical and pharmacological 
therapy ( Table 55–5 ). Th is person must have a fi rm 
grasp of the guidelines for cardiac arrest presented in 
the CPR-ECC algorithms ( Figures 55–9 to  55–13 ). 
 TABLE 555  Steps for synchronized 
cardioversion.  1 
1.   Consider sedation. 
2.   Turn on defibrillator (monophasic or biphasic). 
3.   Attach monitor leads to the patient (“white to right, 
red to ribs, what’s left over to the left shoulder”) and 
ensure proper display of the patient’s rhythm. 
4.   Engage the synchronization mode by pressing the 
“sync” control button. 
5.   Look for markers on R waves indicating sync mode. 
6.   If necessary, adjust monitor gain until sync markers 
occur with each R wave. 
7.   Select appropriate energy level. 
8.   Position conductor pads on patient (or apply gel to 
paddles). 
9.   Position paddle on patient (sternum-apex). 
10.  Announce to team members: “Charging 
defibrillator—stand clear!” 
11.  Press “charge” button on apex paddle (right hand). 
12.  When the defibrillator is charged, begin the final 
clearing chant. State firmly in a forceful voice the 
following chant before each shock:
• “I am going to shock on three. One, I’m clear.” (Check 
to make sure you are clear of contact with the 
patient, the stretcher, and the equipment.) 
 • “Two, you are clear.” (Make a visual check to ensure 
that no one continues to touch the patient or 
stretcher. In particular, do not forget about the 
person providing ventilation. That person’s hands 
should not be touching the ventilatory adjuncts, 
including the tracheal tube!). 
• “Three,  everybody’s clear.” (Check yourself one 
more time before pressing the “shock” buttons.) 
13.  Apply 25 lb pressure on both paddles. 
14.  Press the “discharge” buttons simultaneously. 
15.  Check the monitor. If tachycardia persists, increase 
the joules according to the electrical cardioversion 
algorithm. 
16.  Reset the sync mode after each synchronized 
cardioversion because most defibrillators default 
back to unsynchronized mode. This default allows an 
immediate defibrillation if the cardioversion produces 
ventricular fibrillation. 
 1  Data from The American Heart Association Guidelines 2010 for 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. 
Circulation 2010;122:S706.
1250 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
Pulseless Electrical Activity
(Rhythm other than VT/VF on monitor, with no pulse)
Review for differential diagnosis
• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Hydrogen ion—acidosis
• Hyper-/hypokalemia
• Hypothermia
• Toxins (drug OD, accidents)
• Tamponade, cardiac
• Tension pneumothorax
• Thrombosis, coronary (ACS)
• Thrombosis, pulmonary (embolism)
Vasopressin
40 units once
Epinephrine 1 mg IV push,
repeat every 3 to 5 minutes
Secondary survey
Airway:  Advanced airway placement (<10 sec)
Breathing: Confirm placement with clinical criteria and confirmation 
device; secure airway
Circulation 
• Establish IV/IO access 
• Administer drugs 
• Monitor rhythm 
• Check for effective CPR (PETCO2 >10, arterial DP >20, SCVO2 >30)
• Check responsiveness
• Activate emergency services
• Start compressions
• Open airway
• Breathing ratio of 30:2
 FIGURE 5510  Pulseless electrical activity algorithm. 
VF/VT, ventricular ﬁ brillation and pulseless ventricular 
tachycardia. P ETCO 2 , end-tidal carbon dioxide; DP, diastolic 
pressure; S CVO 2 , central venous oxygen saturation.  (Data 
from the American Heart Association BLS and ACLS Guidelines 2010 
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. 
Circulation 2010.122;S729.) 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1251 
Asystole
• Check responsiveness
• Activate emergency services
• Start compressions
• Open airway
• Breathing ratio of 30:2
Secondary survey
Airway:  Advanced airway  placement (<10 sec)
Breathing: Confirm placement with clinical criteria and confirmation 
device; secure airway
Circulation 
• Establish IV/IO access 
• Administer drugs 
• Monitor rhythm 
• Check for effective CPR (PETCO2 >10, arterial DP >20, SCVO2 >30)
• Search for reversible causes
Vasopressin
40 units once
Epinephrine
1 mg IV every 3 to 5 minutes
 Asystole persists
• Withhold resuscitation efforts?
• Consider quality of resuscitation?
• Atypical clinical features?
• Support for cease efforts in place?
 FIGURE 5511  Asystole: The silent heart 
algorithm. VF/VT, ventricular ﬁ brillation and pulseless 
ventricular tachycardia; P ETCO 2 , end-tidal carbon 
dioxide; DP, diastolic pressure; S CVO 2 , central venous 
oxygen saturation. (Data from The American Heart 
Association BLS and ACLS Guidelines 2010 for cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 
2010:122;S729.) 
1252 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
• Relatively slow (rate less than expected 
relative to underlying condition or cause)
• Assess secondary ABCs (invasive airway 
management needed?)
• Oxygen–IV access–monitor–fluids
• Vital signs, pulse oximeter, monitor BP
• Obtain and review 12-lead ECG
• Obtain and review portable chest film
• Problem-focused history
• Problem-focused physical examination
• Consider causes (differential diagnoses)
Bradycardia
or
Primary ABCD Survey
Secondary ABCD Survey
Serious signs or symptoms?
Due to the bradycardia?
Type II second-degree AV block
or
Third-degree AV block?
Intervention sequence
• Atropine 0.5 to 1.0 mg
• Transcutaneous pacing if available
• Dopamine 5 to 20 µg/kg per minute
• Epinephrine 2 to 10 µg/min
Yes
Yes
No
No
Observe
3,4,5
1,2
6
7
• Slow (absolute bradycardia = rate <60 bpm)
• Assess ABCs
• Secure airway noninvasively
• Ensure monitor/defibrillator is available
• Prepare for transvenous pacer
• If symptoms develop, use 
transcutaneous pacemaker until 
transvenous pacer placed
 FIGURE 5512  Bradycardia algorithm. AV, atrioventricular. (Data from The American Heart Association BLS and ACLS Guidelines 
2010 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 2010:122;S729.) 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1253 
Doses/Details
Synchronized Cardioversion
Initial recommended doses:
• Narrow regular: 50-100 J
• Narrow irregular: 120-200 J biphasic 
or 200 J monophasic
• Wide regular: 100 J
• Wide irregular: defibrillation dose 
(NOT synchronized)
Adenonsine IV Dose:
First dose: 6 mg rapid IV push; 
follow with NS flush
Second does: 12 mg if required
Antiarrhythmic Infusions for 
Stable Wide-QRS Tachycardia
Procainamide IV Dose:
20-50 mg/min until arrhythmia 
suppressed, hypotension ensues, 
QRS duration increases >50%, or 
maximum dose 17 mg/kg given. 
Maintenance infusion: 1-4 mg/min. 
Avoid if prolonged QT or CHF.
Amiodarone IV Dose:
First dose: 150 mg over 10 minutes.
Repeat as needed if VT recurs.
Follow by maintenance infusion of 
1 mg/min for first 6 hours.
Sotalol IV Dose:
100 mg (1.5 mg/kg) over 5 minutes. 
Avoid if prolonged QT.
Adult Tachycardia
(with pulse)
1
2
3
7
5
6
4
Wide QRS?
≥0.12 second
Assess appropriateness for clinical 
condition. Heart rate typically ≥150/min 
if tachyarrhythmia.
Identify and treat underlying cause
• Maintain patent airway; assist breathing 
as necessary
• Oxygen (if hypoxemic)
• Cardiac monitor to identify rhythm; 
monitor blood pressure and oximetry
Persistent tachyarrhythmia causing:
• Hypotension?
• Acutely altered mental status?
• Signs of shock?
• Ischemic chest discomfort?
• Acute heart failure?
Synchronized cardioversion
• Consider sedation
• If regular narrow complex, 
consider adenosine
• IV access and 12-lead ECG 
if available
• Consider adenosine only if 
regular and monomorphic
• Consider antiarrhythmic infusion
• Consider expert consultation
• IV access and 12-lead ECG if available
• Vagal maneuvers
• Adenosine (if regular)
• β-Blocker or calcium channel blocker
• Consider expert consultaion
No
No
Yes
Yes
 FIGURE 5513  Tachycardia overview algorithm. VT, 
ventricular tachycardia; CHF, congestive heart failure. 
WPW, Wolﬀ -Parkinson-White syndrome. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from The American Heart Association BLS and ACLS 
Guidelines 2010 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation 2010:122;S729.) 
1254 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 CASE DISCUSSION
Intraoperative Hypotension 
& Cardiac Arrest 
 A 16-year-old boy is rushed to the operating 
room for emergency laparotomy and thora-
cotomy after suﬀ ering multiple abdominal and 
thoracic stab wounds. In the ﬁ eld, paramedics 
intubated the patient, started two large-bore 
intravenous lines, began ﬂ uid resuscitation, and 
inﬂ ated a pneumatic antishock garment. Upon 
arrival in the operating room, the patient’s blood 
pressure is unobtainable, heart rate is 128 beats/
min (sinus tachycardia), and respirations are 
being controlled by a bag-valve device. 
 What should be done immediately? 
 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation must be initi-
ated immediately: external chest compressions 
should be started as soon as the arterial blood 
pressure is found to be inadequate for vital organ 
perfusion. Because the patient is already intu-
bated, the location of the tracheal tube should be 
conﬁ rmed with chest auscultation and quantita-
tive waveform capnography (if available, to assist 
in both conﬁ rmation of tube placement as well as 
to assess the adequacy of CPR) and 100% oxygen 
should be delivered. 
 Which CPR sequence best ﬁ ts this situation? 
 Pulselessness in the presence of sinus rhythm 
suggests severe hypovolemia, cardiac tamponade, 
ventricular rupture, dissecting aortic aneurysm, 
tension pneumothorax, profound hypoxemia and 
acidosis, or pulmonary embolism. Epinephrine, 
1 mg, should be administered intravenously. 
 What is the most likely cause of this 
patient’s profound hypotension? 
 The presence of multiple stab wounds strongly 
suggests hypovolemia. Abdominal ultrasound 
can rapidly identify a collapsed vena cava, which 
is pathognomonic of hypovolemia. Fluids, pref-
erably warmed, should be rapidly administered. 
Additional venous access can be sought as other 
members of the operating room team administer 
ﬂ uid through blood pumps or other rapid infusion 
devices. Five percent albumin or lactated Ringer’s 
solution is acceptable until blood products are 
available. Activation of a massive transfusion pro-
tocol is often indicated. 
 What are the signs of tension pneumothorax 
and pericardial tamponade? 
 The signs of  tension pneumothorax —the 
presence of air under pressure in the pleural 
space—include increasing peak inspiratory pres-
sures, tachycardia and hypotension (decreased 
venous return), hypoxia (atelectasis), distended neck 
veins, unequal breath sounds, tracheal deviation, 
and mediastinal shift away from the pneumothorax. 
 Pericardial tamponade — cardiac compres-
sion from pericardial contents—should be sus-
pected in any patient with narrow pulse pressure; 
pulsus paradoxus (>10 mm Hg drop in systolic 
blood pressure with inspiration); elevated cen-
tral venous pressure with neck vein distention; 
equalization of central venous pressure, atrial 
pressures, and ventricular end-diastolic pressures; 
distant heart sounds; tachycardia; and hypoten-
sion. Many of these signs may be masked by con-
current hypovolemic shock. 
 Fluid administration and properly 
performed external cardiac compressions do 
not result in satisfactory carotid or femoral 
pulsations. What else should be done? 
 Because external chest compressions are often 
ineﬀ ective in trauma patients, an emergency tho-
racotomy should be performed as soon as pos-
sible to clamp the thoracic aorta, relieve a tension 
pneumothorax or pericardial tamponade, identify 
possible intrathoracic hemorrhage, and perform 
open-chest cardiac compressions. Cross-clamping 
of the thoracic aorta increases brain and heart 
perfusion and decreases subdiaphragmatic hem-
orrhage. Lack of response to cross-clamping is a 
good predictor of demise.  
 What is the function of the pneumatic antishock 
garment, and how should it be removed? 
 Inﬂ ation of the bladders within a pneumatic 
antishock garment increases arterial blood 
 
CHAPTER 55 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation  
1255 
GUIDELINES
 Th e American Heart Association in Collaboration with 
the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation 
(ILCOR): Guidelines 2010 for cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. 
Circulation 2010;122:S250. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Adult ACLS. Circulation 2010;122:S729. 
 Adult BLS. Circulation 2010;122:S685. 
 Adult CPR overview. Circulation 2010;122:S675. 
 CPR techniques and devices. Circulation 2010;122:S720. 
 Electrical therapies: AED, defi brillation, pacing. 
Circulation 2010;122:S706. 
 Executive summary ACLS. Circulation 2010;122:S640. 
pressure by elevating peripheral vascular resis-
tance. Functionally, the suit has the same eﬀ ect 
as thoracic aorta cross-clamping by decreas-
ing blood ﬂ ow and hemorrhage in the lower 
half of the body. Complications of inﬂ ating the 
abdominal section of the pneumatic antishock 
garment include renal dysfunction, altered lung 
volumes, and visceral injury during external 
chest compressions. The suit should be deﬂ ated 
only after restoration of hemodynamic param-
eters. Even then, deﬂ ation should be gradual, as 
it may be accompanied by marked hypotension 
and metabolic acidosis caused by reperfusion of 
ischemic tissues. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1257
 Formerly anesthetized patients should 
not leave the operating room unless they 
have a patent airway, have adequate 
ventilation and oxygenation, and are 
hemodynamically stable; qualiﬁ ed 
anesthesia personnel must also be 
available to attend the transfer. 
 Before the recovering patient is fully 
responsive, pain is often manifested as 
postoperative restlessness. Serious systemic 
disturbances (eg, hypoxemia, respiratory or 
metabolic acidosis, or hypotension), bladder 
distention, or a surgical complication 
(eg, occult intraabdominal hemorrhage) 
must also be considered in the diﬀ erential 
diagnosis of postoperative agitation.  
 Intense shivering causes precipitous rises 
in oxygen consumption, CO 2  production, 
and cardiac output. These physiological 
eﬀ ects are often poorly tolerated by patients 
with preexisting cardiac or pulmonary 
impairment. 
 Respiratory problems are the most 
frequently encountered serious 
complications in the postanesthesia 
care unit (PACU). The overwhelming 
majority are related to airway obstruction, 
hypoventilation, and/or hypoxemia. 
 Hypoventilation in the PACU is most 
commonly due to the residual depressant 
eﬀ ects of anesthetic agents on respiratory 
drive. 
1
2
3
4
5
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
 Obtundation, circulatory depression, or 
severe acidosis (arterial blood pH < 7.15) is 
an indication for immediate and aggressive 
respiratory and hemodynamic intervention, 
including airway and inotropic support as 
needed. 
 Following naloxone administration, patients 
should be observed closely for recurrence 
of opioid-induced respiratory depression 
(“renarcotization”), as naloxone has a shorter 
duration than do most opioids.  
 Increased intrapulmonary shunting from 
a decreased functional residual capacity 
relative to closing capacity is the most 
common cause of hypoxemia following 
general anesthesia. 
 The possibility of a postoperative 
pneumothorax should always be 
considered following central line placement, 
intercostal blocks, abdominal or chest 
trauma (including rib fractures), neck 
dissections, tracheostomy, nephrectomies, 
or other retroperitoneal or intraabdominal 
procedures (including laparoscopy), 
especially if the diaphragm may have been 
penetrated or disrupted. 
 Hypovolemia is by far the most common 
cause of hypotension in the PACU. 
 Noxious stimulation from incisional pain, 
endotracheal intubation, or bladder 
distention is usually responsible for 
postoperative hypertension. 
6
7
8
9
10
11
 Postanesthesia Care 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
56
1258 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
routinely manage these patients and their potential 
 procedure-related complications. For example, in 
areas where regional and epidural blocks are admin-
istered, Intralipid ® should be stocked in anticipation 
of treating local anesthetic toxicity. 
 Th is chapter discusses the essential components 
of a modern PACU, the general care of patients 
acutely recovering from anesthesia and surgery, and 
the respiratory and circulatory complications most 
commonly encountered in the PACU. 
 THE POSTANESTHESIA 
CARE UNIT 
 At the conclusion of any procedure requiring anes-
thesia, anesthetic agents are discontinued, monitors 
are disconnected, and the patient emerging from 
sedation or anesthesia is taken to the PACU. Fol-
lowing general anesthesia, if an endotracheal tube 
or laryngeal mask airway (LMA) was utilized, and 
if ventilation is judged adequate, the endotracheal 
tube or LMA is usually removed prior to transport. 
Patients are also routinely observed in the PACU 
following regional anesthesia and monitored anes-
thesia care (local anesthesia with sedation). Most 
procedure guidelines require that a patient be admit-
ted to the PACU following any type of anesthesia, 
except by specifi c order of the attending anesthesiol-
ogist. Aft er a brief verbal (and in some cases written) 
“hand off ” report to the PACU nurse, the patient is 
left  in the PACU until the major eff ects of anesthesia 
have worn off . Th is period is characterized by a rela-
tively high incidence of potentially life-threatening 
respiratory and circulatory complications. 
 Th e delivery of anesthesia services in areas 
remote from the main operating room, such as 
endoscopy, interventional radiology, and magnetic 
resonance imaging suites is increasingly common. 
Patients recovering from anesthesia delivered in 
these areas must receive the same standard of care as 
patients recovering from anesthesia received in the 
main operating room. Some institutions have devel-
oped “satellite” PACUs to serve each of these remote 
areas individually, and others have combined their 
procedural areas into one centralized procedural 
suite served by a single PACU. 
 Historically, emphasis on specialized nursing care 
during the immediate postoperative period was 
prompted by the realization that many early postop-
erative deaths occurred immediately aft er anesthe-
sia and surgery and that many of these deaths were 
preventable. A nursing shortage in the United States 
following World War II, as well as the experience of 
providing surgical care to large numbers of battle 
casualties during the war, contributed to the post-
war trend of centralization of immediate postopera-
tive care in the form of recovery rooms, where one 
or more nurses could pay close attention to several 
acute postoperative patients at one time. Over the 
past two decades, the accelerating practice of car-
ing for selected postoperative patients overnight in a 
postanesthesia care unit (PACU), or the equivalent, 
has been a response to increasingly complex surgi-
cal procedures performed on higher-acuity patients, 
oft en in the setting of a shortage of surgical intensive 
care beds. Th e success of PACUs in decreasing post-
operative morbidity and mortality has been a major 
infl uence on the evolution of modern surgical inten-
sive care units. 
 Another recent transformation in postanesthe-
sia care is related to the shift  from inpatient to out-
patient surgery. It is estimated that more than 70% 
of all surgical procedures in the United States are 
now performed on an outpatient basis. Two phases 
of recovery may be recognized for outpatient sur-
gery.  Phase 1 is the immediate intensive care level 
recovery that cares for patients during emergence 
and awakening from anesthesia and continues until 
standard PACU criteria are met (see Discharge 
Criteria below).  Phase 2 is a lower-level care that 
ensures that the patient is ready to go home. “Fast-
tracking” of selected outpatients may allow them to 
safely bypass phase 1 recovery and go directly to the 
phase 2 level of care. 
 In many institutions, the PACU also commonly 
functions as a more intensely monitored location 
for perioperative and chronic pain patients under-
going procedures such as single-shot nerve blocks 
and placement of epidural and peripheral nerve 
catheters, and for patients undergoing other proce-
dures such as central line placement, electroconvul-
sive therapy, and elective cardioversion. Th e PACU 
must be appropriately staff ed and equipped to 
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care 
1259 
may be used to measure temperature in the PACU 
but are not suffi  ciently accurate to document the 
results of treatment for hypothermia or hyperther-
mia; mercury or electronic thermometers must be 
used if an abnormality in temperature is suspected. 
A forced-air warming device, heating lamp, and/or a 
warming/ cooling blanket should be available. 
 Th e PACU must have its own supplies of basic 
and emergency equipment, separate from that of the 
operating room, based on the needs of the patient 
population. Th is includes airway equipment and 
supplies, such as oxygen cannulas, a selection of 
masks, oral and nasal airways, laryngoscopes, endo-
tracheal tubes, LMAs, a cricothyrotomy kit, and 
self-infl ating bags for ventilation. A readily available 
supply of catheters for vascular cannulation (venous, 
arterial, central venous) is mandatory. A defi brilla-
tion device with transcutaneous pacing capabilities, 
and an emergency cart with drugs and supplies for 
advanced life support (see  Chapter 55 ) and infusion 
pumps, must be present and periodically inspected. 
Transvenous pacing catheters; pulse generators; and 
tracheostomy, chest tube, and vascular cut-down 
trays are typically present, depending on the surgi-
cal patient population. 
 Respiratory therapy equipment for aerosol 
bronchodilator treatments, continuous positive air-
way pressure (CPAP), and ventilators should be in 
close proximity to the recovery room. Immediate 
availability of a bronchoscope is desirable. 
 Staﬃ  ng 
 Inadequate staffi  ng is oft en cited as a major contrib-
uting factor in PACU mishaps. Th e PACU should 
be staff ed by nurses specifi cally trained in the care 
of adult and/or pediatric patients emerging from 
anesthesia. Th ey should have expertise in airway 
management and advanced cardiac life support, as 
well as problems commonly encountered in surgical 
patients relating to wound care, drainage catheters, 
and postoperative bleeding. 
 Patients in the PACU should be under the medi-
cal direction of an anesthesiologist, who must be 
immediately available to respond to urgent or emer-
gent patient care problems. High-volume tertiary care 
surgical institutions oft en have an anesthesiologist 
assigned full time to the PACU. Th e management of 
 Design 
 Th e PACU should be located near the operat-
ing rooms and off -site invasive procedure areas. A 
central location in the operating room area itself is 
desirable, as it ensures that the patient can be rushed 
back to surgery, if needed, or that members of the 
operating room team can quickly respond to urgent 
or emergent patient care issues. Proximity to radio-
graphic, laboratory, and other intensive care facilities 
on the same fl oor is also advantageous. Th e transfer 
of critically ill patients in elevators or through long 
corridors can jeopardize their care because urgent 
problems may arise along the way. 
 An open-ward design facilitates observation 
of multiple patients simultaneously. However, an 
appropriate number of individually enclosed patient 
care spaces is required for patients needing isolation 
for infection control. A ratio of 1.5 PACU beds per 
operating room is customary, although this num-
ber will vary depending on the respective operating 
room suite’s case volume, variety of surgical proce-
dures, and patient acuity. Each patient space should 
be well-lighted and large enough to allow easy access 
to patients in spite of poles for intravenous infusion 
pumps, a ventilator, or radiographic equipment; 
construction guidelines dictate a minimum of 7 ft  
between beds and 120 sq ft /patient. Multiple electri-
cal outlets, including at least one with backup emer-
gency power, and at least one outlet each for oxygen 
and suction, should be present at each bed space. 
 Equipment 
 Many PACU incidents leading to serious morbidity 
or mortality are related to inadequate monitoring. 
Pulse oximetry (Sp o 2 ), electrocardiogram (ECG), 
and automated noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP) 
monitors are mandatory for each space. Although 
ECG, Sp o 2 , and NIBP must be utilized for every 
patient in the initial phase of recovery from anes-
thesia (phase 1 care), decreased monitoring may be 
adequate thereaft er. Appropriate equipment must be 
available for those patients requiring invasive arte-
rial, central venous, pulmonary artery, or intracranial 
pressure monitoring. Capnography is useful for intu-
bated patients and is increasingly employed for extu-
bated patients as well. Temperature-sensitive strips 
1260 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
average concentration used, and the duration of 
exposure to the anesthetic. Hypoventilation delays 
emergence from inhalational anesthesia. 
 Emergence from an intravenous anesthetic is 
a function of its pharmacokinetics. Recovery from 
most intravenous anesthetic agents is dependent 
primarily on redistribution rather than metabolism 
and elimination. As the total administered dose 
increases, however, cumulative eff ects become clini-
cally apparent in the form of prolonged emergence; 
the termination of action becomes increasingly 
dependent on the metabolism or elimination. Th is 
is the basis for the concept of a context-sensitive 
half-time (see  Chapter 7 ). Advanced age or renal or 
hepatic disease can prolong emergence (see  Chap-
ter 9 ). Short and ultrashort-acting anesthetic agents, 
such as propofol and remifentanil, signifi cantly 
shorten emergence, time to awakening, and dis-
charge. Some studies show that the use of a Bispec-
tral Index Scale (BIS) monitor (see  Chapter 6 ) may 
reduce total drug dosage and shorten recovery and 
time to discharge. LMA (rather than an endotra-
cheal tube) use may also allow lighter levels of anes-
thesia that could speed emergence. 
 Th e speed of emergence can also be infl uenced 
by preoperative medications. Premedication with 
agents that outlast the procedure (eg, lorazepam) 
may be expected to prolong emergence. Th e short 
duration of action of midazolam makes it a suitable 
premedication agent for short procedures. Th e eff ects 
of preoperative sleep deprivation or drug ingestion 
(alcohol, sedatives) can also be additive to those of 
anesthetic agents and can prolong emergence. 
 Delayed Emergence 
 Th e most frequent cause of delayed emergence 
(when the patient fails to regain consciousness 
30–60 min aft er general anesthesia) is residual anes-
thetic, sedative, and analgesic drug eff ect. Delayed 
emergence may occur as a result of absolute or 
relative drug overdose or potentiation of anesthetic 
agents by prior drug or alcohol ingestion. Naloxone 
(in 80 mcg increments in adults) and fl umazenil (in 
0.2 mg increments in adults) will readily reverse the 
eff ects of an opioid and benzodiazepine, respectively. 
Physostigmine (1–2 mg) may partially reverse the 
eff ect of other agents. A nerve stimulator can be used 
the patient in the PACU should refl ect a coordinated 
eff ort involving anesthesiologists, surgeons, nurses, 
respiratory therapists, and appropriate consultants. 
Th e anesthesia team emphasizes management of 
analgesia, airway, cardiac, pulmonary, and metabolic 
problems, whereas the surgical team generally man-
ages any problems directly related to the surgical 
procedure itself. Based on the assumptions that the 
average PACU stay is 1 hr and that the average inpa-
tient procedure lasts 2–3 hr, a ratio of one recovery 
nurse for two patients is generally satisfactory. How-
ever, staffi  ng for nursing care should be tailored to 
the unique caseload requirements of each facility. If 
the operating room schedule regularly includes pedi-
atric patients or frequent short procedures, a ratio of 
one nurse to one patient is oft en needed. A charge 
nurse should be assigned to ensure optimal staffi  ng 
at all times, including the appropriate response to 
urgent or emergent patient care problems. 
 Care of the Patient 
 EMERGENCE FROM 
GENERAL ANESTHESIA 
 Recovery from general or regional anesthesia is a 
time of great physiological stress. Emergence from 
general anesthesia should ideally be characterized 
by a smooth and gradual awakening in a controlled 
environment. However, problems such as airway 
obstruction, shivering, agitation, delirium, pain, 
nausea and vomiting, hypothermia, and autonomic 
lability are frequently encountered. Patients receiv-
ing spinal or epidural anesthesia may experience 
decreases in blood pressure during transport or 
recovery; the sympatholytic eff ects of major con-
duction blocks prevent compensatory refl ex vaso-
constriction when patients are moved or when they 
sit up. 
 Following an inhalational-based anesthetic, 
the speed of emergence is directly proportional to 
alveolar ventilation, but inversely proportional to 
the agent’s blood solubility (see  Chapter 8 ). As the 
duration of anesthesia increases, emergence also 
becomes increasingly dependent on total tissue 
uptake, which is a function of agent solubility, the 
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care
1261
head-down (Trendelenburg) or back-up position. 
Th e head-down position is useful for hypovolemic 
patients, whereas the back-up position is useful for 
patients with underlying pulmonary dysfunction 
(see  Chapters 20 and  23 ). Patients at increased risk 
of vomiting or upper airway bleeding (eg, following 
tonsillectomy) should be transported in the lateral 
position. Th is position also helps prevent airway 
obstruction and facilitates drainage of secretions. 
 ROUTINE RECOVERY 
 General Anesthesia 
 Airway patency, vital signs, oxygenation, and level 
of consciousness must be assessed immediately 
upon PACU arrival. Subsequent blood pressure, 
heart rate, and respiratory rate measurements are 
routinely made at least every 5 min for 15 min or 
until stable, and every 15 min thereaft er. Pulse 
oximetry should be monitored continuously in all 
patients. Th e occurrence of hypoxemia does not 
necessarily correlate with the level of consciousness. 
Neuromuscular function should be assessed clini-
cally (eg, head-lift  and grip strength). At least one 
temperature measurement must also be obtained. 
Additional monitoring includes pain assessment 
(eg, numerical or descriptive scales); the presence or 
absence of nausea or vomiting; and fl uid input and 
output, including urine fl ow, drainage, and bleed-
ing. Aft er initial vital signs have been recorded, the 
anesthesia provider should give a brief report to the 
PACU nurse that includes (1) the preoperative his-
tory (including mental status and any communica-
tion problems, such as language barriers, deafness, 
blindness, or mental disability); (2) pertinent intra-
operative events (type of anesthesia, the surgical 
procedure, blood loss, fl uid replacement, antibiotic 
and other relevant medication administration, and 
any complications); (3) expected postoperative 
problems; (4) anticipated need for PACU medica-
tion administration, such as antibiotics; and (5) 
postanesthesia orders (analgesia and nausea/vom-
iting therapy; epidural or perineural catheter care; 
including the need for acute pain service involve-
ment, administration of fl uids or blood products, 
postoperative ventilation, chest x-ray for follow-up 
of central venous catheterization, etc.). 
to exclude persisting neuromuscular blockade in 
poorly responsive patients on a mechanical ventila-
tor who have inadequate spontaneous tidal volumes. 
 Less common causes of delayed emergence 
include hypothermia, marked metabolic distur-
bances, and perioperative stroke. A core tempera-
ture of less than 33°C has an anesthetic eff ect and 
greatly potentiates the actions of central nervous 
system depressants. Forced-air warming devices are 
most eff ective in raising body temperature. Hypox-
emia and hypercarbia are readily excluded by pulse 
oximetry, capnography, and/or blood gas analysis. 
Hypercalcemia, hypermagnesemia,  hyponatremia, 
and hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia are rare 
causes of delayed emergence that require laboratory 
measurements for diagnosis. Perioperative stroke is 
rare, except aft er neurological, cardiac, and cerebro-
vascular surgery (see  Chapter 28 ); diagnosis is facili-
tated by neurological evaluation and radiological 
imaging. 
 TRANSPORT FROM 
THE OPERATING 
ROOM TO THE PACU 
 Th is seemingly short period may be complicated by 
the lack of adequate monitoring, medication access, 
or resuscitative equipment.  Formerly anesthe-
tized patients should not leave the operating 
room unless they have a patent airway, have ade-
quate ventilation and oxygenation, and are hemody-
namically stable; qualifi ed anesthesia personnel 
must attend the transfer. Supplemental oxygen 
should be administered during transport to patients 
at risk of hypoxemia. Some studies suggest that 
transient hypoxemia (Sp o 2 <90%) may develop in 
as  many as 30% to 50% of otherwise “normal” 
patients during transport while breathing room air; 
supplemental oxygen may therefore be advisable for 
all transported patients, especially if the PACU is 
not in immediate proximity to the operating room. 
Unstable patients should remain intubated and 
should be transported with a portable monitor 
(ECG, Sp o 2 , and blood pressure) and a supply of 
emergency drugs. 
 All patients should be taken to the PACU on 
a bed or gurney that can be placed in either the 
1
1262 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
decades to decrease opioid requirements, and thus 
opioid-related side eff ects, while maintaining satis-
factory analgesia (see  Chapter 47 ). Preoperative oral 
administration of nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, and gabapentin 
or pregabalin may signifi cantly reduce postoperative 
opioid requirements, and these medications may be 
resumed postoperatively if the patient can continue 
oral medication. Additional analgesic modalities 
utilizing local anesthetics, such as intraoperative 
wound infi ltration, postoperative wound catheter 
infusions, single-shot and continuous catheter 
peripheral nerve blocks, and continuous epidural 
infusions, also reduce postoperative opioid analgesic 
requirements, and thus also reduce opioid-related 
side eff ects. 
 Mild to moderate postoperative pain can be 
treated orally with acetaminophen, ibuprofen, 
hydrocodone, or oxycodone. Alternatively, ketorolac 
tromethamine (15–30 mg in adults) or acetamino-
phen (15 mg/kg, or 1 g if patient >50 kg) may be 
administered intravenously. 
 In situations where moderate to severe postop-
erative pain is present, or oral analgesia is not possi-
ble, parenteral or intraspinal opioids, single-shot or 
continuous nerve blocks, and continuous epidural 
analgesia are used, oft en in combination techniques. 
Parenteral opioids are most safely administered by 
titration of small doses. Considerable variability in 
opioid requirements should be expected in surgi-
cal patients recovering in the PACU, and adequate 
analgesia must be balanced against the risk of exces-
sive sedation and respiratory depression. Opioids 
of intermediate to long duration, such as hydro-
morphone 0.25–0.5 mg (0.015–0.02 mg/kg in chil-
dren) or morphine 2–4 mg (0.025–0.05 mg/kg in 
children), are most commonly used. Meperidine is 
most oft en used in small doses to treat postoperative 
shivering. Opioid requirements are oft en markedly 
increased in patients with a history of chronic pain 
and chronic opioid therapy, because of opioid toler-
ance, and in patients with a history of opioid addic-
tion, because of opioid tolerance and psychological 
dependence. Consultation with a pain specialist is 
oft en extremely helpful in these situations. 
 Analgesic eff ects of parenteral opioids usually 
peak within minutes of administration. Maximal 
 All patients recovering from general anesthe-
sia must receive supplemental oxygen and pulse 
oximetry monitoring during emergence because 
transient hypoxemia can develop even in healthy 
patients. A rational decision regarding continuation 
of supplemental oxygen therapy at the time of PACU 
discharge can be made based on Sp o 2 readings on 
room air. Arterial blood gas measurements may 
be obtained to confi rm abnormal oximetry read-
ings, but are not necessary in most patients. Oxygen 
therapy should be carefully controlled in patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and a 
history of, or potential for, CO 2 retention. Patients 
should generally be nursed in the back-up posi-
tion, whenever possible, to optimize oxygenation. 
However, elevating the head of the bed before the 
patient is responsive can lead to airway obstruction. 
In such cases, the oral or nasal airway should be left  
in place until the patient is awake and able to main-
tain airway. Deep breathing and coughing should be 
encouraged periodically. 
 Regional Anesthesia 
 Patients who are heavily sedated or hemodynami-
cally unstable following regional anesthesia should 
also receive supplemental oxygen in the PACU. 
Sensory and motor levels should be periodically 
recorded following regional anesthesia to document 
regression of the block. Precautions in the form of 
padding or repeated warning may be necessary to 
prevent self-injury from uncoordinated arm move-
ments following brachial plexus blocks. Blood pres-
sure should be closely monitored following spinal 
and epidural anesthesia. Bladder catheterization 
may be necessary in patients who have had spinal or 
epidural anesthesia for longer than 4 hr. 
 Pain Control 
 Moderate to severe postoperative pain is most 
commonly treated with oral or parenteral opioids. 
However, perioperative opioid administration is 
associated with side eff ects (nausea and vomit-
ing, respiratory depression, pruritis, ileus, and uri-
nary retention) which may have signifi cant adverse 
eff ects on postoperative convalescence. In response 
to this problem, a variety of  opioid sparing strategies 
have been increasingly embraced over the past two 
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care
1263
home within 24 hr of an uneventful discharge (post-
discharge nausea and vomiting) in a signifi cant 
number of ambulatory surgery patients. Th e etiol-
ogy of PONV is usually multifactorial and associ-
ated with anesthetic and analgesic agents, the type 
of surgical procedure, and intrinsic patient factors, 
such as a history of motion sickness. It is also impor-
tant to recognize that nausea is a common complaint 
reported at the onset of hypotension, particularly 
following spinal or epidural anesthesia. 
Table 56–1 lists commonly recognized risk 
factors for PONV. An increased incidence of nausea 
and vomiting is reported following opioid adminis-
tration and intraperitoneal (especially laparoscopic), 
breast, and strabismus surgery. Th e greatest inci-
dence seems to be in young women; nausea may 
be more common during menstruation. Increased 
vagal tone manifested as sudden bradycardia com-
monly precedes, or coincides with, emesis. Propo-
fol anesthesia decreases the incidence of PONV, 
and a preoperative history of smoking lessens the 
respiratory depression, particularly with morphine 
and hydromorphone, may not occur until 20–30 min 
later. When the patient is fully awake, patient-
controlled analgesia can be instituted for inpatients. 
Intramuscular administration of opioids is discour-
aged because delayed and variable onset (10–20 min 
or longer) and delayed respiratory depression (up 
to 1 h). 
 When an epidural catheter is used, epidural 
bolus administration of fentanyl (50–100 mcg) or 
sufentanil (20–30 mcg) with 5–10 mL of 0.1% bupi-
vacaine can provide excellent pain relief in adults. 
Epidural morphine (3–5 mg) may also be used, but 
delayed respiratory depression with epidural admin-
istration of this opioid mandates close monitoring 
for 24 hr aft erward (see  Chapter 48 ). 
 Agitation 
 Before the recovering patient is fully respon-
sive, pain is oft en manifested as postoperative 
restlessness. Serious systemic disturbances (such 
as hypoxemia, respiratory or metabolic acidosis, 
or hypotension), bladder distention, or a surgical 
complication (such as occult intraabdominal hem-
orrhage) must also be considered in the diff erential 
diagnosis of postoperative agitation. Marked agita-
tion may necessitate arm and leg restraints to avoid 
self-injury, particularly in children. When serious 
physiological disturbances have been excluded in 
children, cuddling and kind words from a sympa-
thetic attendant or the parents oft en calms the pedi-
atric patient. Other contributory factors include 
marked preoperative anxiety and fear, as well as 
adverse drug eff ects (large doses of central anticho-
linergic agents, phenothiazines, or ketamine). Phy-
sostigmine 1–2 mg intravenously (0.05 mg/kg in 
children) is most eff ective in treating delirium due 
to atropine and scopolamine. If serious systemic 
disturbances and pain are excluded, persistent agita-
tion may require sedation with intermittent intrave-
nous doses of midazolam 0.5–1 mg (0.05 mg/kg in 
children). 
 Nausea & Vomiting 
 Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is com-
mon following general anesthesia, occurring in 30% 
to 40% of all patients. Moreover, PONV occurs at 
2
 TABLE 561 Risk factors for postoperative 
nausea and vomiting. 
 Patient factors 
 Young age 
 Female gender, particularly if menstruating on day 
of surgery or in first trimester of pregnancy 
 Large body habitus 
 History of prior postoperative emesis 
 History of motion sickness 
 Anesthetic techniques 
 General anesthesia 
 Drugs
 Opioids 
 Volatile agents 
 Nitrous oxide 
 Surgical procedures 
 Strabismus surgery 
 Ear surgery 
 Laparoscopy 
 Orchiopexy 
 Ovum retrieval 
 Tonsillectomy 
 Breast surgery 
 Postoperative factors 
 Postoperative pain 
 Hypotension 
1264 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
with multiple risk factors should receive prophy-
laxis. In addition, the use of two or three agents that 
act on diff ering receptors is more eff ective than sin-
gle-agent prophylaxis. 
 Shivering & Hypothermia 
 Shivering can occur in the PACU as a result of intra-
operative hypothermia or the eff ects of anesthetic 
agents, and it is also common in the immediate post-
partum period. Th e most important cause of hypo-
thermia is a redistribution of heat from the body core 
to the peripheral compartments (see  Chapter 6 ). A 
relatively cool ambient operating room temperature, 
prolonged exposure of a large wound, and the use 
of large amounts of unwarmed intravenous fl uids or 
high fl ows of unhumidifi ed gases can also be con-
tributory. Nearly all anesthetics, particularly volatile 
agents and spinal and epidural anesthesia, decrease 
the normal vasoconstrictive response to hypother-
mia by decreasing sympathetic tone. Although anes-
thetic agents also decrease the shivering threshold, 
shivering commonly observed during or aft er emer-
gence from general anesthesia represents the body’s 
eff ort to increase heat production and raise body 
temperature and may be associated with intense 
vasoconstriction. Emergence from even brief gen-
eral anesthesia is sometimes also associated with 
shivering, and although the shivering can be one 
of several nonspecifi c neurological signs (postur-
ing, clonus, or Babinski’s sign) that are sometimes 
observed during emergence, it is most oft en due to 
hypothermia. Regardless of the mechanism, its inci-
dence seems to be related to the duration of surgery 
and the use of a volatile agent. Shivering may occa-
sionally be suffi  ciently intense to cause hyperther-
mia (38–39°C) and signifi cant metabolic acidosis, 
both of which promptly resolve when the shivering 
stops. Other causes of shivering should be excluded, 
such as bacteremia and sepsis, drug allergy, or trans-
fusion reaction. 
 Hypothermia should be treated with a forced-air 
warming device, or (less satisfactorily) with warming 
lights or heating blankets, to raise body temperature 
to normal.  Intense shivering causes precipitous 
rises in oxygen consumption, CO 2 production, 
and cardiac output. Th ese physiological eff ects are 
oft en poorly tolerated by patients with preexisting 
3
likelihood of PONV. Selective 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(serotonin) receptor 3 (5-HT 3 ) antagonists, such as 
ondansetron 4 mg (0.1 mg/kg in children), granis-
etron 0.01–0.04 mg/kg, and dolasetron 12.5 mg 
(0.035 mg/kg in children), are eff ective in preventing 
PONV, and, to a lesser extent, in treating established 
PONV. It should be noted that unlike ondansetron, 
which is usually eff ective immediately, dolasetron 
requires 15 min for onset. An orally disintegrating 
tablet preparation of ondansetron (8 mg) may be 
useful for treatment and prophylaxis against post-
discharge nausea and vomiting. Metoclopramide, 
0.15 mg/kg intravenously, is a less eff ective alterna-
tive to 5-HT 3 antagonists. 5-HT 3 antagonists are not 
associated with the acute extrapyramidal (dystonic) 
manifestations and dysphoric reactions that may 
be encountered with metoclopramide or phenothi-
azine-type antiemetics. Transdermal scopolamine is 
eff ective, but can be associated with side eff ects, such 
as sedation, dysphoria, blurred vision, dry mouth, 
urinary retention, and exacerbation of glaucoma, 
particularly in elderly patients. Dexamethasone 
4–10 mg (0.10 mg/kg in children), when utilized as 
an antiemetic, has the additional advantages of pro-
viding a varying degree of analgesia and a sense of 
patient well-being. Moreover, it seems to be eff ec-
tive for up to 24 hr, and, thus, may be useful for 
postdischarge nausea and vomiting. Oral aprepitant 
(Emend ® ) 40 mg may be administered within 3 hr 
prior to anesthesia induction. Intravenous droperi-
dol 0.625–1.25 mg (0.05–0.075 mg/kg in children), 
when given intraoperatively, signifi cantly decreases 
the likelihood of PONV. Unfortunately, droperidol 
carries a US Food and Drug Administration “black 
box” warning, indicating that large (5–15 mg) doses 
can prolong the QT interval and have been associ-
ated with fatal cardiac arrhythmias. Nonpharmaco-
logical prophylaxis against PONV includes ensuring 
adequate hydration (20 mL/kg) aft er fasting, and 
stimulation of the P6 acupuncture point (wrist). Th e 
latter may include application of pressure, electrical 
current, or injections. 
 Controversy exists regarding routine PONV 
prophylaxis for all patients. Because of the cost of 
treatment of established PONV, it may be cost-
eff ective to provide prophylaxis to all patients in cer-
tain populations (eg, outpatients). Clearly, patients 
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care 
1265 
consciousness, circulation, respiration, and motor 
activity ( Table 56–2 ). Th e majority of patients can 
meet discharge criteria within 60 min from the time 
of PACU arrival. Patients to be transferred to other 
intensive care areas need not meet all requirements. 
 In addition to the above criteria, patients receiv-
ing regional anesthesia should also be assessed 
for regression of both sensory and motor block-
ade. Complete resolution of the block prior to 
PACU dismissal avoids inadvertent injuries due 
to motor weakness or sensory defi cits; however, 
cardiac or pulmonary impairment. Hypothermia has 
been associated with an increased incidence of myo-
cardial ischemia, arrhythmias, increased transfusion 
requirements due to coagulopathy, and increased 
duration of muscle relaxant eff ects. Small intravenous 
doses of meperidine (10–25 mg) can dramatically 
reduce or even stop shivering. Intubated and mechan-
ically ventilated patients can also be sedated and 
given a muscle relaxant until normothermia is rees-
tablished by active rewarming and the eff ects of anes-
thesia have dissipated. 
 Discharge Criteria 
 A. PACU 
 All patients must be evaluated by a qualifi ed anes-
thesia provider prior to discharge from the PACU 
unless strict discharge criteria are adopted. Stan-
dards for discharging patients from the PACU are 
established by the department of anesthesiology and 
the hospital medical staff . Th ey may allow PACU 
nurses to determine when patients may be trans-
ferred without the presence of a qualifi ed anes-
thesia provider if all PACU discharge criteria have 
been met. Criteria can vary according to whether 
the patient is going to be discharged to an intensive 
care unit, a regular ward, the outpatient department 
(phase 2 recovery), or directly home. 
 Before discharge, patients should have been 
observed for respiratory depression for at least 
20–30 min aft er the last dose of parenteral opioid. 
Other minimum discharge criteria for patients 
recovering from general anesthesia usually include 
the following: 
 1. 
 Easy arousability 
2. 
 Full orientation 
3. 
 Th e ability to maintain and protect the airway 
4. 
 Stable vital signs for at least 15–30 min 
5. 
 Th e ability to call for help, if necessary 
6. 
 No obvious surgical complications (such as 
active bleeding) 
 Postoperative pain and nausea and vomiting 
must be controlled, and normothermia should be 
reestablished prior to PACU discharge. Scoring sys-
tems are widely used. Most assess Sp o 2 (or color), 
 TABLE 562 Postanesthetic Aldrete 
recovery score.  1 , 2  
Original Criteria
Modiﬁ ed Criteria
Point 
Value
 Color 
 Oxygenation 
Pink
Sp O 2 > 92% on room air
2
Pale or dusky
Sp O 2 > 90% on oxygen
1
Cyanotic
Sp O 2 < 90% on oxygen
0
 Respiration 
Can breathe deeply 
and cough
Breathes deeply and 
coughs freely
2
Shallow but adequate 
exchange
Dyspneic, shallow or 
limited breathing
1
Apnea or obstruction
Apnea
0
 Circulation 
Blood pressure within 
20% of normal
Blood pressure ± 20 mm 
Hg of normal
2
Blood pressure within 
20% to 50% of 
normal
Blood pressure ± 20–50 
mm Hg of normal
1
Blood pressure 
deviating >50% 
from normal
Blood pressure more 
than ± 50 mm Hg of 
normal
0
 Consciousness 
Awake, alert, and 
oriented
Fully awake
2
Arousable but readily 
drifts back to sleep
Arousable on calling
1
No response
Not responsive
0
 Activity 
Moves all extremities
Same
2
Moves two extremities Same
1
No movement
Same
0
  1  Data from Aldrete JA, Kronlik D: A postanesthetic recovery score. 
 Anesth Analg 1970;49:924 and Aldrete JA: The post-anesthesia 
 recovery score revisited. J Clin Anesth 1995;7:89.
  2  Ideally, the patient should be discharged when the total score is 10, 
but a minimum of 9 is required.
1266 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
home can be delegated to a nurse, if approved dis-
charge criteria are applied. 
 Home readiness does not imply that the patient 
has the ability to make important decisions, to 
drive, or to return to work. Th ese activities require 
complete psychomotor recovery, which is oft en not 
achieved until 24–72 hr postoperatively. All outpa-
tient centers must use some system of postoperative 
follow-up, preferably phone contact the day aft er 
discharge. 
 Management of Complications 
 RESPIRATORY 
COMPLICATIONS 
 Respiratory problems are the most frequently 
encountered serious complications in the 
PACU. Th e overwhelming majority are related to 
4
many institutions have protocols that allow earlier 
discharge to appropriately monitored areas, and 
patients may be discharged with peripheral nerve 
blocks from single-shot or continuous perineural 
catheter infusions for the purpose of regional anal-
gesia. Documenting regression of a block is impor-
tant. Failure of a spinal or epidural block to resolve 
6 hr aft er the last dose of local anesthetic raises the 
possibility of spinal subdural or epidural hematoma, 
which should be excluded by prompt radiological 
imaging and neurologic evaluation. 
 In some centers, outpatients who meet the 
above discharge criteria when they come out of the 
operating room may be “fast-tracked,” bypassing the 
PACU and proceeding directly to the phase 2 recov-
ery area. Similarly, inpatients who meet the same 
criteria may be transferred directly from the operat-
ing room to their ward, if appropriate staffi  ng and 
monitoring is present. 
 B. Outpatients 
 In addition to emergence and awakening, recovery 
from anesthesia following outpatient procedures 
includes two additional stages: home readiness 
(phase 2 recovery) and complete psychomotor 
recovery. A scoring system has been developed to 
help assess home readiness discharge ( Table 56–3 ). 
Recovery of proprioception, sympathetic tone, blad-
der function, and motor strength are additional crite-
ria following regional anesthesia. For example, intact 
proprioception of the big toe, minimal orthostatic 
blood pressure and heart rate changes, and normal 
plantar fl exion of the foot are important signals of 
recovery following spinal anesthesia. Urination and 
drinking or eating before discharge are usually no 
longer required; exceptions include patients with a 
history of urinary retention and those with diabetes. 
 All outpatients must be discharged home in the 
company of a responsible adult who will stay with 
them overnight (the latter is required if they have 
received an anesthetic). Patients must be provided 
with written postoperative instructions on how 
to obtain emergency help and to perform routine 
follow-up care. Th e assessment of home readiness 
is the responsibility of the qualifi ed anesthesia pro-
vider, preferably one who is already familiar with 
the patient, although authority to discharge a patient 
 TABLE 563 Postanesthesia discharge 
scoring system (PADS).  1 , 2 
Criteria
Points
 Vital signs 
Within 20% of preoperative baseline
2
Within 20% to 40% of preoperative baseline
1
>40% of preoperative baseline
0
 Activity level 
Steady gait, no dizziness, at preoperative level
2
Requires assistance
1
Unable to ambulate
0
 Nausea and vomiting 
Minimal, treated with oral medication
2
Moderate, treated with parenteral medication
1
Continues after repeated medication
0
 Pain: minimal or none, acceptable to patient, 
controlled with oral medication 
Yes
2
No
1
 Surgical bleeding 
Minimal: no dressing change required
2
Moderate: up to two dressing changes
1
Severe: three or more dressing changes
0
 1  Modiﬁ ed from Marshall SI, Chung F: Discharge criteria and complica-
tions after ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 1999;88:508.
 2  Score ≥ 9 is required for discharge.
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care 
1267 
recurrence. Refractory laryngospasm should be 
treated with a small dose of intravenous succinyl-
choline (10–20 mg in adults) and positive-pressure 
ventilation with 100% oxygen. Endotracheal intu-
bation may occasionally be necessary to reestablish 
ventilation; cricothyrotomy or transtracheal jet ven-
tilation is indicated if intubation is unsuccessful in 
such instances. 
 Glottic edema following airway instrumenta-
tion is an important cause of airway obstruction in 
infants and young children because of the relatively 
small airway lumen. Intravenous corticosteroids 
(dexamethasone, 0.5 mg/kg, 10 mg dose maximum) 
or aerosolized racemic epinephrine (0.5 mL of a 
2.25% solution with 3 mL of normal saline) may be 
useful in such cases. Postoperative wound hemato-
mas following thyroid, carotid artery, and other neck 
procedures can quickly compromise the airway, and 
opening the wound immediately relieves tracheal 
compression in most cases. Rarely, gauze packing 
may be unintentionally left  in the hypopharynx 
following oral surgery and can cause immediate or 
delayed complete airway obstruction, especially in 
patients with intermaxillary fi xation. 
 Accidental or intentional decannulation of a 
fresh tracheostomy is hazardous because the vari-
ous tissue planes have not yet organized into a well-
formed track, thereby oft en making recannulation 
very diffi  cult or impossible. In cases of tracheos-
tomy performed within the previous 3–4 weeks, 
intentional replacement of a tracheostomy cannula 
should only be performed with a qualifi ed surgeon 
at the bedside and a surgical tracheostomy instru-
ment set, along with other appropriate airway equip-
ment, immediately available. 
 Hypoventilation 
 Hypoventilation, which is generally defi ned as a 
Pa co 2 >45 mm Hg, is common following general 
anesthesia. In most instances, the hypoventilation 
is mild, and most cases are undiagnosed. Signifi -
cant hypoventilation is usually clinically apparent 
when the Pa co 2 is >60 mm Hg or arterial blood pH 
is <7.25. Signs are varied and include excessive 
somnolence, airway obstruction, slow respiratory 
rate, tachypnea with shallow breathing, or labored 
breathing. Mild to moderate respiratory acidosis 
airway obstruction, hypoventilation, or hypoxemia. 
Because hypoxemia is the fi nal common pathway to 
serious morbidity and mortality, routine monitoring 
of pulse oximetry in the PACU leads to earlier rec-
ognition of these complications and fewer adverse 
outcomes. 
 Airway Obstruction 
 Airway obstruction in unconscious patients is most 
commonly due to the tongue falling back against the 
posterior pharynx (see  Chapter 19 ). Other causes 
include laryngospasm, glottic edema, secretions, 
vomitus, a retained throat pack or blood in the 
airway, or external pressure on the trachea (most 
commonly from a neck hematoma). Partial airway 
obstruction usually presents as sonorous respira-
tion. Near-total or total obstruction causes cessa-
tion of airfl ow and an absence of breath sounds and 
may be accompanied by paradoxic (rocking) move-
ment of the chest. Th e abdomen and chest should 
normally rise together during inspiration; however, 
with airway obstruction, the chest descends as the 
abdomen rises during each inspiration (paradoxic 
chest movement). Patients with airway obstruc-
tion should receive supplemental oxygen while 
corrective measures are undertaken. A combined 
jaw-thrust and head-tilt maneuver pulls the tongue 
forward and opens the airway, and insertion of an 
oral or nasal airway oft en alleviates the problem. 
Nasal airways may be better tolerated than oral air-
ways by patients emerging from anesthesia and may 
decrease the likelihood of trauma to the teeth when 
the patient bites down. 
 If the above maneuvers fail to reestablish an 
open airway, laryngospasm should be considered. 
Laryngospasm is usually characterized by high-
pitched crowing noises, but may be silent with com-
plete glottic closure. Spasm of the vocal cords is 
more apt to occur following airway trauma, repeated 
instrumentation, or stimulation from secretions or 
blood in the airway. Th e jaw-thrust maneuver, par-
ticularly when combined with gentle positive airway 
pressure via a tight-fi tting face mask, usually breaks 
laryngospasm. Insertion of an oral or nasal airway 
is also helpful in ensuring a patent airway down to 
the level of the vocal cords. Any secretions or blood 
in the hypopharynx should be suctioned to prevent 
1268 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Treatment of Hypoventilation 
 Treatment should generally be directed at the 
underlying cause, but marked hypoventilation always 
requires assisted or controlled ventilation until causal 
factors are identifi ed and corrected.  Obtunda-
tion, circulatory depression, and severe acido-
sis (arterial blood pH <7.15) are indications for 
immediate and aggressive respiratory and hemody-
namic intervention, including airway and inotropic 
support as needed. Antagonism of opioid-induced 
depression with large doses of naloxone oft en results 
in sudden pain and marked increase in sympathetic 
tone. Th e latter can precipitate a hypertensive crisis, 
pulmonary edema, and myocardial ischemia or 
infarction. If naloxone is used to reverse opioid-
induced respiratory depression, titration in small 
increments (80 mcg in adults) usually avoids compli-
cations by reversal of hypoventilation without sig-
nifi cant reversal of analgesia.  Following 
naloxone administration, patients should be 
observed closely for recurrence of opioid-induced 
respiratory depression (“renarcotization”), as nalox-
one has a shorter duration than most opioids. If 
residual muscle paralysis is present, additional cho-
linesterase inhibitor may be given. Residual paralysis 
in spite of a full dose of a cholinesterase inhibitor 
necessitates controlled  ventilation under close obser-
vation until spontaneous recovery occurs. Hypoven-
tilation due to pain and splinting following upper 
abdominal or thoracic  procedures should be treated 
with intravenous or intraspinal opioid administra-
tion, intravenous  ketorolac, epidural anesthesia, or 
intercostal nerve blocks. 
 Hypoxemia 
 Mild hypoxemia is common in patients recovering 
from anesthesia when supplemental oxygen is not 
given. Mild to moderate hypoxemia (Pa o 2 50–60 mm 
Hg) in young healthy patients may be well tolerated 
initially, but with increasing duration or severity, the 
initial sympathetic stimulation oft en seen is replaced 
with progressive acidosis and circulatory depression. 
Obvious cyanosis may be absent if the hemoglobin 
concentration is reduced. Hypoxemia may also be 
suspected from restlessness, tachycardia, or cardiac 
irritability (ventricular or atrial). Obtundation, bra-
dycardia, hypotension, and cardiac arrest are late 
6
7
may cause tachycardia, hypertension, and cardiac 
irritability (via sympathetic stimulation), but more 
severe acidosis produces circulatory depression 
(see  Chapter 50 . If signifi cant hypoventilation is 
suspected, assessment and management is facili-
tated by capnography and/or arterial blood gas 
measurement. 
 Hypoventilation in the PACU is most com-
monly due to the residual depressant eff ects 
of anesthetics on respiratory drive. Opioid-induced 
respiratory depression characteristically produces a 
slow respiratory rate, oft en with large tidal volumes. 
Excessive sedation is usually present, but the patient 
is oft en responsive and able to breathe on com-
mand. Delayed occurrence of respiratory depres-
sion have been reported with all opioids. Proposed 
mechanisms include variations in the intensity of 
stimulation during recovery and delayed release of 
the opioid from peripheral compartments, such as 
skeletal muscle (or possibly the lungs with fentanyl), 
as the patient rewarms or begins to move. 
 Causes of residual muscle paralysis in the PACU 
include inadequate reversal, pharmacological inter-
actions, altered pharmacokinetics (due to hypother-
mia, altered volumes of distribution, and renal or 
hepatic dysfunction), and metabolic factors (such 
as hypokalemia or respiratory acidosis). Regard-
less of the cause, generalized weakness, dyscoordi-
nated movements (“fi sh out of water”), shallow tidal 
volumes, and tachypnea are usually apparent. Th e 
diagnosis can be made with a nerve stimulator in 
unconscious patients; head lift  and grip strength can 
be assessed in awake patients. Th e ability to sustain a 
head-lift  for 5 sec may be the most sensitive test for 
assessing the adequacy of reversal. 
 Splinting due to incisional pain, diaphragmatic 
dysfunction following upper abdominal or thoracic 
surgery, abdominal distention, and tight abdomi-
nal dressings are other factors that can contribute 
to hypoventilation. Increased CO 2 production from 
shivering, hyperthermia, or sepsis can also increase 
Pa co 2 , even in normal patients recovering from 
general anesthesia. Marked hypoventilation and 
respiratory acidosis can result when these factors are 
superimposed on an impaired ventilatory reserve 
due to underlying pulmonary, neuromuscular, or 
neurological disease. 
5
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care
1269
intercostal blocks, abdominal or chest trauma 
(including rib fractures), neck dissection, tracheos-
tomy, nephrectomy, or other retroperitoneal or 
intraabdominal procedures (including laparoscopy), 
especially if the diaphragm may have been pene-
trated or disrupted. Patients with subpleural blebs or 
large bullae can also develop pneumothorax during 
positive-pressure ventilation. 
 Treatment of Hypoxemia 
 Oxygen therapy with or without positive airway 
pressure is the cornerstone of treatment for hypox-
emia. Routine administration of 30% to 60% oxy-
gen is usually enough to prevent hypoxemia with 
even moderate hypoventilation and hypercapnia 
(conversely, clinical signs of hypoventilation and 
hypercapnia may be masked by routine oxygen 
administration). Patients with underlying pulmo-
nary or cardiac disease may require higher concen-
trations of oxygen; oxygen therapy should be guided 
by Sp o 2 or arterial blood gas measurements. Oxygen 
concentration must be closely controlled in patients 
with chronic CO 2 retention to avoid precipitating 
acute respiratory failure. Patients with severe or per-
sistent hypoxemia should be given 100% oxygen via 
a nonrebreathing mask or an endotracheal tube until 
the cause is established and other therapies are insti-
tuted; controlled or assisted mechanical ventilation 
may also be necessary. Th e chest radiograph (prefer-
ably with the patient positioned sitting upright) is 
valuable in assessing lung volume and heart size and 
in demonstrating a pneumothorax or pulmonary 
infi ltrates. However, in cases of pulmonary aspira-
tion, infi ltrates are usually initially absent. If pneu-
mothorax is suspected, a chest radiograph taken at 
end-expiration helps highlight the pneumothorax 
by providing the greatest contrast between lung tis-
sue and adjacent air in the pleural space. In the situa-
tion of an intubated patient with hypoxemia, a chest 
radiograph provides additional usefulness to breath 
sound assessment in verifying endotracheal tube 
position, especially when the tube is inadvertently 
positioned immediately above the carina, with resul-
tant intermittent migration into a main bronchus. 
 Additional treatment of hypoxemia should 
be directed at the underlying cause. A chest tube 
or Heimlich valve should be inserted for any 
signs. Pulse oximetry facilitates early detection of 
hypoxemia and must be routinely utilized in the 
PACU. Arterial blood gas measurements may be per-
formed to confi rm the diagnosis and guide therapy. 
 Hypoxemia in the PACU is usually caused by 
hypoventilation, increased right-to-left  intrapulmo-
nary shunting, or both. A decrease in cardiac output 
or an increase in oxygen consumption (as with shiv-
ering) will accentuate hypoxemia. Diff usion hypoxia 
(see  Chapter 8 ) is an uncommon cause of hypox-
emia when recovering patients are given supple-
mental oxygen. Hypoxemia due exclusively to 
hypoventilation is also unusual in patients receiving 
supplemental oxygen, unless marked hypercapnia or 
a concomitant increase in intrapulmonary shunting 
is present.  Increased intrapulmonary shunting 
from a decreased functional residual capacity 
(FRC) relative to closing capacity is the most com-
mon cause of hypoxemia following general anesthe-
sia. Th e greatest reductions in FRC occur following 
upper abdominal and thoracic surgery. Th e loss of 
lung volume is oft en attributed to microatelectasis, 
as atelectasis is oft en not identifi ed on a chest radio-
graph. A semi-upright position helps maintain FRC. 
 Marked right-to-left  intrapulmonary shunting 
( 
•Qs/
•Qt >15%) is usually associated with radio-
graphic fi ndings, such as pulmonary atelectasis, 
parenchymal infi ltrates, or a large pneumothorax. 
Causes include prolonged intraoperative hypoventi-
lation with low tidal volumes, unintentional endo-
bronchial intubation, lobar collapse from bronchial 
obstruction by secretions or blood, pulmonary aspi-
ration, or pulmonary edema. Postoperative pulmo-
nary edema most oft en presents as wheezing within 
the fi rst 60 min aft er surgery, and, to a lesser extent, 
pink frothy fl uid in the airway, and may be due to left  
ventricular failure (cardiogenic), acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, or relief of prolonged airway 
obstruction (negative pressure pulmonary edema). 
In contrast to wheezing associated with pulmonary 
edema, wheezing due to primary obstructive lung 
disease, which also oft en results in large increases in 
intrapulmonary shunting, is not associated with 
edema fl uid in the airway or infi ltrates on the chest
radiograph.  Th e possibility of a postoperative 
pneumothorax should always be considered 
following central line placement, supraclavicular or 
8
9
1270 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
blood volume, despite an otherwise normal intra-
vascular volume (see Chapter 45). Hypotension 
associated with sepsis and allergic reactions is usu-
ally the result of both hypovolemia and vasodila-
tion. Hypotension from a tension pneumothorax or 
cardiac tamponade is the result of impaired venous 
return to the right atrium. 
 Left  ventricular dysfunction in previously 
healthy persons is unusual, unless it is associated 
with severe metabolic disturbances (hypoxemia, 
acidosis, or sepsis). Hypotension due to ventricu-
lar dysfunction is primarily encountered in patients 
with underlying coronary artery or valvular heart 
disease or congestive heart failure and is usually 
precipitated by fl uid overload, myocardial ischemia, 
acute increases in aft erload, or arrhythmias. 
 Treatment of Hypotension 
 Mild hypotension during recovery from anesthesia 
is common and typically does not require intensive 
treatment. Signifi cant hypotension is oft en defi ned 
as a 20% to 30% reduction in blood pressure below 
the patient’s baseline level and usually requires cor-
rection. Treatment depends on the ability to assess 
intravascular volume. An increase in blood pres-
sure following a fl uid bolus (250–500 mL crystal-
loid or 100–250 mL colloid) generally confi rms 
hypovolemia. With severe hypotension, a vasopres-
sor or inotrope (dopamine or epinephrine) may be 
necessary to increase arterial blood pressure until 
the intravascular volume defi cit is at least partially 
corrected. Signs of cardiac dysfunction should be 
sought in patients with heart disease or cardiac risk 
factors. Failure of a patient with severe hypotension 
to promptly respond to initial treatment mandates 
invasive hemodynamic monitoring, or, better still, 
echocardiographic 
examination; 
manipulations 
of cardiac preload, contractility, and aft erload are 
oft en necessary. Th e presence of a tension pneumo-
thorax, as suggested by hypotension with unilater-
ally decreased breath sounds, hyperresonance, and 
tracheal deviation, is an indication for immediate 
pleural aspiration, even before radiographic confi r-
mation. Similarly, hypotension due to cardiac tam-
ponade, usually following chest trauma or thoracic 
surgery, oft en necessitates immediate pericardiocen-
tesis or surgical exploration. 
symptomatic pneumothorax or one that is greater 
than 15% to 20%. An asymptomatic pneumotho-
rax may be aspirated using a intercostal catheter or 
followed by observation. Bronchospasm should be 
treated with aerosolized bronchodilator therapy. 
Diuretics should be given for circulatory fl uid over-
load and cardiac function should be optimized. Per-
sistent hypoxemia in spite of 50% oxygen generally 
is an indication for positive end-expiratory pressure 
ventilation or CPAP. Bronchoscopy is oft en useful 
in reexpanding lobar atelectasis caused by bron-
chial plugs or particulate aspiration. In the setting 
of an intubated patient, secretions or debris must 
be removed by suction and also by lavage, if neces-
sary, and a malpositioned endotracheal tube must be 
appropriately repositioned. 
 CIRCULATORY 
COMPLICATIONS 
 Th e most common circulatory disturbances in the 
PACU are hypotension, hypertension, and arrhyth-
mias. Th e possibility that the circulatory abnor-
mality is secondary to an underlying respiratory 
disturbance should always be considered before any 
other intervention, especially in children. 
 Hypotension 
 Hypotension is usually due to relative hypovolemia, 
left  ventricular dysfunction, or, less commonly, 
excessive arterial vasodilatation.  Hypovole-
mia is by far the most common cause of hypo-
tension in the PACU. Absolute hypovolemia can 
result from inadequate intraoperative fl uid replace-
ment, continuing fl uid sequestration by tissues 
(“third-spacing”), wound drainage, or hemorrhage. 
Vasoconstriction during hypothermia with central 
sequestration of intravascular volume may mask 
hypovolemia until the patient’s temperature begins 
to rise again; subsequent peripheral vasodilation 
during rewarming unmasks the hypovolemia and 
results in delayed hypotension. Relative hypovole-
mia is oft en responsible for the hypotension associ-
ated with spinal or epidural anesthesia (especially 
in the setting of concomitant general anesthesia), 
venodilators, and α-adrenergic blockade: the 
venous pooling reduces the eff ective circulating 
10
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care
1271
system activity, other metabolic abnormalities, and 
preexisting cardiac or pulmonary disease also pre-
dispose patients to arrhythmias in the PACU. 
 Bradycardia oft en represents the residual eff ects 
of cholinesterase inhibitors, opioids, or β-adrenergic 
blockers. Tachycardia may represent the eff ect of an 
anticholinergic agent; a β-agonist, such as albuterol; 
refl ex tachycardia from hydralazine; and more com-
mon causes, such as pain, fever, hypovolemia, and 
anemia. Anesthetic-induced depression of barore-
ceptor function makes heart rate an unreliable mon-
itor of intravascular volume in the PACU. 
 Premature atrial and ventricular beats oft en 
represent hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, increased 
sympathetic tone, or, less commonly, myocardial 
ischemia. Th e latter can be diagnosed with a 12-lead 
ECG. Premature atrial or ventricular beats noted in 
the PACU without discernable cause will oft en also 
be found on the patient’s preoperative ECG, if one 
is available. Such patients with a preexisting history 
of extrasystoles may or may not have a history of 
palpitations or other symptoms, and previous car-
diology evaluation oft en has found no defi nitive 
cause. Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, including 
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fl ut-
ter, and atrial fi brillation, are typically encountered 
in patients with a history of these arrhythmias and 
are more commonly encountered following thoracic 
surgery. Th e management of arrhythmias is dis-
cussed in  Chapters 20 and  55 . 
 CASE DISCUSSION
Fever & Tachycardia 
in a Young Adult Male 
 A 19-year-old man sustains a closed fracture of 
the femur in a motor vehicle accident. He is placed 
in traction for 3 days prior to surgery. During that 
time, a persistent low-grade fever (37.5–38.7°C 
orally), mild hypertension (150–170/70–90 mm 
Hg), and tachycardia (100–126 beats/min) are 
noted. His hematocrit remains between 30% 
and 32.5%. Broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage 
is initiated. He is scheduled for open reduction 
and internal ﬁ xation of the fracture. When the 
patient is brought into the operating room, vital 
 Hypertension 
 Postoperative hypertension is common in the PACU 
and typically occurs within the fi rst 30 min aft er 
admission.  Noxious stimulation from inci-
sional pain, endotracheal intubation, or blad-
der distention is usually responsible. Postoperative 
hypertension may also refl ect the neuroendocrine 
stress response to surgery or increased sympathetic 
tone secondary to hypoxemia, hypercapnia, or met-
abolic acidosis. Patients with a history of hyperten-
sion are likely to develop hypertension in the PACU, 
even in the absence of an identifi able cause. Fluid 
overload or intracranial hypertension may also 
occasionally present as postoperative hypertension. 
 Treatment of Hypertension 
 Mild hypertension generally does not require treat-
ment, but a reversible cause should be sought. 
Marked hypertension can precipitate postopera-
tive bleeding, myocardial ischemia, heart failure, 
or intracranial hemorrhage. Although decisions to 
treat postoperative hypertension should be indi-
vidualized, in general, elevations in blood pressure 
greater than 20% to 30% of the patient’s baseline, or 
those associated with adverse eff ects such as myo-
cardial ischemia, heart failure, or bleeding, should be 
treated. Mild to moderate elevations can be treated 
with an intravenous β-adrenergic blocker, such as 
labetalol, esmolol, or metoprolol; an angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor, such as enalapril; 
or a calcium channel blocker, such as nicardip-
ine. Hydralazine and sublingual nifedipine (when 
administered to patients not receiving β-blockers) 
may cause tachycardia and myocardial ischemia and 
infarction. Marked hypertension in patients with 
limited cardiac reserve requires direct intraarterial 
pressure monitoring and should be treated with an 
intravenous infusion of nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, 
nicardipine, clevidipine, or fenoldopam. Th e end 
point for treatment should be consistent with the 
patient’s own normal blood pressure. 
 Arrhythmias 
 Respiratory disturbances, particularly hypoxemia, 
hypercarbia, and acidosis, will commonly be associ-
ated with cardiac arrhythmias. Residual eff ects from 
anesthetic agents, increased sympathetic nervous 
11
1272 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
signs are as follows: blood pressure 162/95 mm 
Hg, pulse 150 beats/min, respirations 20 breaths/
min, and oral temperature 38.1°C. He is sweating 
and is anxious in spite of intravenous premedi-
cation with fentanyl 50 mcg and midazolam 1 
mg. On close examination, he is noted to have a 
slightly enlarged thyroid gland. 
 Should the surgical team proceed 
with the operation? 
 The proposed operation is elective; therefore, 
signiﬁ cant abnormalities should be diagnosed 
and properly treated preoperatively, if possible, 
to make the patient optimally ready for surgery. If 
the patient had an open fracture, the risk of infec-
tion would clearly mandate immediate operation. 
Even with a closed femoral fracture, cancellations 
or delays should be avoided because nonopera-
tive treatment potentiates the risks associated with 
bed rest, including atelectasis, pneumonia, deep 
venous thrombosis, and potentially lethal pulmo-
nary thromboembolism. In deciding whether to 
proceed with the surgery, the anesthesia provider 
must ask the following questions: 
1.  What are the most likely causes of the abnor-
malities based on the clinical presentation? 
2.  What, if any, additional investigations or con-
sultations might be helpful? 
3.  How would these or other commonly associated 
abnormalities aﬀ ect anesthetic management? 
4.  Are the potential anesthetic interactions seri-
ous enough to delay surgery until a suspected 
cause is conclusively excluded? The tachycar-
dia of 150 beats/min and the low-grade fever 
therefore require further evaluation prior to 
surgery. 
 What are the likely causes of the tachycardia 
and fever in this patient? 
 These two abnormalities may reﬂ ect one 
process or separate entities ( Tables 56–4 and 
 56–5 ). Moreover, although multiple factors can 
often be simultaneously identiﬁ ed, their relative 
contribution is often not readily apparent. Fever 
commonly follows major trauma; contributory 
factors can include the inﬂ ammatory reaction to 
 TABLE 564 Perioperative causes 
of tachycardia. 
 Anxiety 
 Pain 
 Fever (see  Table 56–5 ) 
 Respiratory 
 Hypoxemia 
 Hypercapnia 
 Circulatory 
 Hypotension 
 Anemia 
 Hypovolemia 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Cardiac tamponade 
 Tension pneumothorax 
 Thromboembolism 
 Drug-induced 
 Antimuscarinic agents 
 β-Adrenergic agonists 
 Vasodilators 
 Allergy 
 Drug withdrawal 
 Metabolic disorders 
 Hypoglycemia 
 Thyrotoxicosis 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Adrenal (addisonian) crisis 
 Carcinoid syndrome 
 Acute porphyria 
 TABLE 565 Perioperative causes of fever. 
 Infections 
 Immunologically mediated processes
 Drug reactions 
 Blood reactions 
 Tissue destruction (rejection) 
 Connective tissue disorders 
 Granulomatous disorders 
 Tissue damage
 Trauma 
 Infarction 
 Thrombosis 
 Neoplastic disorders 
 Metabolic disorders
 Thyroid storm (thyroid crisis) 
 Adrenal (addisonian) crisis 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Malignant hyperthermia 
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome 
 Acute gout 
 Acute porphyria 
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care 
1273 
 The patient is transferred to the PACU for 
further evaluation. A 12-lead ECG conﬁ rms sinus 
tachycardia of 150 beats/min. A chest ﬁ lm is nor-
mal. Arterial blood gas measurements on room 
air are normal (pH 7.44, Pa CO 2 41 mm Hg, Pa O 2 
87 mm Hg, and HCO 3 − 27 mEq/L). The hemoglo-
bin concentration is found to be 11 g/dL. Blood for 
thyroid function tests is sent to the laboratory. The 
patient is sedated intravenously with midazolam 
(2 mg) and fentanyl (50 mcg) and is given 500 mL 
of 5% albumin. He seems to be relaxed and pain 
free, but the heart rate decreases only to 144 beats/
min. The decision is made to proceed with surgery 
using continuous lumbar epidural anesthesia with 
2% lidocaine. Esmolol is administered slowly until 
his pulse decreases to 120 beats/min, and a con-
tinuous esmolol infusion is administered at a rate 
of 300 mcg/kg/min. 
 The procedure is completed in 3 1/2 hr. 
Although the patient did not complain of any pain 
during the procedure and was given only minimal 
additional sedation (midazolam, 2 mg), he is deliri-
ous upon admission to the PACU. The esmolol infu-
sion is proceeding at a rate of 500 mcg/kg/min. 
He has also received propranolol, 24 mg intrave-
nously. Estimated blood loss was 500 mL, and ﬂ uid 
replacement consisted of 2 units of packed red 
blood cells, 1000 mL of hetastarch, and 9000 mL of 
lactated Ringer’s injection. Vital signs are as follows: 
blood pressure 105/40 mm Hg, pulse 124 beats/
min, respirations 30 breaths/min, and rectal tem-
perature 38.8°C. Arterial blood gas measurements 
are reported as follows: pH 7.37, Pa CO 2  37 mm Hg, 
Pa O 2 91 mm Hg, and HCO 3 − 22 mEq/L. 
 What is the most likely diagnosis? 
 The patient is now obviously in a hypermeta-
bolic state manifested by excessive adrenergic 
activity, fever, markedly increased ﬂ uid require-
ments, and a worsening mental status. The absence 
of major metabolic acidosis and lack of exposure 
to a known triggering agent exclude malignant 
hyperthermia (see  Chapter 52 ). Other possibili-
ties include a transfusion reaction, sepsis, or an 
undiagnosed pheochromocytoma. The sequence 
of events makes the ﬁ rst two unlikely, and the 
the tissue trauma, superimposed infection (most 
commonly wound, pulmonary, or urinary), anti-
biotic therapy (drug reaction), or thrombophlebi-
tis. Infection must be seriously considered in this 
patient because of the risk of bacteria seeding and 
infecting the metal ﬁ xation device placed during 
surgery. Although tachycardia is commonly asso-
ciated with a low-grade fever, it is usually not of 
this magnitude in a 19-year-old patient. Moderate 
to severe pain, anxiety, hypovolemia, or anemia 
may be other contributory factors. Pulmonary 
fat embolism should also be considered in any 
patient with long bone fracture, particularly when 
hypoxemia, tachypnea, or mental status changes 
are present. Lastly, the possibly enlarged thy-
roid gland, sweating, and anxious appearance, 
together with both fever and tachycardia, suggest 
thyrotoxicosis. 
 What (if any) additional measures may be 
helpful in evaluating the fever and tachycardia? 
 Arterial blood gas measurements and a chest 
ﬁ lm would be helpful in excluding fat embolism. 
A repeat hematocrit or hemoglobin concentration 
measurement would exclude worsening anemia; 
signiﬁ cant tachycardia may be expected when 
the hematocrit is below 25% to 27% (hemoglobin 
<8 g/dL) in most patients. The response to an intra-
venous ﬂ uid challenge with 250–500 mL of a colloid 
or crystalloid solution may be helpful; a decrease 
in heart rate after the ﬂ uid bolus is strongly sug-
gestive of hypovolemia. Similarly, response of 
the heart rate to sedation and additional opioid 
analgesia can be helpful in excluding anxiety and 
pain, respectively, as causes. Although a tentative 
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism can be made based 
on clinical grounds, conﬁ rmation requires mea-
surement of serum thyroid hormones; the latter 
usually requires 24–48 hr in most hospitals. Signs 
of infection—such as increased inﬂ ammation or 
purulence in a wound, purulent sputum, an inﬁ l-
trate on the chest ﬁ lm, pyuria, or leukocytosis with 
premature white cells on a blood smear (shift to 
the left)—should prompt cultures and a delay of 
surgery until the results are obtained and correct 
antibiotic coverage is conﬁ rmed. 
1274 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
not only antagonizes the peripheral eﬀ ects of the 
thyrotoxicosis, but may also inhibit the peripheral 
conversion of T 4 . Combined β 1 - and β 2 -blockade is 
preferable to selective β 1 -antagonism (esmolol or 
metoprolol) because excessive β 2 -receptor activity 
is responsible for the metabolic eﬀ ects. β 2 -Receptor 
blockade also reduces muscle blood ﬂ ow and may 
decrease heat production. Supportive measures 
include surface cooling (cooling blanket), acet-
aminophen (aspirin is not recommended because 
it may displace thyroid hormone from plasma 
carrier proteins), and generous intravenous ﬂ uid 
replacement. Vasopressors are often necessary to 
support arterial blood pressure.  
 Ventricular rate control is indicated in patients 
with atrial ﬁ brillation. Transthoracic echocardiog-
raphy, transesophageal echocardiography, and 
hemodynamic monitoring may facilitate manage-
ment of patients with signs of congestive heart 
failure or persistent hypotension. β-Adrenergic 
blockade is contraindicated in patients with con-
gestive heart failure. 
 Propranolol, dexamethasone, propylthiouracil, 
and sodium iodide are given; the patient is admit-
ted to the intensive care unit, where treatment is 
continued. Over the next 3 days, his mental sta-
tus markedly improves. The T 3  and total thyroxine 
levels on the day of surgery were both elevated 
to 250 ng/dL and 18.5 ng/dL, respectively. He was 
discharged home 6 days later on a regimen of pro-
pranolol and propylthiouracil, with a blood pres-
sure of 124/80 mm Hg, a pulse of 92 beats/min, and 
an oral temperature of 37.3°C. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Awad IT, Chung F: Factors aff ecting recovery and 
discharge following ambulatory surgery. Can J Anesth 
2006;53:858. 
 Baldini G, Bagry H, Aprikian A, et al: Postoperative 
urinary retention: anesthetic and perioperative 
considerations. Anesthesiology 2009;110:1139. 
 Bettelli G: Anaesthesia for the elderly outpatient: 
preoperative assessment and evaluation, anaesthetic 
technique and postoperative pain management. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol 2010;23:726. 
decreasing prominence of hypertension (now 
replaced with relative hypotension) and increasing 
fever also make the latter unlikely. The clinical pre-
sentation now strongly suggests thyroid storm. He 
has also received a very large dose of esmolol for 
several hours and this may be contributing to the 
relatively low blood pressure despite aggressive 
ﬂ uid administration. 
 Emergency consultation is obtained with 
an endocrinologist, who concurs with the 
diagnosis of thyroid storm and assists with its 
management. How is thyroid storm managed? 
 Thyroid storm (crisis) is a medical emergency 
that carries a 10% to 50% mortality rate. It is usually 
encountered in patients with poorly controlled or 
undiagnosed Graves disease. Precipitating factors 
include (1) the stress of surgery and anesthesia, (2) 
labor and delivery, (3) severe infection, and, rarely, 
(4) thyroiditis 1–2 wk following administration of 
radioactive iodine. Manifestations usually include 
mental status changes (irritability, delirium, or 
coma), fever, tachycardia, and hypotension. Both 
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are common, 
particularly atrial ﬁ brillation. Congestive heart fail-
ure develops in 25% of patients. Hypertension that 
often precedes hypotension, heat intolerance with 
profuse sweating, nausea and vomiting, and diar-
rhea may be prominent initially. Hypokalemia is 
present in up to 50% of patients. Levels of thyroid 
hormones are high in plasma, but correlate poorly 
with the severity of the crisis. The sudden exacer-
bation of thyrotoxicosis may represent a rapid shift 
of the hormone from the protein-bound to the free 
state or increased responsiveness to thyroid hor-
mones at the cellular level. 
 Treatment is directed toward reversing the 
crisis and its complications. Large doses of cor-
ticosteroids inhibit the synthesis, release, and 
peripheral conversion of thyroxine (T 4 ) to the more 
active triiodothyronine (T 3 ). Corticosteroids also 
prevent relative adrenal insuﬃ  ciency secondary 
to the hypermetabolic state. Propylthiouracil is 
administered to inhibit synthesis of thyroid hor-
mone, and iodide is given to inhibit release of 
thyroid hormones from the gland. Propranolol 
 
CHAPTER 56 Postanesthesia Care 
1275 
 Ip HYV, Chung F: Escort accompanying discharge aft er 
ambulatory surgery: a necessity or a luxury? Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:748. 
 Jakobsson J: Preoperative single-dose intravenous 
dexamethasone during ambulatory surgery: 
update around the benefi t versus risk. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2010;23:682. 
 Kaafarani HMA, Itani KMF, Rosen AK, et al: How does 
patient safety culture in the operating room and 
post-anesthesia care unit compare to the rest of the 
hospital? Am J Surg 2009;198:70. 
 Kehlet H: PROSPECT: evidence-based procedure-specifi c 
postoperative pain management. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol 2007;21:149. 
 Leskiw U, Weinberg GL: Lipid resuscitation for local 
anesthetic toxicity: is it really lifesaving? Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;22:667. 
 Nielsen PR, Rudin Å, Werner MU: Prediction of 
postoperative pain. Curr Anaesth Crit Care 
2007;18:157. 
 Rawal N: Postdischarge complications and rehabilitation 
aft er ambulatory surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 
2008;21:736. 
 Schug SA, Chong C: Pain management aft er ambulatory 
surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:738. 
 Tang R, Evans H, Chaput A, Kim C: Multimodal 
analgesia for hip arthroplasty. Orthoped Clin N Am 
2009;40:377. 
 White PF, Tang J, Wender RH, et al: Th e eff ects of 
oral ibuprofen and celecoxib in preventing pain, 
improving recovery outcomes and patient satisfaction 
aft er ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg 2011;112:323. 
 Buvanendran A, Kroin JS: Multimodal analgesia for 
controlling acute postoperative pain. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;22:588. 
 Buvanendran A, Kroin JS: Multimodal analgesia for 
controlling acute postoperative pain. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009:22:588. 
 Capdevila X, Ponrouch M, Morau D: Th e role of regional 
anesthesia in patient outcome: ambulatory surgery. 
Tech Reg Anesth Pain Manag 2008;12:194. 
 Duncan PG, Shandro J, Bachand R, Ainsworth L: A pilot 
study of recovery room bypass (“fast-track protocol”) 
in a community hospital. Can J Anesth, 2001;
48:630. 
 Durkin B, Page C, Glass P: Pregabalin for the treatment 
of postsurgical pain. Expert Opin Pharmacother 
2010;11:2751. 
 Elvir-Lazo OL, White PF: Postoperative pain 
management aft er ambulatory surgery: role of 
multimodal analgesia. Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:217. 
 Franck M, Radtke FM, Apfel CC, et al: Documentation of 
post-operative nausea and vomiting in routine clinical 
practice. J Int Med Res 2010;38:1034. 
 Gupta A: Wound infi ltration with local anaesthetics 
in ambulatory surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 
2010;23:708. 
 Hanson BS, Søreide E, Warland AM, et al: Risk factors 
of post-operative urinary retention in hospitalized 
patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2011;55:545. 
 Heitz JW, Witkowski TA, Viscusi ER: New and emerging 
analgesics and analgesic technologies for acute pain 
management. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;
22:608. 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1277
K E Y C O N C E P T S
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Critical Care 
57
Brain death criteria can be applied only in 
the absence of hypothermia, hypotension, 
metabolic or endocrine abnormalities, 
neuromuscular blockers, or drugs known 
to depress brain function. 
Hyperoxia  and hypoxia are risk factors, 
but not the primary causes of retinopathy 
of prematurity (ROP). Neonates’ risk of 
ROP increases with low birth weight and 
complexity of comorbidities (eg, sepsis). 
 Pressure control ventilation (PCV) is similar 
to pressure support ventilation in that peak 
airway pressure is controlled but is diﬀ erent 
in that a mandatory rate and inspiratory 
time are selected. As with pressure support, 
gas ﬂ ow ceases when the pressure level 
is reached; however, the ventilator does 
not cycle to expiration until the preset 
inspiration time has elapsed. 
 The disadvantage of conventional PCV is 
that tidal volume (V T ) is not guaranteed 
(although there are modes in which the 
consistent delivered pressure of PCV can 
be combined with a predeﬁ ned volume 
delivery). 
When compared with orotracheal intubation, 
nasotracheal intubation may be more 
comfortable for the patient and more secure 
(fewer instances of accidental extubation).  
When left in place for more than 2–3 
weeks, both orotracheal and nasotracheal 
1
2
3
4
5
6
tubes predispose patients to subglottic 
stenosis. If longer periods of mechanical 
ventilation are necessary, the tracheal tube 
should generally be replaced by a cuﬀ ed 
tracheostomy tube. 
The major eﬀ ect of positive end-expiratory 
pressure (PEEP) on the lungs is to increase 
functional residual capacity (FRC). In patients 
with decreased lung volume, appropriate 
levels of either PEEP or continuous positive 
airway pressure (CPAP) will increase FRC and 
tidal ventilation above closing capacity, will 
improve lung compliance, and will correct 
ventilation/perfusion abnormalities. 
A higher incidence of pulmonary 
barotrauma is observed with excessive PEEP 
or CPAP, particularly at levels greater than 
20 cm H 2 O. 
Maneuvers that produce sustained 
maximum lung inﬂ ation such as the use 
of an incentive spirometer can be helpful 
in inducing cough as well as preventing 
atelectasis and preserving normal lung 
volume. 
While injury from high inspired oxygen 
concentrations has not been conclusively 
demonstrated in humans, V T of 12 mL/kg 
was associated with greater mortality than V T 
of 6 mL/kg and plateau pressure of less than 
30 cm H 2 O in patients with acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. 
7
8
9
10
—Continued next page
1278 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
 Th is chapter provides an abbreviated survey of 
critical care medicine. Many topics relevant to criti-
cal care are covered in other chapters; only important 
topics not presented elsewhere will be presented. 
 Economic, Ethical, & Legal 
Issues in Critical Care 
 High-quality critical care is very expensive; poor-
quality critical care is even more expensive. Inten-
sive care unit (ICU) beds constitute only 10% of all 
beds in most hospitals yet account for a large frac-
tion of hospital expenditures. If this cost is justifi ed, 
clear reductions in morbidity or mortality should 
be readily demonstrable. Unfortunately, confi rma-
tory studies are few and typically fl awed by the use 
of historical controls. A method of reliably identi-
fying those patients who will benefi t most from 
intensive care is needed. Several scoring systems 
based on the severity of physiological derangements 
and preexisting health have been used, such as the 
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation 
(APACHE) and Th erapeutic Intervention Scoring 
System (TISS), but while all reliably identify “sicker” 
patients none reliably identifi es the very sick but 
recoverable patients for whom intensive care is 
intended. Survival is generally inversely related to 
the severity of illness and number of organ systems 
 Early elective tracheal intubation is advisable 
when there are obvious signs of heat injury 
to the airway. 
 The criteria developed by the Acute Kidney 
Injury Network are now most often used 
to stage acute kidney injury (AKI). AKI is 
diagnosed by documenting an increase 
in serum creatinine of more than 50%, or 
an absolute increase of 0.3 mg/dL, and 
a reduction in urine output to less than 
0.5 mL/kg/h for 6 h or longer, with all 
ﬁ ndings developing over 48 h or less. 
11
12
Age greater than 70 years, 
corticosteroid therapy, chemotherapy 
of malignancy, prolonged use of invasive 
devices, respiratory failure, kidney 
failure, head trauma, and burns are 
established risk factors for nosocomial 
infections. 
Systemic venodilation and transudation 
of ﬂ uid into tissues result in a 
relative hypovolemia in patients 
with sepsis. 
13
14
 Critical care medicine deals with potentially life-
threatening illnesses. Anesthesiologists played a 
major role in developing this multidisciplinary sub-
specialty. Relative to most other physicians, anesthesi-
ologists have greater expertise in airway management, 
mechanical ventilation, drug and fl uid resuscitation, 
and advanced monitoring techniques that are cen-
tral to eff ective care in critical illness. Moreover, the 
emphasis in anesthesia on physiology, pathophysiol-
ogy, and pharmacology, as well as on rapid diagnosis 
and treatment of acute physiological derangements, 
provides an excellent foundation for a career in evalu-
ating and treating patients with critical illness. Th e 
critical care physician (or “intensivist”) also requires 
broad knowledge that crosses internal medicine, 
surgery, pediatrics, neurology, emergency medicine, 
and palliative care. Unlike most subspecialty educa-
tion, which tends to emphasize a single organ system, 
intensive care fellowships provide experience in treat-
ing patients with systemic infl ammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) and the related multiple organ dys-
function syndrome (MODS). Th e American Boards 
of Anesthesiology, Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, and 
Surgery, recognizing these requirements, sponsor 
specialized training for certifi cation in critical care 
medicine. Clinicians who have such certifi cation are 
increasingly recognized by multinational corpora-
tions and organizations as making important contri-
butions to the outcomes of hospitalized patients. 
Continued—
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1279 
increased awareness of ethical and legal issues has 
changed the practice of critical care medicine. 
 Decisions about when to initiate or terminate 
treatment can be diffi  cult. Generally, any treatment 
that can reasonably be expected to reverse illness 
or restore health is justifi ed, whereas withholding 
that treatment requires specifi c ethical justifi ca-
tion. Conversely, if treatment will defi nitely not 
reverse a disease process or restore health, then the 
decision to initiate such treatment may not be justi-
fi ed and may be unethical. Until recently, nearly all 
patients in the United States—even those who were 
clearly about to die—received maximal treatment 
(sometimes contrary to the patient’s or family’s 
wishes) for fear of the possible legal repercussions 
of withholding treatment. “Heroic” measures such 
as chest compressions, drug resuscitation, and 
mechanical ventilation were continued until the 
patient died. Th ese complex decisions must involve 
the patient (or guardian) and the family and must 
be consistent with hospital policies and state and 
federal law. 
 Fortunately, legal guidelines for arriving at these 
decisions are available in nearly all states. Although 
laws vary from state to state, they tend to be simi-
lar. Th e greatest conundrums relate to withholding 
treatment and discontinuing artifi cial life-support 
systems. Competent patients (ie, individuals who 
have the capacity to understand and make medical 
decisions) have the right to refuse treatment and 
the right to have life-support machines or devices 
turned off  (or not initiated) if and when they so 
request. Most states allow competent individuals to 
prepare an advance directive, usually either a liv-
ing will or a durable power of attorney for health 
care, to prevent needless prolongation of life if they 
become incompetent (eg, severe mental disability, 
vegetative state, or irreversible coma). Withhold-
ing treatment or discontinuing life support from 
patients who do not have advance directives or 
cannot provide their own consent requires per-
mission of the spouse, guardian, next of kin, or an 
individual to whom the patient has given power of 
attorney for health care. In some cases, clarifi cation 
from the courts may be necessary. “Do Not Resus-
citate” (DNR) or “Allow  Natural Death” (AND) 
orders have been upheld by the courts for patients 
in whom resuscitation off ers no hope of curing or 
 ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS 
AC
AKI
AMI
APACHE
APRV
ARDS
CMV
CPAP
CRRT
EGD
FENa + 
F IO 2 
FRC
HFJV
HFV
I:E
ILV
IMV
IPAP
MMV
MODS
P plt 
PCV
PEEP
PSV
ROP
RSBI
SIMV
SIRS
TISS
V D 
V T 
Assist-control (ventilation)
Acute kidney injury
Acute myocardial infarction
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health 
Evaluation
Airway pressure release ventilation
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Continuous mandatory ventilation
Continuous positive airway pressure
Continuous renal replacement therapy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Fractional excretion of filtered sodium
Fraction of inspired oxygen
Functional residual capacity
High-frequency jet ventilation
High-frequency ventilation
Inspiratory:expiratory (ratio)
Independent lung ventilation
Intermittent mandatory ventilation
Inspiratory positive airway pressure
Mandatory minute ventilation
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
Plateau pressure
Pressure control ventilation
Positive end-expiratory pressure
Pressure support ventilation
Retinopathy of prematurity
Rapid shallow breathing index
Synchronized intermittent mandatory 
ventilation
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System
Volume of distribution
Tidal volume
aff ected. Th e Society of Critical Care Medicine has 
established Project Impact, a system that allows 
ICUs to compare their outcomes and the care they 
provide against a national and international network 
of ICUs. 
 ETHICAL & LEGAL ISSUES 
 Th e high cost of critical care medicine has led to 
economic constraints being applied by govern-
ments and third-party payers. At the same time an 
1280 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
3 . 
Absent brainstem refl exes, including no 
pupillary, corneal, vestibuloocular (caloric), 
or gag (or cough) refl exes 
 4. 
Absence of ventilatory eff ort, with the arterial 
CO 2 tension at least 60 mm Hg or 20 mm Hg 
above the pretest level. 
 Repeating the examination (not less than 
2 h apart) is optional. In the United States the 
required number of physician observers varies by 
state (Florida requires two), as does the level of 
expertise (Virginia requires a neurologist or neu-
rosurgeon to make the determination). Th e apnea 
test should be reserved for last because of its det-
rimental eff ects on intracranial pressure. Confi r-
matory test fi ndings that may be helpful but are 
not required include an isoelectric electroenceph-
alogram, absence of brainstem auditory evoked 
potentials, and absence of cerebral perfusion as 
documented by angiographic, transcranial Dop-
pler, or radioisotopic studies. 
 Respiratory Care 
 Respiratory care refers both to the delivery of pul-
monary therapy and diagnostic tests and to the allied 
health profession that has become an integral part 
of cardiopulmonary diagnostics and critical care. 
Respiratory therapists’ scope of practice encom-
passes medical gas therapy, delivery of aerosolized 
medications, airway management, mechanical ven-
tilation, positive airway pressure therapy, critical 
care monitoring, cardiopulmonary rehabilitation, 
and the application of various techniques collec-
tively termed  chest physiotherapy . Th e latter includes 
administering aerosols, clearing pulmonary secre-
tions, reexpansion of atelectatic lung, and preserv-
ing normal lung function postoperatively or during 
illness. Diagnostic services may include pulmonary 
function testing, arterial blood gas analysis, elec-
trocardiography testing, and evaluation of sleep- 
disordered breathing. Th e majority of respiratory 
care procedures are based on clinical practice guide-
lines developed by the American Association for 
Respiratory Care using best practice/evidence-based 
medicine criteria. 
reversing the disease process responsible for immi-
nent death. 
 Artifi cial support of ventilation and circula-
tion complicates legal defi nitions of death. Until 
recently, most states required only a determination 
by a physician that irreversible cessation of venti-
latory and circulatory function had occurred. All 
states have added the concept of brain death to that 
defi nition, while some states recognize religious 
exemptions. In New Jersey, for example, physi-
cians cannot declare brain death “if it would violate 
the personal religious beliefs of the individual.” In 
addition, although brain death can be established 
in a pregnant woman, the issue of whether life sup-
port can be withdrawn remains subject to both 
ethical and legal debate. Th ere have been a num-
ber of cases of women giving birth to a viable baby 
weeks or months aft er having been declared brain 
dead. Th ese cases involve issues of maternal rights, 
“fetal rights,” and paternal rights and have yet to be 
resolved. 
 Brain Death 
 Brain death is defi ned as irreversible cessation of all 
brain function. Spinal cord function below C1 may 
still be present. Establishing brain death relieves the 
burden on families of unjustifi able hope and pro-
longed anxiety; it also prevents waste of medical 
resources, and potentially allows the retrieval of 
organs for transplantation. 
 Brain death criteria can be applied only in the 
absence of hypothermia, hypotension, meta-
bolic or endocrine abnormalities, neuromuscular 
blockers, and drugs known to depress brain func-
tion. A toxicology screen is required if suffi  cient time 
since admission (at least 3 days) has not elapsed to 
exclude a drug eff ect. Moreover, the patient should 
be observed long enough to establish with reason-
able certainty the irreversible nature of the injury. 
 Generally accepted clinical criteria for brain death 
include the following: 
1 . 
Coma 
 2. 
Absent motor activity, including no decerebrate 
or decorticate posturing; spinal cord refl exes 
may be preserved in some patients 
1
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1281 
is less than 90% while at rest breathing room air. 
In neonates, therapy is recommended if Pa o 2 is less 
than 50 mm Hg (6.7 kPa) or Sa o 2 is less than 88% 
(or capillary P o 2 is less than 40 mm Hg [5.3 kPa]). 
Th erapy may be indicated for patients when clini-
cians suspect (rather than measure) hypoxemia or 
hypoxia based on a medical history and physical 
examination. Patients with myocardial infarction, 
cardiogenic pulmonary edema, acute lung injury, 
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), pul-
monary fi brosis, cyanide poisoning, or carbon 
monoxide inhalation all require supplemental 
oxygen. Supplemental oxygen is given during the 
perioperative period because general anesthe-
sia commonly causes a decrease in Pa o 2 second-
ary to increased pulmonary ventilation/perfusion 
mismatching and decreased functional residual 
capacity (FRC). Supplemental oxygen should be 
provided before procedures such as tracheal suc-
tioning or bronchoscopy, which commonly cause 
arterial desaturation. Th ere is evidence that supple-
mental oxygen is eff ective in prolonging survival 
of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) whose resting Pa o 2 is lower than 
60 mm Hg at sea level. Supplemental oxygen ther-
apy also appears to have a mild benefi cial eff ect on 
the mean pulmonary arterial pressure and subjec-
tive indices of patients’ dyspnea. 
 MEDICAL GAS THERAPY 
 Th e therapeutic medical gases include oxygen at 
ambient or hyperbaric pressure, helium–oxygen 
mixtures (heliox), and nitric oxide. Oxygen is made 
available in high-pressure cylinders, via pipeline sys-
tems, from oxygen concentrators, as well as in liquid 
form. Heliox is occasionally used to partially relieve 
the increased work of breathing due to partial upper 
airway obstruction. Nitric oxide is administered as a 
direct, selective pulmonary vasodilator. 
 Th e primary goal of oxygen therapy is to 
prevent or correct hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia. 
 Table 57–1 identifi es classic categories of hypoxia. 
Oxygen therapy alone may not correct either 
hypoxemia or hypoxia. Continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) or positive end-expiratory pres-
sure (PEEP) may be required to recruit collapsed 
alveoli. Patients with profound hypercapnia may 
require ventilatory assistance. High concentrations 
of oxygen may be indicated for conditions requir-
ing removal of entrapped gas (eg, nitrogen) from 
body cavities or vessels. Th e short-term inhalation 
of increased concentrations of oxygen is relatively 
free of complications. 
 Supplemental oxygen is indicated for adults, 
children, and infants (older than 1 month) when 
Pa o 2 is less than 60 mm Hg (8 kPa) or Sa o 2 or Sp o 2 
 TABLE 571 Classiﬁ cation of hypoxias. 1 
Hypoxia
Pathophysiologic Category
Clinical Example
Hypoxic hypoxia
↓ P Barom or ↓ F IO 2 (<0.21)
Alveolar hypoventilation
Pulmonary diffusion defect
Pulmonary  V/Q mismatch
R → L shunt
Altitude, O 2 equipment error
Drug overdose, COPD exacerbation
Emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis
Asthma, pulmonary emboli
Atelectasis, cyanotic congenital heart disease
Circulatory hypoxia
Reduced cardiac output
Microvascular dysfunction
Severe heart failure, dehydration
Sepsis, SIRS
Hemic hypoxia
Reduced hemoglobin content
Reduced hemoglobin function
Anemias
Carboxyhemoglobinemia, methemoglobinemia
Demand hypoxia
Histotoxic hypoxia
↑ Oxygen consumption
Inability of cells to utilize oxygen
Fever, seizures
Cyanide toxicity, ↑TNF, late sepsis
 1 P Barom , barometric pressure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; V/Q˙
˙
 , ventilation/perfusion; R → L, right to left; SIRS, systemic 
inﬂ ammatory response syndrome; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
1282 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
 1. Variable-Performance 
Equipment ( Table 57–2 ) 
 Nasal Cannulas 
 Th e nasal cannula is available as either a blind-ended 
soft  plastic tube with an over-the-ear head-elastic 
or dual-fl ow with under-the-chin lariat adjustment. 
Sizes appropriate for adults, children, and infants are 
available. Cannulas are connected to fl owmeters with 
small-bore tubing and can rapidly be placed on most 
patients. Th e tension of attachment should be fi rm yet 
comfortable enough to avoid pressure sores on the 
ears, cheeks, and nose. Patients receiving long-term 
oxygen therapy most commonly use a nasal cannula. 
Th e appliance is usually well tolerated, allowing unen-
cumbered speech, eating, and drinking. Cannulas can 
be combined with spectacle frames for convenience 
or to improve acceptance by improving cosmesis. 
Oxygen-conserving cannulas equipped with inlet res-
ervoirs are available for patients receiving long-term 
oxygen. Since oxygen fl ows continuously, approxi-
mately 80% of the gas is wasted during expiration. 
 AMBIENT OXYGEN THERAPY 
EQUIPMENT 
 Classifying Oxygen Therapy 
Equipment 
 Oxygen given alone or in a gas can be mixed 
with air as a partial supplement to patients’ tidal 
or minute volume or serve as the entire source of 
the inspired volume. Th is approach provides the 
basis for classifying devices or systems according 
to their ability to provide adequate fl ow levels and 
a range of fraction of inspired oxygen (F io 2 ). Other 
considerations in selecting therapy include patient 
compliance, the presence and type of artifi cial air-
way, and the need for humidifi cation or an aerosol 
delivery system. 
 A. Low-Flow or Variable-Performance 
Equipment 
 Oxygen (usually 100%) is supplied at a fi xed 
fl ow that is only a portion of inspired gas. Such 
devices are usually intended for patients with 
stable breathing patterns. As ventilatory demands 
change, variable amounts of room air will dilute 
the oxygen fl ow. Low-fl ow systems are adequate 
for patients with 
 • Minute ventilation less than ∼8–10 L/min 
 • Breathing frequencies less than ∼20 breaths/min 
 • Tidal volumes (V T ) less than ∼0.8 L 
 • Normal inspiratory fl ow (10–30 L/min). 
 B. High-Flow or Fixed-Performance 
Equipment 
 Inspired gas at a preset F io 2 is supplied continuously 
at high fl ow or by providing a suffi  ciently large reser-
voir of premixed gas. Ideally, the delivered F io 2 is not 
aff ected by variations in ventilatory level or breath-
ing pattern. Profoundly dyspneic and hypoxemic 
patients may need fl ows of 100% oxygen in excess 
of 100 L/min. High-fl ow systems are indicated for 
patients who require 
 • Consistent F io 2 
 • Large inspiratory fl ows of gas (>40 L/min). 
 TABLE 572 Oxygen delivery devices 
and systems. 
Device/System
Oxygen Flow 
Rate (L/min)
F IO 2 Range
Nasal cannula
1
2
3
4
5–6
0.21–0.24
0.23–0.28
0.27–0.34
0.31–0.38
0.32–0.44
Simple mask
5–6
7–8
0.30–0.45
0.40–0.60
Mask with 
reservoir
5
0.35–0.50
Partial 
rebreathing 
mask-bag
7
15
0.35–0.75
0.65–1.00
Nonrebreathing 
mask-bag
7–15
0.40–1.00
Venturi mask 
and jet nebulizer
4–6 (total flow = 15)
4–6 (total flow = 45)
8–10 (total flow = 45)
8–10 (total flow = 33)
8–12 (total flow = 33)
0.24
0.28
0.35
0.40
0.50
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1283 
an over-the-ear lariat or a headband strap. Th e 
lower edge of the mask’s fl anges rests on the upper 
lip, surrounding the external nose. Nasal masks 
have been shown to provide supplemental oxygen 
equivalent to the nasal cannula under low-fl ow 
conditions for adult patients. Th e primary advan-
tage of the nasal mask over nasal cannulas appears 
to be patient comfort. Th e nasal mask does not pro-
duce sores around the external nares and dry oxy-
gen is not “jetted” into the nasal cavity. Th e nasal 
mask should be considered if it improves patient 
comfort and compliance. 
 “Simple” Oxygen Mask 
 Th e “simple” or oxygen mask is a disposable light-
weight plastic device that covers both nose and 
mouth. It has no reservoir bag. Masks are fastened 
to the patient’s face by adjustment of an elastic 
headband; some manufacturers provide a mal-
leable metal nose-bridge adjustment device. Th e 
seal is rarely complete: usually there is “inboard” 
leaking. Th us, patients receive a mixture of oxygen 
and secondarily entrained room air. Th is varies 
depending on the size of the leak, oxygen fl ow, and 
breathing pattern. Some brands of the simple mask 
connect tubing to a standard tapered fi tting; oth-
ers have a small room air–entrainment hole at the 
connection. 
 Th e body of the mask functions as a reservoir 
for both oxygen and expired carbon dioxide. A 
minimum oxygen fl ow of approximately 5 L/min 
is applied to the mask to limit rebreathing and the 
resulting increased respiratory work. Wearing any 
mask appliance for long periods of time is uncom-
fortable. Speech is muffl  ed and drinking and eating 
are diffi  cult. 
 It is diffi  cult to predict delivered F io 2 at specifi c 
oxygen fl ow rates. During normal breathing, it is 
reasonable to expect an F io 2 of 0.3–0.6 with fl ows 
of 5–10 L/min, respectively. Oxygen levels can be 
increased with smaller V T or slower breathing rates. 
With higher fl ows and ideal conditions, F io 2 may 
approach 0.7 or 0.8. 
 Masks lacking oxygen reservoirs may be best 
suited for patients who require concentrations of 
oxygen greater than cannulas provide, yet need oxy-
gen therapy for fairly short periods of time. Examples 
Th ere are valved reservoir devices that permit storage 
of incoming oxygen until inspiration occurs. 
 Th e actual F io 2 delivered to adults with nasal 
cannulas is determined by oxygen fl ow, nasopharyn-
geal volume, and the patient’s inspiratory fl ow (which 
depends both on V t and inspiratory time). Oxygen 
from the cannula can fi ll the nasopharynx aft er exha-
lation, yet with inspiration, oxygen and entrained air 
are drawn into the trachea. Th e inspired percent oxy-
gen increases by approximately 1–2% (above 21%) 
per liter of oxygen fl ow with quiet breathing in adults. 
Cannulas can be expected to provide inspired oxygen 
concentrations up to 30–35% with normal breathing 
and oxygen fl ows of 3–4 L/min. However, levels of 
40–50% can be attained with oxygen fl ows of greater 
than 10 L/min for short periods. Flows greater than 
5 L/min are poorly tolerated because of the discom-
fort of gas jetting into the nasal cavity and because of 
drying and crusting of the nasal mucosa. 
 Data from “normal-breathing subjects” may 
not be accurate for acutely ill tachypneic patients. 
Increasing V t and reducing inspiratory time will 
dilute the small fl ow of oxygen. Diff erent propor-
tions of mouth-only versus nose-only breathing and 
varied inspiratory fl ow can alter F io 2 by up to 40%. 
In clinical practice, fl ow should be titrated accord-
ing to vital signs, pulse oximetry, and arterial blood 
gas measurements. Some patients with COPD tend 
to hypoventilate with even modest oxygen fl ows, yet 
are hypoxemic on room air. Th ey may do well with 
cannula fl ows of less than 1–2 L/min. 
 Pediatric-sized nasal cannulas are available. 
Special cannulas allow babies to nurse and produce 
less trauma of the face and nose than oxygen masks. 
Because of the inherently reduced minute ventilation 
of infants, fl ow requirements to the cannula must be 
proportionately reduced. Th is generally requires a 
pressure-compensated fl owmeter accurate at deliv-
ering oxygen fl ows in the less than 1–3 L/min range. 
Hypopharyngeal oxygen sampling from infants 
breathing with cannulas has demonstrated mean 
F io 2 of 0.35, 0.45, 0.6, and 0.68 with fl ows of 0.25, 
0.5, 0.75, and 1.0 L/min, respectively. 
 Nasal Mask 
 Th e nasal mask is a hybrid of the nasal cannula and 
a face mask. It can be applied to the face by either 
1284 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
 2. Fixed-Performance (High-Flow) 
Equipment 
 Anesthesia Bag or 
Bag-Mask-Valve Systems 
 Th e basic design follows that of the nonrebreathing 
reservoir mask but with more “capable” components. 
Self-infl ating bags consist of a roughly 1.5 L bladder, 
usually with an oxygen inlet reservoir. Anesthesia 
bags are 1-, 2-, or 3-L non–self-infl ating reservoirs 
with a tailpiece gas inlet. Masks are designed to pro-
vide a comfortable leak-free seal for manual ventila-
tion. Th e inspiratory/expiratory valve systems may 
vary. Th e fl ow to the reservoir should be kept high 
so that the bags do not defl ate substantially. When 
using an anesthesia bag, operators may frequently 
have to adjust the oxygen fl ow and exhaust valve to 
respond to changing breathing patterns or demands, 
particularly when maintaining a complete seal 
between the mask and face is diffi  cult. 
 Th e most common systems for disposable and 
permanent self-infl ating resuscitation bags use 
a unidirectional gas fl ow. Although these devices 
off er the potential for a constant F IO 2 greater than 
0.9, tailpiece inlet valves will not open for a spon-
taneously breathing patient. Opening the valves 
requires negative pressure bag recoil aft er compres-
sion. If this situation is not recognized, clinicians 
might be misled into thinking the patient is receiv-
ing a specifi c concentration of oxygen when this is 
not the case. 
 Th ere are limits to the ability of each system 
to maintain its fi xed-performance characteristics. 
Delivered F IO 2 can approach 1.0 with either anesthe-
sia or self-infl ating bags. Spontaneously breathing 
patients are allowed to breathe only the contents of 
the system if the mask seal is tight and the reservoir 
is adequately maintained. 
 Failure to maintain an adequate oxygen sup-
ply in the reservoir and inlet fl ow is a concern. 
Th e spring-loaded valve of anesthesia bags must 
be adjusted to prevent overdistention of the bag. 
 Self-infl ating bags look the same whether or not 
oxygen fl ow to the unit is adequate, and they will 
entrain room air into the bag, thus lowering the 
delivered F IO 2 . 
would include medical transport or therapy in the 
postanesthesia care unit or emergency department. 
It is not the device of choice for patients with severe 
respiratory disease who are profoundly hypoxemic, 
tachypneic, or unable to protect their airway from 
aspiration. 
 Masks with Gas Reservoirs 
 Incorporating a gas reservoir is a logical adaptation 
to the simple mask. Two types of reservoir mask 
are commonly used: the partial rebreathing mask 
and the nonrebreathing mask. Both are dispos-
able, lightweight, transparent plastic under-the-
chin reservoirs. Th e diff erence between the two 
relates to use of valves on the mask and between 
the mask and the bag reservoir. Mask reservoirs 
commonly hold approximately 600 mL or less of 
gas volume. Th e phrase “partial rebreather” is used 
because “part” of the patient’s expired V T refi lls 
the bag. Usually that gas is largely dead space that 
should not result in signifi cant rebreathing of car-
bon dioxide. 
 Th e nonrebreather uses the same basic system 
as the partial rebreather but incorporates fl ap-type 
valves between the bag and mask and on at least one 
of the mask’s exhalation ports. Inboard leaking is 
common, and room air will enter during brisk inspi-
ratory fl ows, even when the bag contains gas. Th e 
lack of a complete facial seal and a relatively small 
reservoir infl uence the delivered oxygen concentra-
tion. Th e key factor in successful application of the 
masks is to use a suffi  ciently high fl ow of oxygen, so 
that the reservoir bag is at least partially full during 
inspiration. Typical minimum fl ows of oxygen are 
10–15 L/min. Well-fi tting partial rebreathing masks 
provide a range of F IO 2 from 0.35 to 0.60 with oxygen 
fl ows up to 10 L/min. With inlet fl ows of 15 L/min 
or more and ideal breathing conditions, F IO 2 may 
approach 1.0. Either style of mask is indicated for 
patients suspected of having signifi cant hypoxemia, 
with relatively normal spontaneous minute ventila-
tion. Such patients may include victims of trauma, 
myocardial infarction, or carbon monoxide expo-
sure. Profoundly dyspneic patients with gasping 
respiration may be served by a fi xed-performance, 
high-fl ow oxygen system. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1285 
patient and caregivers to keep the mask on the face 
continuously. Interruption of oxygen is a serious 
problem in unstable patients with hypoxemia and or 
hypercarbia. 
 Direct analysis of the F IO 2 during air-entrain-
ment mask breathing is diffi  cult to perform accu-
rately. Arterial blood gas analysis and the patient’s 
respiratory rate should guide clinicians as to whether 
the patient’s demands are being met by the mask’s 
fl ow. If that occurs, then inlet oxygen fl ows may 
need to be increased or an alternate device selected. 
 Air-Entraining Nebulizers 
 Large-volume, high-output or “all-purpose” nebu-
lizers have been used in respiratory care for many 
years to provide mist therapy with some control 
of the F IO 2 . Th ese units are commonly placed on 
patients following extubation for their aerosol-pro-
ducing properties. Like the air-entraining masks, 
nebulizers use a pneumatic jet and an adjustable 
orifi ce to vary entrained air for varying F IO 2 lev-
els. Many commercial devices have an inlet orifi ce 
diameter that maximally allows only 15 L/min when 
the source pressure is 50 psi. Th is means that on 
the 100% setting (no air entrainment) output fl ow 
is only 15 L/min. Only patients breathing at slow 
rates and small V T will receive 100% oxygen. Th is 
problem has been addressed by the development of 
high-fl ow, high-F IO 2 nebulizers. For more common 
applications that use an F IO 2 of 0.3–0.5, room air is 
entrained, reducing the F IO 2 and increasing the total 
fl ow output to 40–50 L/min. 
 Knowledge of the air/oxygen ratio and the 
input fl ow rate of oxygen allows the total outfl ow to 
be calculated. Nebulizer systems can be applied to 
the patient with many diff erent devices, including 
aerosol, tracheostomy dome/collar, face tent, and 
 Τ -piece adapter. Th ese appliances can all be attached 
via large-bore tubing to the nebulizer. Th is open 
system freely vents inspiratory and expiratory gases 
around the patient’s face or out a distal port of a 
 Τ -piece adapter. Unfortunately, the lack of any valves 
allows patients to secondarily entrain room air. It is 
common practice to use either a reservoir bag before 
the  Τ -piece or a reservoir tube on the distal side of 
the  Τ -piece to provide a larger volume of gas than 
 Air-Entraining Venturi Masks 
 Th e gas delivery approach with air-entraining masks 
is diff erent than with an oxygen reservoir. Th e goal 
is to create an open system with high fl ow about 
the nose and mouth, with a fi xed F IO 2 . Oxygen is 
directed by small-bore tubing to a mixing jet; the 
fi nal oxygen concentration depends on the ratio 
of air drawn in through entrainment ports. Manu-
facturers have developed both fi xed and adjustable 
entrainment selections over an F IO 2 range. Most 
provide instructions for the operator to set a mini-
mum fl ow of oxygen.  Table 57–3 identifi es total fl ow 
at various inlet fl ows and F IO 2 . 
 Despite the high-fl ow concept, F IO 2 can vary up 
to 6% from the anticipated setting. Th e air-entraining 
masks are a logical choice for patients who require 
greater F IO 2 than can be provided by devices such as 
the nasal cannula. Patients with COPD who tend to 
hypoventilate with a moderate F IO 2 are candidates 
for the Venturi mask. Clinicians providing oxygen 
therapy with Venturi masks should be aware of the 
previously mentioned problems involving the mask 
itself. F IO 2 can increase if the air entrainment ports 
are obstructed by the patient’s hands, bed sheets, or 
water condensate. Clinicians should encourage the 
 TABLE 573 Air-entrainment mask input 
ﬂ ow versus total ﬂ ow at varying F IO 2 . 1 
F IO 2 
Inlet Oxygen Flow 
(Minimum)
Total Flow 
(L/min)
0.24
 4
97
0.28
 6
68
0.3
 6
54
0.35
 8
45
0.4
12
50
0.5
12
33
0.7
12
19
0.8
12
16
1.0
12
12
 1 F IO 2 , fraction of inspired oxygen.
1286 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
neonates will not tolerate facial appliances. Oxy-
gen hoods cover only the head, allowing access to 
the child’s lower body while still permitting use of 
a standard incubator or radiant warmer. Th e hood 
is ideal for relatively short-term oxygen therapy for 
newborns and inactive infants. However, for mobile 
infants requiring longer term therapy, the nasal 
cannula, face mask, or full-bed enclosure allow for 
greater mobility. 
 Normally, oxygen and air are premixed by an 
air–oxygen blender and passed through a heated 
humidifi er. Nebulizers should be avoided. Most 
pneumatic jet-type nebulizers create noise levels 
(>65 dB) that may cause newborn hearing loss, and 
cold gas can induce an increase in oxygen consump-
tion. Hoods come in diff erent sizes. Some are sim-
ple Plexiglas boxes; others have elaborate systems 
for sealing the neck opening. Th ere is no attempt 
to completely seal the system, as a constant fl ow of 
gas is needed to remove carbon dioxide (minimum 
fl ow >7 L/min). Hood inlet fl ows of 10–15 L/min are 
adequate for a majority of patients. 
 Helium–Oxygen Therapy 
 Helium–oxygen (heliox) mixtures have a notable, 
yet limited clinical role. In addition to its uses in 
industry and deep-sea diving, heliox has a number 
of medical applications. Helium is premixed with 
oxygen in several standard blends. Th e most popu-
lar mixture is 79%/21% helium–oxygen, which has 
a density that is 40% that of pure oxygen. Helium–
oxygen mixtures are available in large-sized com-
pressed gas cylinders. 
 In anesthetic practice, pressures needed to ven-
tilate patients with small-diameter tracheal tubes 
can be substantially reduced when the 79%/21% 
mixture is used. Heliox can provide patients with 
upper airway–obstructing lesions (eg, subglottic 
edema, foreign bodies, and tracheal tumors) with 
relief from acute distress until more defi nitive care 
can be delivered. Th e evidence is less convincing in 
treating lower airway obstruction from COPD or 
acute asthma. Helium mixtures may also be used as 
the driving gas for small-volume nebulizers in bron-
chodilator therapy for asthma. However, with heliox, 
the nebulizer fl ow needs to be increased to 11 L/min 
versus the usual 6–8 L/min with oxygen. Patients’ 
that coming from the nebulizer. A typical concern 
of those applying air-entrainment aerosol therapy 
with controlled oxygen concentration is whether the 
system will provide adequate fl ow. Clinicians should 
observe the mist like a tracer to determine adequacy 
of fl ow. When a  Τ -piece is used and the visible mist 
(exiting the distal port) disappears during inspira-
tion, the fl ow is inadequate. 
 Another concern in clinical practice is that 
excess water in the tubing collects and can obstruct 
gas fl ow completely or can off er increased resistance 
to fl ow. Th e latter may increase the F IO 2 above the 
desired setting. Other complications include bron-
chospasm or laryngospasm in some patients as a 
consequence of airway irritation from sterile water 
droplets (condensate of the aerosol). In such cir-
cumstances, a heated (nonaerosol) humidifi cation 
system should be substituted. 
 High-Flow Air–Oxygen Systems 
 Dual air–oxygen fl owmeters and air–oxygen blend-
ers are commonly used for oxygen administration as 
well as freestanding continuous positive airway pres-
sure (CPAP) and “add-on” ventilator systems. Th ese 
systems diff er from the air-entraining nebulizers, 
as their total output fl ows do not diminish at F IO 2 
greater than 0.4. With these high-fl ow systems, the 
total fl ow to the patient and F IO 2 can be set indepen-
dently to meet patient needs. Th is can be done using 
a large reservoir bag or constant fl ows in the range 
of 50 to more than 100 L/min. Clinicians can use a 
variety of appliances with these systems, including 
aerosol masks, face tents, or well-fi tted nonrebreath-
ing system masks with air–oxygen blenders. Face-
sealing mask systems can also be constructed with 
a reservoir bag and a safety valve to allow breathing 
if the blender fails. Th e high fl ows of gas require use 
of heated humidifi ers of the type commonly used 
on mechanical ventilators. Humidifi cation off ers 
an advantage for patients with reactive airways. 
Because of the high fl ows, such systems are used to 
apply CPAP or BIPAP for spontaneously breathing 
patients. 
 Oxygen Hoods 
 Although many of the devices previously described 
have pediatric-sized options, many infants and 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1287 
respiratory rates as infrequent as 2 per minute, 
delaying the diagnosis. 
 Absorption Atelectasis 
 High concentrations of oxygen can cause pulmonary 
atelectasis in areas of low V/Q ratios. As nitrogen is 
“washed out” of the lungs, the lowered gas tension 
in pulmonary capillary blood results in increased 
uptake of alveolar gas and absorption atelectasis. 
If the area remains perfused but nonventilated, the 
resulting intrapulmonary shunt can lead to pro-
gressive widening of the alveolar-to-arterial (A–a) 
gradient. 
 Pulmonary Toxicity 
 Prolonged high concentrations of oxygen may dam-
age the lungs. Toxicity is dependent both on the par-
tial pressure of oxygen in the inspired gas and the 
duration of exposure. Alveolar rather than arterial 
oxygen tension is most important in the develop-
ment of oxygen toxicity. Although 100% oxygen 
for up to 10–20 h is generally considered safe, con-
centrations greater than 50–60% are undesirable 
for longer periods as they may lead to pulmonary 
toxicity. 
 Molecular oxygen (O 2 ) is unusual in that each 
atom has unpaired electrons. Th is gives the mol-
ecule the paramagnetic property that allows precise 
measurements of oxygen concentration. Notably, 
internal rearrangement of these electrons or their 
interaction with other atoms (iron) or molecules 
(xanthine) can produce potentially toxic chemi-
cal species. Oxygen toxicity is thought to be due 
to intracellular generation of highly reactive O 2 
metabolites (free radicals) such as superoxide and 
activated hydroxyl ions, singlet O 2 , and hydrogen 
peroxide. A high concentration of O 2 increases the 
likelihood of generating toxic species. Th ese metab-
olites are cytotoxic because they readily react with 
cellular DNA, sulfh ydryl proteins, and lipids. Two 
cellular enzymes, superoxide dismutase and cata-
lase, protect against toxicity by sequentially convert-
ing superoxide fi rst to hydrogen peroxide and then 
to water. Additional protection may be provided by 
antioxidants and free radical scavengers; however, 
clinical evidence supporting the use of these agents 
in preventing pulmonary toxicity is lacking. 
work of breathing can be reduced with heliox as 
compared to a conventional oxygen/nitrogen gas 
mixture. 
 Hyperbaric Oxygen 
 Hyperbaric oxygen therapy uses a pressurized 
chamber to expose the patient to oxygen tensions 
exceeding ambient barometric pressure (at sea 
level the ambient pressure is 760 mm Hg). With 
a one-person hyperbaric chamber, 100% oxygen 
is usually used to pressurize the chamber. Larger 
chambers allow for the simultaneous treatment of 
multiple patients and for the presence of medical 
personnel in the chamber with patients. Multi-
place chambers use air to pressurize the chamber, 
whereas patients receive 100% oxygen by mask, 
hood, or tracheal tube. Common indications for 
hyperbaric oxygen include decompression sickness 
(the “bends”), certain forms of gas embolism, gas 
gangrene, carbon monoxide poisoning, and treat-
ment of certain wounds. 
 3. Hazards of Oxygen Therapy 
 Oxygen therapy can result in both respiratory and 
nonrespiratory toxicity. Important factors include 
patient susceptibility, the F IO 2 , and duration of 
therapy. 
 Hypoventilation 
 Th is complication is primarily seen in patients with 
COPD who have chronic CO 2 retention. Th ese 
patients develop an altered respiratory drive that 
becomes at least partly dependent on the mainte-
nance of relative hypoxemia. Elevation of arterial 
oxygen tension to “normal” can therefore cause 
severe hypoventilation in these patients. Conversely, 
stable, spontaneously breathing patients with pro-
found hypercarbia (Pa CO 2 > 80 mm Hg) who are 
being supported with supplemental oxygen should 
not have supplemental oxygen discontinued, even 
for short intervals. Oxygen therapy can be indirectly 
hazardous for patients being monitored with pulse 
oximetry while receiving opioids for pain. Hypoven-
tilation as a consequence of opioids may fail to cause 
worrisome change in oxygen saturation, despite 
1288 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
expressed as behavior changes, nausea, vertigo, mus-
cular twitching, or convulsions. 
 Fire Hazard 
 Oxygen vigorously supports combustion. Th e 
potential for oxygen enriched gas mixtures to pro-
mote fi res and explosions is discussed in Chapter 2. 
 MECHANICAL VENTILATION 
 Despite early intervention and appropriate respi-
ratory care, patients with critical illness will oft en 
require mechanical ventilation. Mechanical venti-
lation can replace or supplement normal sponta-
neous ventilation. In most instances, the problem 
is primarily that of impaired CO 2 elimination 
(ventilatory failure). In other instances, mechani-
cal ventilation may be used as an adjunct (usu-
ally to positive-pressure therapy; see below) in the 
treatment of hypoxemia. Th e decision to initiate 
mechanical ventilation is made on clinical grounds, 
but certain parameters have been suggested as 
guidelines ( Table 57–4 ). 
 Of the two available techniques, positive-
pressure ventilation and negative-pressure ventila-
tion, the former has much wider applications and is 
 In experimental animals oxygen-mediated 
injury of the alveolar–capillary membrane produces 
a syndrome that is pathologically and clinically 
indistinguishable from ARDS. Tracheobronchitis 
may also be present initially in some patients. Pul-
monary O 2 toxicity in newborn infants is manifested 
as bronchopulmonary dysplasia. 
 Retinopathy of Prematurity 
 Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), formerly 
termed  retrolental fi broplasia , is a neovascular reti-
nal disorder that develops in 84% of premature sur-
vivors born at less than 28 weeks’ gestation. ROP 
may include disorganized vascular proliferation 
and fi brosis and may lead to retinal detachment 
and blindness. ROP resolves in approximately 80% 
of these cases without visual loss from retinal 
detachments or scars. ROP was very common in 
the 
1940s–1950s 
when 
unmonitored 
high 
(>0.5 F IO 2 ) oxygen was oft en administered to pre-
mature infants.  However, it is now known 
that hyperoxia  and hypoxia are risk factors, 
but not the primary causes of ROP. Neonates’ risk 
of ROP increases with low birth weight and com-
plexity of comorbidities (eg, sepsis). In contrast to 
pulmonary toxicity, ROP correlates better with 
arterial than with alveolar O 2 tension. Th e recom-
mended arterial concentrations for premature 
infants receiving oxygen are 50–80 mm Hg (6.6–
10.6 kPa). If an infant requires arterial O 2 satura-
tions of 96%–99% for cardiopulmonary reasons, 
fear about causing or worsening ROP is not a rea-
son to withhold the oxygen. 
 Hyperbaric Oxygen Toxicity 
 Th e high inspired O 2 tensions associated with hyper-
baric O 2 therapy greatly accelerate O 2 toxicity. Th e 
risk and expected degree of toxicity are directly 
related to the pressures used as well as the duration 
of exposure. Prolonged exposure to O 2 partial pres-
sures in excess of 0.5 atmospheres can cause pul-
monary O 2 toxicity. Th is may present initially with 
retrosternal burning, cough, and chest tightness 
and will result in progressive impairment of pul-
monary function with continued exposure. Patients 
exposed to O 2 at 2 atmospheres or greater are also at 
risk for central nervous system toxicity that may be 
2
 TABLE 574 Indicators of the need for 
mechanical ventilation. 
Criterion
Measurement
 Direct measurement 
Arterial oxygen tension
Arterial CO 2 tension
<50 mm Hg on room air
>50 mm Hg in the absence 
of metabolic alkalosis
 Derived indices 
Pa O 2 /F IO 2 ratio
PA–a o 2 gradient
V D /V T 
<300 mm Hg
>350 mm Hg
>0.6
 Clinical indices 
Respiratory rate
>35 breaths/min
 Mechanical indices 
Tidal volume
Vital capacity
Maximum inspiratory 
force
<5 mL/kg
<15 mL/kg
> −25 cm H 2 O (eg, –15 cm H 2 O)
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1289 
inspiration (see Chapter 4). Th ese phases are defi ned 
by V T , ventilatory rate, inspiratory time, inspiratory 
gas fl ow, and expiratory time. 
 Classiﬁ cation of Ventilators 
 Th e complexity of modern ventilators defi es simple 
classifi cation. Incorporation of microprocessor tech-
nology into the newest generation of ventilators has 
further complicated this task. Nonetheless, ventila-
tors are most commonly classifi ed according to their 
inspiratory phase characteristics and their method 
of cycling from inspiration to expiration. 
 A. Inspiratory Characteristics 
 Most modern ventilators behave like fl ow genera-
tors. Constant fl ow generators deliver a constant 
inspiratory gas fl ow regardless of airway circuit 
pressure. Constant fl ow is produced by the use of 
either a solenoid (on–off ) valve with a high-pressure 
gas source (5–50 psi) or via a gas injector (Venturi) 
with a lower-pressure source. Machines with high- 
pressure gas sources allow inspiratory gas fl ow to 
remain constant despite large changes in airway 
resistance or pulmonary compliance. Th e perfor-
mance of ventilators with gas injectors varies more 
with airway pressure. Nonconstant fl ow generators 
consistently vary inspiratory fl ow with each inspira-
tory cycle (such as by a rotary piston); a sine wave 
pattern of fl ow is typical. 
 Constant-pressure generators maintain air-
way pressure constant throughout inspiration and 
irrespective of inspiratory gas fl ow. Gas fl ow ceases 
when airway pressure equals the set inspiratory pres-
sure. Pressure generators typically operate at low gas 
pressures (just above peak inspiratory pressure). 
 B. Cycling (Changeover from 
Inspiration to Expiration) 
 Time-cycled ventilators cycle to the expiratory phase 
once a predetermined interval elapses from the start 
of inspiration. V T is the product of the set inspira-
tory time and inspiratory fl ow rate. Time-cycled 
ventilators are commonly used for neonates and in 
the operating room. 
 Volume-cycled ventilators terminate inspira-
tion when a preselected volume is delivered. Many 
adult ventilators are volume cycled but also have 
almost universally used. Although negative-pressure 
ventilation does not require tracheal intubation, 
it cannot overcome substantial increases in airway 
resistance or decreases in pulmonary compliance, 
and it also limits access to the patient. 
 During positive-pressure ventilation, lung 
infl ation is achieved by periodically applying posi-
tive pressure to the upper airway through a tight-
fi tting mask (noninvasive mechanical ventilation) or 
through a tracheal or tracheostomy tube. Increased 
airway resistance and decreased lung compli-
ance can be overcome by manipulating inspiratory 
gas fl ow and pressure. Th e major disadvantages of 
positive-pressure ventilation are altered ventila-
tion-to-perfusion relationships, potentially adverse 
circulatory eff ects, and risk of pulmonary baro-
trauma and volutrauma. Positive-pressure ventila-
tion increases physiological dead space because gas 
fl ow is preferentially directed to the more compli-
ant, nondependent areas of the lungs, whereas blood 
fl ow (infl uenced by gravity) favors dependent areas. 
Reductions in cardiac output are primarily due to 
impaired venous return to the heart from increased 
intrathoracic pressure. Barotrauma is closely related 
to repetitive high peak infl ation pressures and under-
lying lung disease, whereas volutrauma is related to 
the repetitive collapse and reexpansion of alveoli. 
 1. Positive-Pressure Ventilators 
 Positive-pressure ventilators periodically create a 
pressure gradient between the machine circuit and 
alveoli that results in inspiratory gas fl ow. Exhala-
tion occurs passively. Ventilators and their control 
mechanisms can be powered pneumatically (by 
a pressurized gas source), electrically, or by both 
mechanisms. Gas fl ow is either derived directly 
from the pressurized gas source or produced by 
the action of a rotary or linear piston. Th is gas fl ow 
then either goes directly to the patient (single- 
circuit system) or, as commonly occurs with oper-
ating room ventilators, compresses a reservoir bag 
or bellows that is part of the patient circuit (double- 
circuit system). 
 All ventilators have four phases: inspiration, 
the changeover from inspiration to expiration, 
expiration, and the changeover from expiration to 
1290 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
norm in modern critical care units and on newer 
anesthesia machines. 
 Ventilatory Modes 
 Ventilatory mode is defi ned by the method by which 
the ventilator cycles from expiration to inspiration 
as well as whether the patient is able to breathe spon-
taneously ( Table 57–5 and  Figure 57–1 ). Most mod-
ern ventilators are capable of multiple ventilatory 
modes, and some (microprocessor-controlled venti-
lators) can combine modes simultaneously. Typical 
ventilatory modes are regulated to deliver a defi ned 
V T or a defi ned maximal inspiratory pressure. Mod-
ern ventilators can provide for breaths that are vol-
ume-controlled (machine-initiated inspiration stops 
when the set volume is delivered), volume-assisted 
(patient-initiated inspiration stops when the set 
volume is delivered), pressure-controlled (machine-
initiated inspiration at a mandatory inspiratory 
pressure stops aft er a defi ned time has elapsed), 
pressure-assisted (patient-initiated inspiration at a 
mandatory inspiratory pressure stops aft er a defi ned 
time has elapsed), or pressure-supported (patient-
initiated inspiration continues at a mandatory inspi-
ratory pressure until the inspiratory fl ow declines to 
a defi ned value). 
 A. Continuous Mandatory Ventilation (CMV) 
 In this mode, the ventilator cycles from expiration 
to inspiration aft er a fi xed time interval. Th e inter-
val determines the ventilatory rate. Typical settings 
on this mode provide a fi xed V T and fi xed rate (and, 
therefore, minute ventilation) regardless of patient 
eff ort, because  the patient cannot breathe spontane-
ously . Settings to limit inspiratory pressure guard 
against pulmonary barotrauma, and indeed CMV 
can be provided in a pressure-limited (rather than 
volume-limited) way. Controlled ventilation is best 
reserved for patients capable of little or no ventilatory 
eff ort. Awake patients with active ventilatory eff ort 
require sedation, possibly with muscle paralysis. 
 B. Assist-Control (AC) Ventilation 
 Incorporation of a pressure sensor in the  breathing 
circuit of AC ventilators permits the patient’s 
 inspiratory eff ort to be used to trigger inspiration. 
secondary limits on inspiratory pressure to guard 
against pulmonary barotrauma. If inspiratory pres-
sure exceeds the pressure limit, the machine cycles 
into expiration even if the selected volume has not 
been delivered. 
 Properly functioning volume-cycled ventila-
tors do not deliver the set volume to the patient. A 
percentage of the set V T is always lost due to expan-
sion of the breathing circuit during inspiration. Cir-
cuit compliance is usually about 3–5 mL/cm H 2 O; 
thus, if a pressure of 30 cm H 2 O is generated during 
inspiration, 90–150 mL of the set V T is lost to the 
circuit. Loss of V T to the breathing circuit is there-
fore inversely related to lung compliance. For accu-
rate measurement of the exhaled V T , the spirometer 
must be placed at the tracheal tube rather than the 
exhalation valve of the ventilator. 
 Pressure-cycled ventilators cycle into the expi-
ratory phase when airway pressure reaches a pre-
determined level. V T and inspiratory time vary, 
being related to airway resistance and pulmonary 
and circuit compliance. A signifi cant leak in the 
patient circuit can prevent the necessary rise in 
circuit pressure and machine cycling. Conversely, 
an acute increase in airway resistance, or decrease 
in pulmonary compliance, or circuit compliance 
(kink) causes premature cycling and decreases 
the delivered V T . Pressure-cycled ventilators have 
been most oft en used for short-term indications 
(transport). 
 Flow-cycled ventilators have pressure and 
fl ow sensors that allow the ventilator to monitor 
inspiratory fl ow at a preselected fi xed inspiratory 
pressure; when this fl ow reaches a predetermined 
level (usually 25% of the initial peak mechani-
cal inspiratory fl ow rate), the ventilator cycles 
from inspiration into expiration (see the sec-
tions on Pressure Support and Pressure Control 
Ventilation). 
 C. Microprocessor-Controlled Ventilators 
 Th ese versatile machines can be set to function in 
any one of a variety of inspiratory fl ow and cycling 
patterns. Th e microprocessor allows closed-loop 
control over the ventilator’s performance character-
istics. Microprocessor-controlled ventilators are the 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1291 
minute ventilation. IMV has found greatest use as 
a weaning technique. 
 Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventila-
tion (SIMV) times the mechanical breath, whenever 
possible, to coincide with the beginning of a spon-
taneous eff ort. Proper synchronization prevents 
superimposing (stacking) a mechanical breath in 
the middle of a spontaneous breath, resulting in a 
very large V T . As with CMV and AC, settings to limit 
inspiratory pressure guard against pulmonary baro-
trauma. Th e advantages of SIMV include patient 
comfort, and if used for weaning, the machine 
breaths provide a backup if the patient becomes 
fatigued. However, if the rate is too low (4 breaths/
min), the backup may be too low, particularly for 
weak patients who may not be able to overcome 
the added work of breathing during spontaneous 
breaths. 
 IMV circuits provide a continuous supply of gas 
fl ow for spontaneous ventilation between mechanical 
breaths. Modern ventilators incorporate SIMV into 
their design, but older models must be modifi ed by a 
parallel circuit, a continuous fl ow system, or a demand 
A sensitivity control allows selection of the inspira-
tory eff ort required. Th e ventilator can be set for 
a fi xed ventilatory rate, but each patient eff ort of 
suffi  cient magnitude will trigger the set V T . If spon-
taneous inspiratory eff orts are not detected, the 
machine functions as if in the control mode. Most 
oft en, AC ventilation is used in a volume-limited 
format, but it can also be provided in a pressure-
limited way (see below). 
 C. Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation (IMV) 
 IMV allows spontaneous ventilation while the 
patient is on the ventilator. A selected number 
of mechanical breaths (with fi xed V T ) is given to 
supplement spontaneous breathing. At high man-
datory rates (10–12 breaths/min), IMV essentially 
provides all of the patient’s ventilation; at low rates 
(1–2 breaths/min), it provides minimal mechani-
cal ventilation and allows the patient to breathe 
relatively independently. Th e V T and frequency 
of spontaneous breaths are determined by the 
patient’s ventilatory drive and muscle strength. Th e 
IMV rate can be adjusted to maintain a desired 
 TABLE 575 Ventilatory modes. 1 
Mode
I to E Cycling
E to I Cycling
Allows 
Spontaneous 
Ventilation
Weaning 
Mode
 Volume 
 Time 
 Pressure 
 Flow 
 Time 
 Pressure 
CMV
+
+
AC
+
+
+
IMV
+
+
+
+
SIMV
+
+
+
+
+
PSV
+
+
+
+
PCV
+
+
MMV
+
PC-IRV
+
+
APRV
+
+
+
HFJV
+
+
+
 1 CMV, continuous mandatory ventilation; AC, assist-control ventilation; IMV, intermittent mandatory ventilation; SIMV, synchronized intermittent 
mandatory ventilation; PSV, pressure support ventilation; PCV, pressure control ventilation; MMV, mandatory minute ventilation; IRV, inverse I:E ratio 
ventilation; APRV, airway pressure release ventilation; HFJV, high-frequency jet ventilation.
Continuous 
mandatory
ventilation
Assist control
Intermittent
mandatory
ventilation
Synchronized
intermittent
mandatory
ventilation
Pressure
support
ventilation
Inverse ratio
ventilation
Airway
pressure
release
ventilation
High-frequency
jet ventilation
Time
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
Airway pressure
 S = Spontaneous breath
M = Mechanical breath
ME = Mechanical exhalation
= Patient effort
Stacking M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
S
S
S
ME
ME
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
M
M
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
 FIGURE 571  Airway pressure waveforms of ventilatory modes. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1293
is no backup rate if the patient’s intrinsic respiratory 
rate decreases or the patient becomes apneic. Pres-
sure support is oft en used in conjunction with IMV 
( Figure 57–3 ). Th e IMV machine breaths provide 
backup, and a low level of pressure support is used 
to off set the increased work of breathing resulting 
from the breathing circuit and machine. 
 F. Pressure Control Ventilation (PCV) 
 Pressure control ventilation is similar to PSV 
in that peak airway pressure is controlled but 
is diff erent in that a mandatory rate and inspiratory 
3
fl ow valve. Regardless of the system, proper function-
ing of one-way valves and suffi  cient gas fl ow are nec-
essary to prevent an increase in the patient’s work of 
breathing, particularly when PEEP is also used. 
 Th e IMV discussion has considered this to be a 
volume-limited format; however, it can also be pro-
vided in pressure-limited format if desired (see below). 
 D. Mandatory Minute Ventilation (MMV) 
 With MMV, the patient is able to breathe sponta-
neously (with pressure support) and also receive 
SIMV mechanical breaths, while the machine moni-
tors the exhaled minute ventilation. In this mode, 
the machine continuously adjusts the number of 
SIMV mechanical breaths so that the sum total of 
spontaneous and mechanical ventilation equals the 
desired set minute ventilation. Th e role of this mode 
in weaning remains to be defi ned. 
 E. Pressure Support Ventilation (PSV) 
 Pressure support ventilation was designed to aug-
ment the V T of spontaneously breathing patients and 
overcome any increased inspiratory resistance from 
the tracheal tube, breathing circuit (tubing, connec-
tors, and humidifi er), and ventilator (pneumatic 
circuitry and valves). Microprocessor-controlled 
machines have this mode, which delivers suffi  cient 
gas fl ow with every inspiratory eff ort to maintain a 
predetermined positive pressure throughout inspi-
ration. When inspiratory fl ow decreases to a prede-
termined level, the ventilator’s feedback (servo) loop 
cycles the machine into the expiratory phase, and air-
way pressure returns to baseline ( Figure 57–2 ). Th e 
only setting in this mode is inspiratory pressure. Th e 
patient determines the respiratory rate and V T var-
ies according to inspiratory gas fl ow, lung mechan-
ics, and the patient’s own inspiratory eff ort. Low 
levels of PSV (5–10 cm H 2 O) are usually suffi  cient 
to overcome any added resistance imposed by the 
breathing apparatus. Higher levels (10–40 cm H 2 O) 
can function as a standalone ventilatory mode if the 
patient has suffi  cient spontaneous ventilatory drive 
and stable lung mechanics. Th e principal advantages 
of PSV are its ability to augment spontaneous V T , 
decrease the work of breathing, and increase patient 
comfort. However, if the patient fatigues or lung 
mechanics change, V T may be inadequate, and there 
Flow
(L/s)
1
1
0.8
–10
30–0.2
Pressure
(cm H2O)
Volume
(L)
 FIGURE 572  Pressure support ventilation. The 
patient initiates a breath; the machine is set to deliver 
15 cm H 2 O pressure (above 5 cm H 2 O of continuous 
positive airway pressure [CPAP]). When ﬂ ow ceases, 
the machine cycles into the expiratory mode. 
Flow
(L/s)
1
1
0.8
–20
60
M
S
M
–0.2
Pressure
(cm H2O)
Volume
(L)
Paw
VT
V⋅
 FIGURE 573  Intermittent mechanical ventilation 
with pressure support. M = machine breath → set tidal 
volume (V T ) delivered. S = spontaneous breath, 15 cm of 
pressure support over 5 cm of PEEP. V T depends on patient 
eﬀ ort and lung mechanics. V, ﬂ ow; Paw, partial airway 
pressure; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure. 
1294 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
inspiratory time such that inspiration is longer than 
expiration during PCV (PC-IRV). Intrinsic PEEP 
may be produced during IRV and is caused by air 
trapping or incomplete emptying of the lung to the 
baseline pressure prior to the initiation of the next 
breath. Th is air trapping increases FRC until a new 
equilibrium is reached. Th is mode does not allow 
spontaneous breathing and requires heavy seda-
tion or neuromuscular blockade. IRV with PEEP is 
eff ective for improving oxygenation in patients with 
decreased FRC. 
 H. Airway Pressure Release Ventilation (APRV) 
 APRV or bilevel ventilation is a mode in which a 
relatively high PEEP is used, despite the patient 
being allowed to breathe spontaneously. Intermit-
tently, the PEEP level decreases to help augment the 
elimination of CO 2 ( Figure 57–4 ). Th e inspiratory 
and expiratory times, high and low PEEP levels, and 
spontaneous respiratory activity determine minute 
ventilation. Initial settings include a minimum PEEP 
of 10–12 cm H 2 O and a release level of 5–10 cm H 2 O. 
Advantages of APRV appear to be less circulatory 
depression and pulmonary barotrauma as well as 
less need for sedation. Th is technique appears to be 
an attractive alternative to PC-IRV for overcoming 
problems with high peak inspiratory pressures in 
patients with reduced lung compliance. 
 I. High-Frequency Ventilation (HFV) 
 Th ree forms of HFV are available. High-frequency 
positive-pressure ventilation involves delivering a 
small “conventional” V T at a rate of 60–120 breaths/
min. High-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) utilizes 
a small cannula at or in the airway through which a 
pulsed jet of high-pressure gas is delivered at a set 
frequency of 120–600 times/min (2–10 Hz). Th e jet 
of gas may entrain air (Bernoulli eff ect), which may 
augment V T . High-frequency oscillation employs a 
time are selected. As with pressure support, gas fl ow 
ceases when the pressure level is reached; however, 
the ventilator does not cycle to expiration until the 
preset inspiration time has elapsed. PCV may be 
used in both the AC and IMV modes. In AC, all 
breaths (either machine initiated or patient initi-
ated) are time cycled and pressure limited. In IMV, 
machine-initiated breaths are time cycled and pres-
sure limited. Th e patient may breathe spontaneously 
between the set rate, and the V T of the spontaneous 
breaths is determined by the patient’s pulmonary 
muscle strength. Th e advantage of PCV is that by 
limiting inspiratory pressure, the risks of baro-
trauma and volutrauma may be decreased. Also, by 
extending inspiratory time, better mixing and 
recruitment of collapsed or fl ooded alveoli may be 
achieved, provided adequate PEEP levels are used. 
 Th e disadvantage of conventional PCV is that 
V T is not guaranteed (although there are 
modes in which the consistent delivered pressure of 
PCV can be combined with a predefi ned volume 
delivery). Any change in compliance or resistance 
will aff ect the delivered V T . Th is is a major issue in 
patients with acute lung injury because if the com-
pliance decreases and the pressure limit is not 
increased, adequate V T may not be attained. PCV 
has been used for patients with acute lung injury or 
ARDS, oft en with a prolonged inspiratory time or 
inverse I:E ratio ventilation (IRV) (see below) in an 
eff ort to recruit collapsed and fl ooded alveoli. Th e 
disadvantage of using IRV with PCV is that the 
patient needs to be heavily sedated and oft en para-
lyzed to tolerate this particular ventilatory mode. 
 With PCV, pressure and inspiratory time are 
preset, whereas airfl ow and volume are variable and 
dependent on the patient’s resistance and compli-
ance. With volume ventilation, on the other hand, 
inspiratory time is also preset but fl ow and V T are 
also preset, and in this circumstance the inspiratory 
pressure can be very high. 
 G. Inverse I:E Ratio Ventilation (IRV) 
 IRV reverses the normal inspiratory:expiratory time 
ratio of 1:3 or greater to a ratio of greater than 1:1. 
Th is may be achieved by adding an end-inspiratory 
pause, by decreasing peak inspiratory fl ow during 
volume-cycled ventilation (CMV), or by setting an 
4
20 cm H2O
5 cm H2O
 FIGURE 574  Airway pressure release ventilation. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1295
positive-pressure ventilation can be applied to each 
lung independently using two ventilators. When 
two ventilators are used, the timing of mechanical 
breaths is oft en synchronized, with one ventilator, 
the “master,” setting the rate for the “slave” ventilator. 
 2. Care of Patients Requiring 
Mechanical Ventilation 
 Tracheal Intubation 
 Tracheal intubation for mechanical ventilation is 
most commonly undertaken in ICU patients to 
manage pulmonary failure. Both nasotracheal and 
orotracheal intubation appear to be relatively safe 
for at least 2–3 weeks.  When compared with 
orotracheal intubation, nasotracheal intuba-
tion may be more comfortable for the patient and 
more secure (fewer instances of accidental extuba-
tion). Nasal intubation, however, has signifi cant 
adverse events associated with its use, including 
nasal bleeding, transient bacteremia, submucosal 
dissection of the nasopharynx or oropharynx, and 
sinusitis or otitis media (from obstruction of sinus 
outfl ow or of the auditory tubes). Nasal intubation 
will also generally necessitate use of a smaller 
diameter tube than orotracheal intubation, and this 
can make it more diffi  cult to clear secretions and 
can limit fi beroptic bronchoscopy to use of smaller 
devices. 
 Intubation usually can be carried out without 
the use of sedation or muscle paralysis in agonal and 
unconscious patients. However, topical anesthesia of 
the airway and sedation are helpful in patients who 
still have active airway refl exes. More vigorous and 
uncooperative patients require varying degrees of 
sedation; administration of a paralytic agent also 
greatly facilitates orotracheal intubation. Small 
doses of relatively short-acting agents are generally 
used; popular agents include midazolam, etomidate, 
dexmedetomidine, and propofol. Succinylcholine or 
a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocker can be 
used for paralysis aft er a hypnotic is given. 
 Th e time of tracheal intubation and initiation of 
mechanical ventilation can be a period of great hemo-
dynamic instability. Hypertension or hypotension 
and bradycardia or tachycardia may be encountered. 
5
driver (usually a piston) that creates to-and-fro gas 
movement in the airway at rates of 180–3000 times/
min (3–50 Hz). 
 Th ese forms of ventilation all produce V T at 
or below anatomic dead space. Th e exact mecha-
nism of gas exchange is unclear but is probably a 
combination of eff ects (including convective ven-
tilation, asymmetrical velocity profi les, Taylor 
dispersion, pendelluft , molecular diff usion, and 
cardiogenic mixing). Jet ventilation has found wid-
est use in the operating room. It may be used for 
laryngeal, tracheal, and bronchial procedures and 
can be lifesaving in emergency airway manage-
ment when tracheal intubation and conventional 
positive-pressure ventilation are unsuccessful (see 
Chapter 19). In the ICU, HFJV may be useful in 
managing some patients with bronchopleural and 
tracheoesophageal fi stulas when conventional ven-
tilation has failed. Occasionally, HFJV or high-fre-
quency oscillation is used in patients with ARDS 
to try to improve oxygenation. Inadequate heating 
and humidifi cation of inspired gases during pro-
longed HFV, however, can be a problem. Initial set-
tings for HFJV in the operating room are typically 
a rate of 120–240 breaths/min, an inspiratory time 
of 33%, and a drive pressure of 15–30 psi. Mean 
airway pressure should be measured in the trachea 
at least 5 cm below the injector to avoid an artifac-
tual error from gas entrainment. Carbon dioxide 
elimination is generally increased by increasing the 
drive pressure, whereas adequacy of oxygenation 
relates to the mean airway pressure. An intrinsic 
PEEP eff ect is seen during HFJV at high drive pres-
sures and inspiratory times greater than 40%. 
 J. Diﬀ erential Lung Ventilation 
 Th is technique, also referred to as independent lung 
ventilation, may be used in patients with severe uni-
lateral lung disease or those with bronchopleural 
fi stulae. Use of conventional positive-pressure ven-
tilation and PEEP in such instances can aggravate 
ventilation/perfusion mismatching or, in patients 
with fi stula, result in inadequate ventilation of the 
unaff ected lung. In patients with restrictive disease 
of one lung, overdistention of the normal lung can 
lead to worsening hypoxemia or barotrauma. Aft er 
separation of the lungs with a double-lumen tube, 
1296 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
tracheal tube, demand valves, and breathing circuit 
of the ventilator. Th ese imposed resistances increase 
the work of breathing. Smaller tubes (<7.0 mm i.d. 
in adults) increase resistance and should be avoided 
whenever possible. Th e simultaneous use of pressure 
support of 5–15 cm H 2 O during SIMV can compen-
sate for tube and circuit resistance. 
 Th e addition of 5–8 cm H 2 O of PEEP during 
positive-pressure ventilation preserves FRC and gas 
exchange. Th is “physiological” PEEP is purported 
to compensate for the loss of a similar amount of 
intrinsic PEEP (and decrease in FRC) in patients 
following tracheal intubation. Periodic sigh breaths 
(large V T ) are not necessary when a PEEP of 5–8 cm 
H 2 O accompanies VT of appropriate volumes. 
 Sedation & Paralysis 
 Sedation and paralysis may be necessary in patients 
who become agitated and “fi ght” the ventilator. 
Repetitive coughing (“bucking”) and straining can 
have adverse hemodynamic eff ects, can interfere 
with gas exchange, and may predispose to pulmo-
nary barotrauma and self-infl icted injury. Sedation 
with or without paralysis may also be desirable when 
patients continue to be tachypneic despite high 
mechanical respiratory rates (>16–18 breaths/min). 
 Commonly used sedatives include opioids 
(morphine or fentanyl), benzodiazepines (usu-
ally midazolam), propofol, and dexmedetomidine. 
Th ese agents may be used alone or in combination 
and are oft en administered by continuous infusion. 
Nondepolarizing paralytic agents are used in com-
bination with sedation when sedation alone and all 
other means to ventilate the patient have failed. 
 Monitoring 
 Patients on mechanical ventilation require continu-
ous monitoring for adverse hemodynamic and pul-
monary eff ects from positive pressure in the airways. 
Continuous electrocardiography and pulse oximetry 
are useful. Direct intraarterial pressure monitoring 
also allows frequent sampling of arterial blood for 
respiratory gas analysis (both a convenience and a 
disadvantage, given the large number of unneces-
sary laboratory tests that are oft en performed on 
patients with critical illness). Accurate recording of 
fl uid intake and output is necessary to assess fl uid 
Responsible factors include activation of autonomic 
refl exes from stimulation of the airway, myocardial 
depression and vasodilation from sedative-hypnotic 
agents, straining by the patient, withdrawal of intense 
sympathetic activity, and reduced venous return due 
to positive pressure in the airways. Careful monitor-
ing is required during and immediately following 
intubation. 
 When left  in place for more than 2–3 weeks, 
both orotracheal and nasotracheal tubes pre-
dispose patients to subglottic stenosis. If longer 
periods of mechanical ventilation are necessary, 
the tracheal tube should generally be replaced by a 
cuff ed tracheostomy tube. If it is anticipated that a 
tracheal tube will be required for more than 2 weeks, 
a tracheostomy may be performed soon aft er intuba-
tion. Th ere is a trend to earlier tracheostomy in vic-
tims of trauma, particularly those with major head 
injuries. While earlier tracheostomy does not reduce 
mortality, it does tend to reduce the incidence of 
pneumonia, the duration of mechanical ventilation, 
and the length of stay. 
 Initial Ventilator Settings 
 Depending on the type of pulmonary failure, 
mechanical ventilation is used to provide either par-
tial or full ventilatory support. For full ventilatory 
support, CMV, AC, or PCV is generally employed 
with a respiratory rate of 10–12 breaths/min and a 
V T of 8–10 mL/kg; lower V T (6–8 mL/kg) may be 
necessary to avoid high peak infl ation pressures 
(>35–40 cm H 2 O) and pulmonary barotrauma and 
volutrauma. High airway pressures that overdistend 
alveoli (transalveolar pressure >35 cm H 2 O) have 
been shown experimentally to promote lung injury. 
Likewise, compared with a V T of 12 mL/kg, a V T of 
6 mL/kg and plateau pressure (P plt ) less than 30 cm 
H 2 O have been associated with reduced mortality in 
patients with ARDS. Partial ventilatory support is 
usually provided by low SIMV settings (<8 breaths/
min), either with or without pressure support. 
Lower P plt (<20–30 cm H 2 O) can help preserve 
cardiac output, may be less likely to alter normal 
 ventilation/perfusion relationships, and is the cur-
rent recommendation. 
 Patients breathing spontaneously on SIMV 
must overcome the additional resistances of the 
6
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1297 
alkalosis, anemia, increased CO 2 production due to 
increased carbohydrate loads, altered mental status, 
and sleep deprivation should be adequately treated. 
Underlying lung disease and respiratory muscle 
wasting from prolonged disuse oft en complicate 
weaning. Patients who fail to wean despite apparent 
readiness oft en have COPD or chronic heart failure. 
 Weaning (or liberation) from mechanical venti-
lation should be considered when patients no longer 
meet general criteria for mechanical ventilation (see 
 Table 57–4 ). In general, this occurs when patients 
have a pH greater than 7.25, show adequate arte-
rial oxygen saturation while receiving F IO 2 less than 
0.5, are able to spontaneously breathe, are hemo-
dynamically stable, and have no current signs of 
myocardial ischemia. Additional mechanical indi-
ces have also been suggested ( Table 57–6 ). Useful 
weaning parameters include arterial blood gas ten-
sions, respiratory rate, and rapid shallow breathing 
index (RSBI, see below). Intact airway refl exes and 
a cooperative patient are also mandatory prior to 
completion of the weaning and extubation unless 
the patient will retain a cuff ed tracheostomy tube. 
Similarly, adequate oxygenation (arterial oxygen 
saturation >90% on 40–50% O 2 with <5 cm H 2 O of 
PEEP) is imperative prior to extubation. When the 
patient is weaned from mechanical ventilation and 
extubation is planned, the RSBI is frequently used to 
help predict who can be successfully weaned from 
mechanical ventilation and extubated. With the 
patient breathing spontaneously on a  Τ -piece, the 
V T (in liters) and respiratory rate ( f ) are measured: 
RSBI = f(breaths/min)
VT(L)
balance. An indwelling urinary catheter will lead 
to an increased risk of urinary tract infections and 
should be avoided when possible, but it is help-
ful for monitoring urinary output. Central venous 
(and rarely pulmonary artery) pressure monitor-
ing are used in hemodynamically unstable patients. 
Frequent chest radiographs are commonly obtained 
to confi rm tracheal tube and central venous cath-
eter positions, evaluate for evidence of pulmonary 
barotrauma or pulmonary disease, and determine 
whether there are signs of pulmonary edema. 
 Airway pressures (baseline, peak, plateau, and 
mean), inhaled and exhaled V T (mechanical and 
spontaneous), and fractional concentration of oxy-
gen should be closely monitored. Monitoring these 
parameters not only allows optimal adjustment of 
ventilator settings but helps detect problems with 
the tracheal tube, breathing circuit, and ventilator. 
For example, an increasing P plt for a set V T can indi-
cate worsening compliance. A declining blood pres-
sure and increasing P plt from dynamic hyperinfl ation 
(autoPEEP) can be quickly diagnosed by discon-
necting the patient from the ventilator. Inadequate 
suctioning of airway secretions and the presence of 
large mucus plugs are oft en manifested as increas-
ing peak infl ation pressures (a sign of increased 
resistance to gas fl ow) and decreasing exhaled 
V T . An abrupt increase in peak infl ation pressure 
together with sudden hypotension strongly suggests 
a pneumothorax. 
 3. Discontinuing Mechanical 
Ventilation 
 Th ere are two phases to discontinuing mechanical 
ventilation. In the fi rst, “readiness testing,” so-called 
weaning parameters and other subjective and objec-
tive assessments are used to determine whether 
the patient can sustain progressive withdrawal of 
mechanical ventilator support. Th e second phase, 
“weaning” or “liberation,” describes the way in 
which mechanical support is removed. 
 Readiness testing should include determining 
whether the process that necessitated mechanical 
ventilation has been reversed or controlled. Com-
plicating factors such as bronchospasm, heart fail-
ure, infection, malnutrition, metabolic acidosis or 
 TABLE 576 Mechanical criteria for 
weaning/extubation. 
Criterion
Measurement
Inspiratory pressure
<−25 cm H 2 O
Tidal volume
>5 mL/kg
Vital capacity
>10 mL/kg
Minute ventilation
<10 mL
Rapid shallow breathing index
<100
1298 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
 Weaning with a T-Piece or CPAP 
 Τ -piece trials allow observation while the patient 
breathes spontaneously without any mechanical 
breaths. Th e  Τ -piece attaches directly to the tracheal 
tube or tracheostomy tube and has corrugated tub-
ing on the other two limbs. A humidifi ed oxygen–air 
mixture fl ows into the proximal limb and exits from 
the distal limb. Suffi  cient gas fl ow must be given in 
the proximal limb to prevent the mist from being 
completely drawn back at the distal limb during 
inspiration; this ensures that the patient is  receiving 
the desired oxygen concentration. Th e patient is 
observed closely during this period; obvious new 
signs of fatigue, chest retractions, tachypnea, tachy-
cardia, arrhythmias, or hypertension or hypotension 
should terminate the trial. If the patient appears to 
tolerate the trial period and the RSBI is less than 100, 
mechanical ventilation can be discontinued perma-
nently. If the patient can also protect and clear the 
airway, the tracheal tube can be removed. 
 If the patient has been intubated for a pro-
longed period or has severe underlying lung disease, 
sequential  Τ -piece trials may be necessary. Periodic 
trials of 10–30 min are initiated and progressively 
increased by 5–10 min or longer per trial as long 
as the patient appears comfortable and maintains 
acceptable arterial blood gas measurements. 
 Many patients develop progressive atelectasis 
during prolonged  Τ -piece trials. Th is may refl ect 
the absence of a normal “physiological” PEEP when 
the larynx is bypassed by a tracheal tube. If this is a 
concern, spontaneous breathing trials on low levels 
(5 cm H 2 O) of CPAP can be tried. Th e CPAP helps 
maintain FRC and prevent atelectasis. 
 POSITIVE AIRWAY 
PRESSURE THERAPY 
 Positive airway pressure therapy can be used in 
patients who are breathing spontaneously as well as 
those who are mechanically ventilated. Th e princi-
pal indication for positive airway pressure therapy 
is a decrease in FRC resulting in absolute or relative 
hypoxemia. By increasing transpulmonary distend-
ing pressure, positive airway pressure therapy can 
increase FRC, improve (increase) lung compliance, 
 Patients with an RSBI less than 100 can be success-
fully extubated. Th ose with an RSBI greater than 120 
should retain some degree of mechanical ventilator 
support. 
 Th e common techniques to wean a patient 
from the ventilator include SIMV, pressure sup-
port, or periods of spontaneous breathing alone 
on a  Τ -piece or on low levels of CPAP. Mandatory 
minute ventilation has also been suggested as an 
ideal weaning technique, but experience with it is 
limited. Finally, many institutions use “automated 
tube compensation” to provide just enough pres-
sure support to compensate for the resistance of 
breathing through an endotracheal tube. Newer 
mechanical ventilators have a setting that will auto-
matically adjust gas fl ows to make this adjustment. 
In practice in adults breathing through conven-
tionally sized tubes (7.5–8.5), the adjustment will 
typically amount to pressure support of 5 cm H 2 O 
and PEEP of 5 cm H 2 O. 
 Weaning with SIMV 
 With SIMV the number of mechanical breaths is 
progressively decreased (by 1–2 breaths/min) as 
long as the arterial CO 2 tension and respiratory 
rate remain acceptable (generally <45–50 mm Hg 
and <30 breaths/min, respectively). If pressure sup-
port is concomitantly used, it should generally be 
reduced to 5–8 cm H 2 O. In patients with acid–base 
disturbances or chronic CO 2 retention, arterial 
blood pH (>7.35) is more useful than CO 2 tension. 
Blood gas measurements can be checked aft er a 
minimum of 15–30 min at each setting. When an 
IMV of 2–4 breaths is reached, mechanical ventila-
tion is discontinued if arterial oxygenation remains 
acceptable. 
 Weaning with PSV 
 Weaning with PSV alone is accomplished by gradu-
ally decreasing the pressure support level by 2–3 cm 
H 2 O while V T , arterial blood gas tensions, and respi-
ratory rate are monitored (using the same criteria as 
for IMV). Th e goal is to try to ensure a V T of 4–6 mL/
kg and an  f of less than 30 with acceptable Pa O 2 and 
Pa CO 2 . When a pressure support level of 5–8 cm H 2 O 
is reached, the patient is considered weaned. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1299
Th is situation can be corrected by adding low levels 
of (inspiratory) PSV if in a volume-targeted mode 
or changing to a pressure-targeted mode. In clini-
cal practice, controlled ventilation, PSV, and CPAP/
PEEP support can be delivered by most modern 
ICU ventilators. Manufacturers have also developed 
specifi c devices to deliver bilevel inspiratory posi-
tive airway pressure (IPAP) with expiratory positive 
airway pressure (EPAP) in either a spontaneous or 
time-cycled fashion. Th e term  bilevel positive air-
way pressure (BiPAP) has become a commonly used 
phrase, adding to the confusion of airway pressure 
terminology. 
 Pulmonary Eﬀ ects of PEEP & CPAP 
 Th e major eff ect of PEEP and CPAP on the 
lungs is to increase FRC. In patients with 
decreased lung volume, appropriate levels of either 
PEEP or CPAP will increase FRC and tidal ven-
tilation above closing capacity, will improve lung 
compliance, and will correct ventilation/perfusion 
abnormalities. Th e resulting decrease in intrapul-
monary shunting improves arterial oxygenation. 
Th e principal mechanism of action for both PEEP 
and CPAP appears to be expansion of partially col-
lapsed alveoli. Recruitment (reexpansion) of col-
lapsed alveoli occurs at PEEP or CPAP levels above 
the infl ection point, defi ned as the pressure level on 
7
and reverse ventilation/perfusion mismatching. 
Improvement in the latter parameter will show as a 
decrease in venous admixture and an improvement 
in arterial O 2 tension. 
 Positive End-Expiratory Pressure 
 Application of positive pressure during expiration 
as an adjunct to a mechanically delivered breath 
is referred to as PEEP. Th e ventilator’s PEEP valve 
provides a pressure threshold that allows expiratory 
fl ow to occur only when airway pressure exceeds the 
selected PEEP level. 
 Continuous Positive 
Airway Pressure 
 Application of a positive-pressure threshold dur-
ing both inspiration and expiration with sponta-
neous breathing is referred to as CPAP. Constant 
levels of pressure can be attained only if a high-
fl ow (inspiratory) gas source is provided. When the 
patient does not have an artifi cial airway, tightly 
fi tting full-face masks, nasal masks, nasal “pillows” 
(ADAM circuit), or nasal prongs (neonatal) can be 
used. Because of the risks of gastric distention and 
regurgitation, CPAP masks should be used only 
on patients with intact airway refl exes and with 
CPAP levels less than 15 cm H 2 O (less than lower 
esophageal sphincter pressure in normal persons). 
Expiratory pressures above 15 cm H 2 O require an 
artifi cial airway. 
 CPAP versus PEEP 
 Th e distinction between PEEP and CPAP is oft en 
blurred in the clinical setting because patients may 
breathe with a combination of mechanical and spon-
taneous breaths. Th erefore, the two terms are oft en 
used interchangeably. In the strictest sense, “pure” 
PEEP is provided as a ventilator-cycled breath. 
In contrast, a “pure” CPAP system provides only 
suffi  cient continuous or “on-demand” gas fl ows 
(60–90 L/min) to prevent inspiratory airway pres-
sure from falling perceptibly below the expiratory 
level during spontaneous breaths ( Figure 57–5 ). 
Some ventilators with demand valve–based CPAP 
systems may not be adequately responsive and 
result in increased inspiratory work of breathing. 
Expiration
Expiration
Inspiration
CPAP
PEEP
Airway pressure
0
10
 FIGURE 575  Airway pressure during positive end-
expiratory pressure (PEEP) and continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP). Note that by increasing inspiratory gas 
ﬂ ows, PEEP progressively becomes CPAP. 
1300 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
pneumoretroperitoneum). A bronchopleural fi stula 
is the result of failure of an air leak to seal (close). 
Although barotrauma must be considered in any 
discussion of CPAP and PEEP, in fact, it may be 
more clearly associated with higher peak inspira-
tory pressures that result with increasing level of 
PEEP or CPAP. Other factors that may increase the 
risk of barotrauma include underlying lung disease, 
stacking of breaths (from too frequent breaths or 
too short expiratory times) so that intrinsic PEEP 
(dynamic hyperinfl ation or autoPEEP) develops, 
large V T (>10–15 mL/kg), and younger age. 
 Adverse Nonpulmonary 
Eﬀ ects of PEEP & CPAP 
 Nonpulmonary adverse eff ects are primarily cir-
culatory and are related to transmission of the ele-
vated airway pressure to the contents of the chest. 
Fortunately, transmission is directly related to lung 
compliance; thus, patients with decreased lung com-
pliance (most patients requiring PEEP) are least 
aff ected. 
 Progressive reductions in cardiac output are 
oft en seen as mean airway pressure and, second-
arily, mean intrathoracic pressure rise. Th e principal 
mechanism appears to be intrathoracic pressure–
related inhibition of return of venous blood to the 
heart. Other mechanisms may include left ward 
displacement of the interventricular septum (inter-
fering with left  ventricular fi lling) because of the 
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance (increased 
right ventricular aft erload) from overdistention of 
alveoli, leading to an increase in right ventricular 
volume. Left  ventricular compliance may therefore 
be reduced; when this occurs, to achieve the same 
cardiac output may require a higher fi lling pressure. 
An increase in intravascular volume will usually at 
least partially off set the eff ects of CPAP and PEEP on 
cardiac output. Circulatory depression is most oft en 
associated with end-expiratory pressures greater 
than 15 cm H 2 O. 
 PEEP-induced elevations in central venous 
pressure and reductions in cardiac output decrease 
both renal and hepatic blood fl ow. Circulating levels 
of antidiuretic hormone and angiotensin are usually 
elevated. Urinary output, glomerular fi ltration, and 
free water clearance decrease. 
a pressure–volume curve at which collapsed alveoli 
are recruited (open); with small changes in pressure 
there are large changes in volume ( Figure 57–6 ). 
Although neither PEEP nor CPAP decreases total 
extravascular lung water, studies suggest that they 
do redistribute extravascular lung water from the 
interstitial space between alveoli and endothelial 
cells toward peribronchial and perihilar areas. Both 
eff ects can potentially improve arterial oxygenation. 
 Excessive PEEP or CPAP, however, can overdis-
tend alveoli (and bronchi), increasing dead space 
ventilation and reducing lung compliance; both 
eff ects can signifi cantly increase the work of breath-
ing. By compressing alveolar capillaries, overdisten-
tion of normal alveoli can also increase pulmonary 
vascular resistance and right ventricular aft erload. 
 A higher incidence of pulmonary barotrauma 
is observed with excessive PEEP or CPAP, par-
ticularly at levels greater than 20 cm H 2 O. Disrup-
tion of alveoli allows air to track interstitially along 
bronchi into the mediastinum (pneumomediasti-
num). From the mediastinum, air can then rupture 
into the pleural space (pneumothorax) or the peri-
cardium (pneumopericardium) or can dissect along 
tissue planes subcutaneously (subcutaneous emphy-
sema) or into the abdomen (pneumoperitoneum or 
8
Pressure
0
30
Volume
IP
E
 FIGURE 576  Pressure–volume curve for pulmonary 
system (eg, lung, thoracic). Inﬂ ection point (IP) above 
which the majority of alveoli are recruited. E, result of 
excessive pressure when alveoli are overdistended and 
pulmonary compliance decreases. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1301
 An aerosol mist is a gas or gas mixture contain-
ing a suspension of liquid particles. Aerosolized 
water may be administered to loosen inspissated 
secretions and facilitate their removal from the tra-
cheobronchial tree. Aerosol mists are also used 
to administer bronchodilators, mucolytic agents, 
or vasoconstrictors (metered-dose inhalers are 
 preferred for administration of bronchodilators). 
A normal cough requires an adequate inspiratory 
capacity, an intact glottis, and adequate muscle 
strength (abdominal muscles and diaphragm). 
Aerosol mists with or without bronchodilators may 
induce cough as well as loosen secretions. Instilla-
tion of hypertonic saline has been used as a muco-
lytic and to induce cough. Additional eff ective 
measures include chest percussion or vibration ther-
apy and postural drainage of the various lung lobes. 
 Maneuvers that produce sustained maximum 
lung infl ation such as the use of an incentive 
spirometer can be helpful in inducing cough as well 
as preventing atelectasis and preserving normal 
lung volume. Patients should be instructed to inhale 
approximately 15–20 mL/kg and to hold it for 2–3 s 
before exhalation. 
 When thick and copious secretions are associ-
ated with obvious atelectasis and hypoxemia, more 
aggressive measures may be indicated. Th ese include 
suctioning the spontaneously breathing patient via 
a nasopharyngeal catheter or fl exible bronchoscope, 
or performing the same two maneuvers through 
a tracheal tube. When there is atelectasis without 
retention of secretions, a brief period of CPAP by 
mask or positive-pressure ventilation through a tra-
cheal tube is oft en very eff ective. 
 Respiratory Failure 
 Respiratory failure may be defi ned as impairment 
of normal gas exchange severe enough to require 
acute therapeutic intervention. Defi nitions based on 
arterial blood gases (see  Table 57–1 ) may not apply 
to patients with chronic pulmonary diseases. For 
example, dyspnea and progressive respiratory aci-
dosis may be present in patients with chronic CO 2
retention. Arterial blood gases typically follow one 
of several patterns in patients with respiratory fail-
ure ( Figure 57–7 ). At one extreme, the derangement 
9
 Increased end-expiratory pressures, because 
they impede blood drainage from the brain and 
blood return to the heart, may increase intracranial 
pressure in patients whose ventricular compliance 
is decreased. Th erefore, in patients on mechanical 
ventilation for acute lung injury and who have evi-
dence of increased intracranial pressure, the level of 
PEEP must be carefully chosen to balance oxygen-
ation requirements against potential adverse eff ects 
on intracranial pressure. 
 Optimum Use of PEEP & CPAP 
 Th e goal of positive-pressure therapy is to increase 
oxygen delivery to tissues, while avoiding the 
adverse sequelae of excessively increased (>0.5) F IO 2 . 
Th e latter is best accomplished with an adequate car-
diac output and hemoglobin concentration. Ideally, 
mixed venous oxygen tensions or the arteriovenous 
oxygen content diff erence should be followed. Th e 
salutary eff ect of PEEP (or CPAP) on arterial oxygen 
tension must be balanced against any detrimental 
eff ect on cardiac output. Volume infusion or inotro-
pic support may be necessary and should be guided 
by hemodynamic measurements. 
 At optimal PEEP the benefi cial eff ects of PEEP 
exceed any detrimental risks. Practically, PEEP is 
usually added in increments of 3–5 cm H 2 O until 
the desired therapeutic end point is reached. Th e 
most commonly suggested end point is an arte-
rial oxygen saturation of hemoglobin of greater 
than 88–90% on a nontoxic inspired oxygen con-
centration (≤50%). Many clinicians favor reducing 
the inspired oxygen concentration to 50% or less 
because of the potentially adverse eff ect of greater 
oxygen concentrations on the lung. Alternatively, 
PEEP may be titrated to the mixed venous artery 
oxygen saturation (SVO2 > 50–60%). Monitoring 
lung compliance and dead space has also been 
suggested. 
 OTHER RESPIRATORY 
CARE TECHNIQUES 
 Other respiratory care techniques, including admin-
istration of aerosolized water or bronchodilators 
and clearing of pulmonary secretions, preserve or 
improve pulmonary function. 
1302 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
overload, therapy to improve cardiac function, and 
nutritional support. 
 PULMONARY EDEMA 
 Pathophysiology 
 Pulmonary edema results from transudation of 
fl uid, fi rst from pulmonary capillaries into intersti-
tial spaces and then from the interstitial spaces into 
alveoli. Fluid within the interstitial space and alveoli 
is collectively referred to as extravascular lung water. 
Th e movement of water across the pulmonary cap-
illaries is similar to what occurs in other capillary 
beds and can be expressed by the Starling equation: 
 Q = K × [(Pc′ − Pi) − σ(πc′ − πi)] 
 where Q is net fl ow across the capillary; Pc′ and Pi 
are capillary and interstitial hydrostatic pressures, 
respectively; πc′ and πi are capillary and interstitial 
oncotic pressures, respectively; K is a fi ltration coef-
fi cient related to eff ective capillary surface area per 
mass of tissue; and σ is a refl ection coeffi  cient that 
expresses the permeability of the capillary endothe-
lium to albumin. Albumin is particularly important 
in this context because water loss to the intersti-
tium will increase when albumin is also lost to the 
interstitium. A σ with a value of 1 implies that the 
endothelium is completely impermeable to albumin, 
whereas a value of 0 indicates free passage of albu-
min and other particles/molecules. Th e pulmonary 
endothelium normally is partially permeable to 
albumin, such that interstitial albumin concentra-
tion is approximately one half that of plasma; there-
fore, under normal conditions πi must be about 
14 mm Hg (one half that of plasma). Pulmonary 
capillary hydrostatic pressure is dependent on verti-
cal height in the lung (gravity) and normally varies 
from 0 to 15 mm Hg (average, 7 mm Hg). Because Pi 
is thought to be normally about –4 to –8 mm Hg, the 
forces favoring transudation of fl uid (Pc′, Pi, and πi) 
are usually almost balanced by the forces favoring 
reabsorption (πc′). Th e net amount of fl uid that 
normally moves out of pulmonary capillaries is 
small (about 10–20 mL/h in adults) and is rapidly 
removed by pulmonary lymphatics, which return it 
into the central venous system. 
primarily aff ects oxygen transfer from the alveoli 
into blood, giving rise to hypoxemia (hypoxic respi-
ratory failure); unless severe ventilation/perfusion 
mismatching is present, CO 2 elimination in these 
instances is typically normal or even enhanced. At 
the other extreme, the disorder primarily aff ects CO 2 
elimination (pure ventilatory failure), resulting in 
hypercapnia; mismatching of ventilation to perfusion 
is typically absent or minimal. Hypoxemia, however, 
can occur with pure ventilatory failure when arte-
rial CO 2 tension reaches 75–80 mm Hg in patients 
breathing room air (see the alveolar gas equation in 
Chapter 23). Few patients with respiratory failure 
display a pattern as “pure” as these extreme examples. 
 Treatment 
 Regardless of the disorder, the treatment of respi-
ratory failure is primarily supportive while the 
reversible components of underlying disease are 
treated. Hypoxemia is treated with oxygen therapy 
and positive airway pressure (if FRC is decreased), 
whereas hypercarbia (ventilatory failure) is treated 
with mechanical ventilation. Other general mea-
sures may include using aerosolized bronchodila-
tors, intravenous antibiotics, and diuretics for fl uid 
Mixed 
Pure shunting
Pure ventilation failure
PaCO2
PaO2
40
80
120
25
50
75
100
 FIGURE 577  Arterial gas tension (room air) patterns 
during acute respiratory failure. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1303 
pressure, which if greater than 18 mm Hg indicates 
that hydrostatic pressure is involved in forcing 
fl uid across the capillaries into the interstitium and 
alveoli. Th e protein content of the edema fl uid can 
also help diff erentiate the two. Fluid due to hemo-
dynamic edema has a low protein content, whereas 
that due to permeability edema has a high protein 
content. 
 Less common causes of edema include pro-
longed severe airway obstruction (negative pres-
sure pulmonary edema), sudden reexpansion of a 
collapsed lung, high altitude, pulmonary lymphatic 
obstruction, and severe head injury, although the 
same mechanisms (ie, changes in hemodynamic 
parameters or capillary permeability) also account 
for these diagnoses. Pulmonary edema associated 
with airway obstruction may result from an increase 
in the transmural pressure across pulmonary capil-
laries associated with a markedly negative interstitial 
hydrostatic pressure. Neurogenic pulmonary edema 
appears to be related to a marked increase in sympa-
thetic tone, which causes severe pulmonary hyper-
tension. Th e latter can disrupt the alveolar–capillary 
membrane. 
 1. Increased Transmural Pressure 
Pulmonary Edema (“Cardiogenic” 
Pulmonary Edema) 
 Signifi cantly increased Pc′ can increase extravascu-
lar lung water and result in pulmonary edema. As 
can be seen from the Starling equation, a decrease 
in πc′ may accentuate the eff ects of any increase in 
Pc′. Two major mechanisms increase Pc′; namely, 
pulmonary venous hypertension and a markedly 
increased pulmonary blood fl ow. Any elevation of 
pulmonary venous pressure is transmitted passively 
backward to the pulmonary capillaries and second-
arily increases Pc′. Pulmonary venous hypertension 
usually results from left  ventricular failure, mitral 
stenosis, or left  atrial obstruction. Increases in pul-
monary blood fl ow that exceed the capacity of the 
pulmonary vasculature will also raise Pc′. Marked 
increases in pulmonary blood fl ow can be the result 
of large left -to-right cardiac or peripheral shunts, 
hypervolemia (fl uid overload), or extremes of ane-
mia or exercise. 
 Th e alveolar epithelial membrane is usually per-
meable to water and gases but is impermeable to albu-
min (and other proteins). A net movement of water 
from the interstitium into alveoli occurs only when 
the normally negative Pi becomes positive (rela-
tive to atmospheric pressure). Fortunately, because 
of the lung’s unique ultrastructure and its capacity to 
increase lymph fl ow, the pulmonary interstitium usu-
ally accommodates large increases in capillary transu-
dation before Pi becomes positive. When this reserve 
capacity is exceeded, pulmonary edema develops. 
 Pulmonary edema is oft en divided into four 
stages: 
 
Stage I: Only interstitial pulmonary edema is 
present. Patients oft en become tachypneic as 
pulmonary compliance begins to decrease. Th e 
chest radiograph reveals increased interstitial 
markings and peribronchial cuffi  ng. 
 
 Stage II: Fluid fi lls the interstitium and begins 
to fi ll the alveoli, being initially confi ned to 
the angles between adjacent septa (crescentic 
fi lling). Near-normal gas exchange may be 
preserved. 
 
Stage III: Many alveoli are completely 
fl ooded and no longer contain gas. Flooding 
is most prominent in dependent areas of the 
lungs. Blood fl ow through the capillaries of 
fl ooded alveoli results in a large increase in 
intrapulmonary shunting. Hypoxemia and 
hypocapnia (the latter due to dyspnea and 
hyperventilation) are characteristic. 
 
 Stage IV: Marked alveolar fl ooding spills 
into the airways as froth. Gas exchange is 
compromised due to both shunting and airway 
obstruction, leading to progressive hypercapnia 
and severe hypoxemia. 
 Causes of Pulmonary Edema 
 Pulmonary edema usually results from either an 
increase in the net hydrostatic pressure across the 
capillaries (hemodynamic or cardiogenic pulmo-
nary edema) or an increase in the permeability of the 
alveolar–capillary membrane (increased permeabil-
ity edema or noncardiogenic pulmonary edema). If 
a pulmonary artery catheter is present, the distinc-
tion can be based on the pulmonary artery occlusion 
1304 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
pathophysiology of acute lung injury and ARDS is 
severe injury of the capillary–alveolar membrane. 
Regardless of the type of injury, the lung responds 
to the ensuing infl ammatory response in a similar 
fashion. Th e released secondary mediators increase 
pulmonary capillary permeability, induce pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction, and alter vascular  reactivity 
such that hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is 
abolished. Destruction of alveolar epithelial cells 
is prominent. Alveolar fl ooding, with decreased 
surfactant production (due to loss of type II pneu-
mocytes), result in collapse. Th e exudative phase of 
ARDS may persist for a varying period; it is oft en 
followed by a fi brotic phase (fi brosing alveolitis), 
which in some cases leads to permanent scarring. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Th e diagnosis of acute lung injury or ARDS requires 
the exclusion of signifi cant underlying left  ventric-
ular dysfunction combined with a P:F ratio of less 
than 300 (acute lung injury) or less than 200 (ARDS), 
and the presence of diff use infi ltrates on chest radio-
graph. Th e lung is oft en aff ected in a nonhomoge-
neous pattern, although dependent areas tend to be 
most aff ected. 
 Acute lung injury and ARDS are commonly 
seen in the settings of sepsis or trauma. Patients 
present with severe dyspnea and labored respira-
tions. Hypoxemia due to intrapulmonary shunting 
is a universal fi nding. Although dead space venti-
lation is increased, arterial CO 2 tension is typically 
decreased because of a marked increase in minute 
ventilation. Ventilatory failure may be seen initially 
in severe cases or may eventually develop due to 
respiratory muscle fatigue or marked destruction 
of the capillary–alveolar membrane. Pulmonary 
hypertension and low or normal left  ventricular 
fi lling pressures are characteristic hemodynamic 
fi ndings. 
 Treatment 
 In addition to intensive respiratory care, treatment 
should be directed at reversible processes such as 
sepsis or hypotension. Hypoxemia is treated with 
oxygen therapy. Milder cases may be treated with a 
CPAP mask, but most patients require intubation 
 Treatment 
 Management of cardiogenic pulmonary edema 
involves decreasing the pressure in the pulmo-
nary capillaries. Generally, this includes mea-
sures to improve left  ventricular function, 
correct fl uid overload with diuretics, or reduce 
pulmonary blood fl ow. Pharmacological treat-
ment of acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema has 
included oxygen, morphine, diuretics (especially 
loop diuretics), vasodilators such as nitrates or 
angiotensin- converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
(although these decrease both preload and aft er-
load), and inotropes such as dobutamine or mil-
rinone. Vasodilators, particularly nitrates, have 
proved useful. By reducing preload, pulmonary 
congestion is relieved; by reducing aft erload, car-
diac output may be improved. Positive airway pres-
sure therapy is also a useful adjunct for improving 
oxygenation. When pulmonary edema is a conse-
quence of acute coronary ischemia and left  ventric-
ular failure, intraaortic balloon counterpulsation 
or other assist devices may be used. 
 2. Increased Permeability Pulmonary 
Edema (Noncardiogenic Pulmonary 
Edema): Acute Lung Injury & ARDS 
 Extravascular lung water increases in patients 
with increased permeability pulmonary edema 
due to enhanced permeability or disruption of the 
 capillary–alveolar membrane. Th e protective eff ect 
of plasma oncotic pressure is lost as increased 
amounts of albumin “leak” into the pulmonary inter-
stitium; normal—or even low—capillary hydrostatic 
pressures are unopposed and result in transudation 
of fl uid into the lungs. Permeability edema is seen 
with acute lung injury (P:F ratio ≤ 300 [P = Pa O 2 
and F = F IO 2 ]) and is oft en associated with sepsis, 
trauma, and pulmonary aspiration; when severe (P:F 
ratio < 200), it is referred to as the acute respiratory 
distress syndrome (ARDS). 
 Pathophysiology 
 Acute lung injury and ARDS represent the pul-
monary manifestation of the systemic infl amma-
tory response syndrome (SIRS). Central to the 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1305
Prophylaxis for gastrointestinal hemorrhage with 
sucralfate, antacids, H 2 blockers, or proton pump 
inhibitors is recommended. 
 DROWNING & 
NEARDROWNING 
 Drowning, with or without aspiration of water, is 
death while submerged in water. Near-drowning, 
with or without aspiration, is suff ocation while sub-
merged with (at least temporary) survival. Survival 
depends on the intensity and duration of the hypoxia 
and on the water temperature. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Both drowning and near-drowning can occur 
whether or not inhalation (aspiration) of water 
occurs. If water does not enter the airways, the 
patient primarily suff ers from asphyxia; however, if 
the patient inhales water, marked intrapulmonary 
shunting also takes place. Ninety percent of drown-
ing patients aspirate fl uid: fresh water, seawater, 
brackish water, or other fl uids. Although the amount 
of liquid aspirated is generally small, marked venti-
lation/perfusion mismatching can result from fl uids 
in the airways and alveoli, refl ex bronchospasm, and 
loss of pulmonary surfactant. Aspiration of gastric 
contents can also complicate drowning before or 
aft er loss of consciousness or during resuscitation. 
 Th e hypotonic water aspirated following fresh 
water drowning is rapidly absorbed by the pulmo-
nary circulation; water cannot usually be recovered 
from the airways. If a signifi cant amount is absorbed 
(>800 mL in a 70-kg adult), transient hemodilution, 
hyponatremia, and even hemolysis may occur. In 
contrast, aspiration of salt water, which is hypertonic, 
draws out water from the pulmonary circulation 
into the alveoli, fl ooding them. Th us, hemoconcen-
tration and hypernatremia may occasionally occur 
following saltwater drowning. Hypermagnesemia 
and hypercalcemia have also been reported follow-
ing near-drowning in salt water. 
 Patients who suff er from cold water drowning 
lose consciousness when core body temperature 
decreases below 32°C. Ventricular fi brillation occurs 
at about 28–30°C, but relative to normothermic 
and at least some degree of mechanical ventilatory 
support.  Increased P plt pressures (>30 cm H 2 O) 
and high V T (>6 mL/kg), however, should also be 
avoided because overdistention of alveoli can 
induce iatrogenic lung injury, as can high 
F IO 2 (>0.5).  While injury from high F IO 2 has 
not been conclusively demonstrated in 
humans, as was previously noted, V T of 12 mL/kg 
was associated with greater mortality than V T of 
6 mL/kg and P plt of less than 30 cm H 2 O in patients 
with ARDS. Th us, reduced tidal volumes are associ-
ated with the greatest improvement in outcome aft er 
ARDS of any intervention subjected to a random-
ized clinical trial. 
 If possible, the F IO 2 should be maintained at 
0.5 or less, primarily by increasing PEEP above the 
infl ection point (see  Figure 57–6 ). Other maneuvers 
to improve oxygenation include the use of inhaled 
nitric oxide, inhaled prostacyclin or prostaglan-
din E 1 (PGE 1 ), and ventilation in the prone posi-
tion. Th ese three techniques improve oxygenation 
in many patients with acute lung injury, but they 
are not risk free and they have not been associated 
with an improvement in survival. A recent meta-
analysis has concluded that moderate doses of cor-
ticosteroids likely improve morbidity and mortality 
outcomes in ARDS, but the underlying data remain 
controversial. 
 Morbidity and mortality from ARDS usually 
arise from the precipitating cause or from complica-
tions rather than from the respiratory failure itself. 
Among the most common serious complications 
are sepsis, renal failure, and gastrointestinal hem-
orrhage. Nosocomial pneumonia is particularly 
common in patients with a protracted course and is 
oft en diffi  cult to diagnose; antibiotics are generally 
indicated when there is a high index of suspicion 
(fever, purulent secretions, leukocytosis, and change 
in chest radiograph). Protected specimen brushings 
and bronchoalveolar lavage sampling via a fl exible 
bronchoscope may be useful. Breach of mucocuta-
neous barriers by various catheters, malnutrition, 
and altered host immunity contribute to a frequent 
incidence of infection. Kidney failure may result 
from various combinations of volume depletion, 
sepsis, or nephrotoxins. Kidney failure substantially 
increases the mortality rate for ARDS (to >60%). 
10
1306 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
inhalation have a mortality rate signifi cantly greater 
than other comparably burned patients without 
smoke inhalation. Any exposure to smoke in a fi re 
requires a presumptive diagnosis of smoke inhala-
tion until proved otherwise. A suggestive history 
might include loss of consciousness or disorienta-
tion in a patient exposed to a fi re, or a burn acquired 
in a closed space. 
 Pathophysiology 
 Th e consequences of smoke inhalation are complex 
because they can involve three types of injuries: heat 
injury to the airways, exposure to toxic gases, and 
a chemical burn with deposition of carbonaceous 
particulates in the lower airways. Th e pulmonary 
response to smoke inhalation is equally complex 
and depends on the duration of the exposure, com-
position of the material that burned, and presence of 
any underlying lung disease. Combustion of many 
synthetic materials produces toxic gases such as car-
bon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen sulfi de, 
hydrogen chloride, ammonia, chlorine, benzene, 
and aldehydes. When these gases react with water in 
the airways, they can produce hydrochloric, acetic, 
formic, and sulfuric acids. Carbon monoxide and 
cyanide poisoning are common. 
 Aft er smoke inhalation direct mucosal injury 
may result in edema, infl ammation, and slough-
ing. Loss of ciliary activity impairs the clearance of 
mucus and bacteria. Manifestations of acute lung 
injury and ARDS typically appear 2–3 days aft er 
the injury and seem related to the delayed develop-
ment of SIRS rather than the acute smoke inhala-
tion itself. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Patients may initially have few if any symptoms 
aft er smoke inhalation. Suggestive physical fi nd-
ings include facial or intraoral burns, singed nasal 
hairs, cough, carbonaceous sputum, and wheez-
ing. Th e diagnosis usually can be confi rmed when 
fl exible bronchoscopy of the upper airway and the 
tracheobronchial tree reveals erythema, edema, 
mucosal ulcerations, and carbonaceous depos-
its. Arterial blood gases initially may be normal or 
reveal only mild hypoxemia and metabolic acidosis 
drowning, the hypothermia has a protective eff ect 
on the brain and may improve outcome provided 
that resuscitation measures are successful. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Nearly all patients with a true near-drowning epi-
sode will have hypoxemia, hypercarbia, and meta-
bolic acidosis. Patients may also suff er from other 
injuries, such as spine fractures following diving 
accidents. Neurological impairment is generally 
related to duration of submersion and severity of 
asphyxia. Cerebral edema complicates prolonged 
asphyxia. Acute lung injury and ARDS develop in 
many patients following resuscitation. 
 Treatment 
 Initial treatment of near-drowning is directed at 
restoring ventilation, perfusion, oxygenation, and 
acid–base balance as quickly as possible. Imme-
diate measures include establishing a clear and 
unobstructed airway, administering oxygen, and 
initiating cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In-line 
stabilization of the cervical spine is necessary when 
intubating patients who suff er from near-drowning 
following a dive. Although salt water can oft en be 
drained out of the lungs by gravity, this practice 
should not delay institution of cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation; abdominal thrusts may promote aspi-
ration of gastric contents. Resuscitation eff orts are 
always continued until the patient is fully assessed 
and under treatment in a hospital, particularly fol-
lowing cold water drowning. Complete recovery 
is possible in such instances even aft er prolonged 
periods of asphyxia. Management includes tracheal 
intubation, positive-pressure ventilation, and PEEP. 
Bronchospasm should be treated with bronchodila-
tors, electrolyte abnormalities corrected, and acute 
lung injury and ARDS treated as discussed above. 
Hypothermia should be corrected gradually over a 
few hours. 
 SMOKE INHALATION 
 Smoke inhalation is the leading cause of death from 
fi res. Aff ected persons may or may not have sus-
tained a burn. Burn victims who suff er from smoke 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1307
of the lower airways and atelectasis.  Progressive 
ventilation/ perfusion mismatching can lead to 
marked hypoxemia over the course of 24–48 h. 
Development of the systemic infl ammatory response 
syndrome can lead to acute lung injury or ARDS. 
 Treatment 
 Fiberoptic bronchoscopy usually establishes the 
diagnosis of an inhalation injury. Bronchoscopy is 
usually carried out with a tracheal tube loaded over 
the bronchoscope so that intubation can quickly be 
performed if edema threatens the patency of the air-
way.  Early elective tracheal intubation is advis-
able when there are obvious signs of heat 
injury to the airway. Patients with hoarseness and 
stridor require immediate intubation; emergency 
cricothyrotomy or tracheostomy is necessary if oral 
or nasal intubation is unsuccessful. 
 Th e presence of clinically important carbon 
monoxide or cyanide poisoning, as evidenced by 
obtundation or coma, also requires prompt tracheal 
intubation and ventilation with oxygen. Th e diag-
nosis of carbon monoxide poisoning requires coox-
imetry: pulse oximeters cannot reliably diff erentiate 
between carboxyhemoglobin and oxyhemoglobin. 
Th e half-life of carboxyhemoglobin is reduced to 1 h 
with 100% oxygen; some clinicians advocate hyper-
baric oxygen therapy if the patient does not respond 
to 100% oxygen. Th e diagnosis of cyanide poison-
ing is diffi  cult because reliable measurements of 
cyanide are not readily available (normal levels are 
<0.1 mg/L). Th e enzyme rhodanase normally con-
verts cyanide to thiocyanate, which is subsequently 
eliminated by the kidneys. Treatment for severe 
cyanide toxicity consists of administering sodium 
nitrite, 300 mg intravenously as a 3% solution over 
3–5 min, followed by sodium thiosulfate, 12.5 g 
intravenously in the form of a 25% solution over 
1–2 min. Sodium nitrite converts hemoglobin to 
methemoglobin, which has a higher affi  nity for cya-
nide than cytochrome oxidase; the cyanide, which is 
slowly released from cyanomethemoglobin, is con-
verted by rhodanase to the less toxic thiocyanate. 
 Marked hypoxemia due to intrapulmonary 
shunting should be managed with tracheal intuba-
tion, oxygen therapy, bronchodilators, positive-
pressure ventilation, and PEEP. Corticosteroids are 
11
due to carbon monoxide. Th e chest radiograph is 
oft en normal on presentation. 
 Heat injury to the airways is usually confi ned 
to supraglottic structures in the absence of pro-
longed exposure to steam. Progressive hoarseness 
and stridor are ominous signs of impending air-
way obstruction, which may develop over 12–18 h. 
Fluid resuscitation of any burn injury will frequently 
aggravate the edema. 
 Carbon monoxide poisoning is usually defi ned 
as greater than 15% carboxyhemoglobin in the 
blood. Th e diagnosis is made by cooximetric mea-
surements of arterial blood. Carbon monoxide has 
200–300 times the affi  nity of oxygen for hemoglo-
bin. When a CO molecule combines with hemo-
globin to form carboxyhemoglobin, it decreases the 
affi  nity of the other binding sites for oxygen, shift -
ing the hemoglobin dissociation curve to the right. 
Th e net result is a marked reduction in the oxygen-
carrying capacity of blood. 
 Carbon monoxide dissociates very slowly from 
hemoglobin with a half-life of approximately 2–4 h. 
Clinical manifestations result from tissue hypoxia 
from impaired oxygen delivery. Levels greater than 
20–40% carboxyhemoglobin are associated with 
neurological impairment, nausea, fatigue, disorien-
tation, and shock. Lower levels may also produce 
symptoms because carbon monoxide also binds 
cytochrome c and myoglobin. Compensatory mech-
anisms include increased cardiac output and periph-
eral vasodilation. 
 Cyanide toxicity may occur in patients exposed 
to fumes from fi res that contain synthetic materi-
als, particularly those containing polyurethane. Th e 
cyanide, which may be inhaled or absorbed through 
mucosal surfaces and skin, binds the cytochrome 
system of enzymes and inhibits cellular production 
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Patients present 
with neurological impairment and lactic acidosis; 
they typically have arrhythmias, increased cardiac 
output, and marked vasodilation. 
 A chemical burn of the respiratory mucosa 
follows inhalation of large amounts of carbona-
ceous material, particularly when combined with 
toxic fumes. Infl ammation of the airways results 
in bronchorrhea and wheezing. Bronchial edema 
and sloughing of the mucosa lead to obstruction 
1308 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
dysfunction following AMI. Relief of the ischemia 
in these areas can restore contractile function, albeit 
not immediately. Stunning may be observed follow-
ing aortic cross- clamping during cardiopulmonary 
bypass and present as a reduced cardiac output upon 
attempted separation from bypass (see Chapter 22). 
When severe hypokinesis or akinesis is observed in 
the setting of severe chronic ischemia, the myocar-
dium in these noninfarcted but poorly contractile 
areas may be said to be “hibernating.” Th is diagno-
sis can be confi rmed by observing viable tissue with 
positron emission tomography, or by showing that 
the hypocontractile myocardium responds to dobu-
tamine during stress echocardiography. 
 Th e immediate treatment of AMI is the admin-
istration of oxygen, aspirin (160–325 mg), nitro-
glycerin (sublingual or spray), morphine (2–4 mg 
intravenously every 5 min) until the pain is relieved, 
and in most cases of an ST-segment elevation MI 
(STEMI) movement of the patient to the cardiac 
catheterization laboratory. Th e mnemonic “MONA 
( m orphine,  o xygen,  n itroglycerin, and  a spirin) 
greets all patients” succinctly states this approach. 
Because the prognosis following AMI is generally 
inversely proportionate to the extent of necrosis, 
the focus in management of an evolving myocar-
dial infarction remains on reperfusion. Based on 
local resources, timing, and anatomic fi ndings dur-
ing angiography, angioplasty, stenting, or coronary 
artery bypass surgery may be preferred. Guidelines 
for treatment of AMI change on a nearly annual 
basis and are regularly published by the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Associa-
tion and by the European Society of Cardiology; we 
strongly recommend that they be consulted. 
 Patients with ST-segment depression or 
dynamic T-wave changes (non–Q wave infarction; 
unstable angina) benefi t from antithrombin (hepa-
rin) and antiplatelet (aspirin) therapy. All patients 
without contraindications (such as acute heart fail-
ure) should receive β blockers. Other medications 
and treatments such as ACE inhibitors, statins, and 
cessation of smoking are the key to secondary pre-
vention. Patients who have recurrent angina should 
be given nitrates. If angina persists or if there is a 
contraindication to β blockers, calcium chan-
nel blockers should be administered. Persistent or 
ineff ective and increase the rate of infections. As 
with other forms of acute lung injury, nosocomial 
infectious pneumonias are common. 
 Acute Myocardial Infarction 
 Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is a serious 
complication of ischemic heart disease, with an 
overall mortality rate of 25%. More than one half 
of these deaths occur shortly aft er onset, usually 
due to arrhythmias (ventricular fi brillation). With 
recent advances in interventional cardiology, the in- 
hospital mortality rate has been reduced to less than 
10–15%. Pump (ventricular) failure is now the lead-
ing cause of death aft er AMI in hospitalized patients. 
 Most myocardial infarctions occur in patients 
with more than one severely narrowed (>75% nar-
rowing of the cross-sectional area) coronary artery. 
A transmural infarction occurs in an area distal 
to a complete occlusion. Patients who die within 
24 hours aft er AMI may demonstrate only coro-
nary atherosclerosis on necropsy examination of the 
heart. Th e occlusion is nearly always due to throm-
bosis at a stenotic atheromatous plaque. Coronary 
emboli or severe spasm is less commonly the cause. 
Th e size and location of the infarct depend on the 
distribution of the obstructed vessel and whether 
collateral vessels have formed. Anterior, apical, and 
septal infarcts of the left  ventricle are usually due to 
thrombosis in the left  anterior descending circula-
tion; lateral and posterior left  ventricular infarcts 
result from occlusions in the left  circumfl ex system, 
whereas right ventricular and posterior–inferior left  
ventricular infarcts result from thrombosis in the 
right coronary artery. In contrast, subendocardial 
(nontransmural, or “non–Q wave”) infarctions more 
oft en occurs in the setting of reduced myocardial 
perfusion due to hypotension or intimal hemor-
rhage, and less commonly follows coronary plaque 
rupture and thrombosis. 
 Following brief episodes of severe ischemia, 
persisting myocardial dysfunction with only a 
slow and incomplete return of contractility can be 
observed. Th is phenomenon of “stunning” is oft en 
thought to occur in areas adjacent to infarcted 
myocardium and can contribute to ventricular 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1309
to stage AKI (see Chapter 30). AKI is diagnosed 
by documenting an increase in serum creatinine 
of more than 50%, or an absolute increase of 
0.3 mg/dL, and a reduction in urine output to less 
than 0.5 mL/kg/h for 6 h or longer, with all fi ndings 
developing over 48 h or less. 
 PRERENAL AZOTEMIA 
 Prerenal azotemia results from hypoperfusion of 
the kidneys; if untreated, it progresses to AKI. Renal 
hypoperfusion typically the result of decreased arte-
rial perfusion pressure, markedly increased venous 
pressure, or renal vasoconstriction ( Table 57–7 ). 
Decreased perfusion pressure is usually associated 
with the release of norepinephrine, angiotensin II, 
and arginine vasopressin (or antidiuretic hormone). 
Th ese hormones constrict cutaneous muscle and 
splanchnic vasculature and promote salt and water 
retention. Th e synthesis of vasodilating prostaglan-
dins (prostacyclin and PGE 2 ) and nitric oxide in the 
kidneys and the intrarenal action of angiotensin II 
recurrent angina signals the need for angiography, if 
it has not already been performed. 
 Intraaortic balloon counterpulsation is usu-
ally reserved for hemodynamically compromised 
patients with refractory ischemia. Temporary pac-
ing following AMI is indicated for Mobitz type II 
and complete heart block, a new bifascicular block, 
and bradycardia with hypotension. Emergency 
treatment of arrhythmias constantly evolves and we 
recommend that the guidelines for Advanced Car-
diac Life Support be followed. In general, ventricu-
lar tachycardia, if treated medically is best managed 
with amiodarone (150 mg intravenous bolus over 
10 min). Synchronized cardioversion may be used 
in patients with ventricular tachycardia and with a 
pulse. Patients with a stable narrow-complex supra-
ventricular tachycardia should be treated with ami-
odarone. Patients with paroxysmal supraventricular 
tachycardia, whose ejection fraction is preserved, 
should be treated with a calcium channel blocker, a 
β blocker, or DC cardioversion. Medically unstable 
hypotensive patients should receive cardioversion. 
 Patients with ectopic or multifocal atrial tachy-
cardia should not receive DC cardioversion; instead 
they should be treated with calcium channel block-
ers, a β blocker, or amiodarone. 
 Acute Kidney Injury & Failure 
 Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a rapid deterioration 
in renal function that is not immediately reversible 
by altering factors such as blood pressure, intravas-
cular volume, cardiac output, or urinary fl ow. Th e 
hallmark of AKI is azotemia and frequently oligu-
ria. Azotemia may be classifi ed as prerenal, renal, 
and postrenal. Moreover, the diagnosis of renal 
azotemia is one of exclusion; thus, prerenal and 
postrenal causes must always be excluded. How-
ever, not all patients with acute azotemia have kid-
ney failure. Likewise, urine output of more than 
500 mL/d does not imply that renal function is nor-
mal. Basing the diagnosis of AKI on creatinine lev-
els or an increase in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is 
also problematic because creatinine clearance is 
not always a good measure of glomerular fi ltration 
rate.  Th e criteria developed by the Acute Kid-
ney Injury Network are now most oft en used 
12
 TABLE 577 Potentially reversible causes 
of azotemia. 
 Prerenal 
Decreased renal perfusion
Hypovolemia
Reduced cardiac output
Hypotension
Abdominal compartment syndrome
Increased renal vascular resistance
Neural
Humoral/Pharmacological
Thromboembolic
 Postrenal 
Urethral obstruction
Bladder outlet obstruction
Neurogenic bladder
Bilateral ureteral obstruction
Intrinsic
Calculi
Tumor
Blood clots
Papillary necrosis
Extrinsic
Abdominal or pelvic tumor
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Postsurgical (ligation)
1310 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
urinary tract proximal to the site of obstruction on 
imaging studies. Treatment depends on the site of 
obstruction. Obstruction at the bladder outlet can 
be relieved with catheterization of the bladder or 
suprapubic cystostomy, whereas ureteral obstruc-
tion requires nephrostomy or ureteral stents. 
 REVERSIBLE AZOTEMIA 
VERSUS AKI 
 It is important to diff erentiate prerenal and postrenal 
azotemia from renal azotemia. Exclusion of postre-
nal azotemia requires physical diagnosis and imag-
ing, whereas exclusion of prerenal azotemia depends 
on the response to treatments aimed at improving 
renal perfusion. Diagnosis and treatment may be 
facilitated by analysis of urine (see  Table 57–8 ); uri-
nary composition in postrenal azotemia is variable 
and depends on the duration and severity of obstruc-
tion. In prerenal azotemia, tubular concentrating 
ability is preserved and refl ected by a low urinary 
sodium concentration and high urine/serum creati-
nine ratio. Calculation of the fractional excretion of 
fi ltered sodium (F E Na + ) may also be extremely use-
ful in the setting of oliguria: 
=
F
Urine sodium/serum sodium
Urine creatinine/serum crea
ENa+
tinine ×100%
 
 F EN a + is less than 1% in oliguric patients with 
prerenal azotemia but typically exceeds 3% in 
patients with oliguric AKI. Values of 1–3% may be 
present in patients with nonoliguric AKI. Th e renal 
failure index, which is the urinary sodium concen-
tration divided by the urine/plasma creatinine ratio, 
is a sensitive index for diagnosing kidney failure. 
Th e use of diuretics increases urinary sodium excre-
tion and invalidates indices that rely on urinary 
sodium concentration as a measure of tubular func-
tion. Moreover, intrinsic kidney diseases that pri-
marily aff ect renal vasculature or glomeruli may not 
aff ect tubular function and therefore are associated 
with indices that are similar to prerenal azotemia. 
Measurement of a 3-h creatinine clearance can esti-
mate the residual glomerular fi ltration rate but may 
underestimate the degree of renal impairment if the 
serum creatinine concentration is still rising. 
help maintain glomerular fi ltration. Use of cyclo-
oxygenase inhibitors (eg, ketorolac for postopera-
tive pain control) or ACE inhibitors in the setting of 
marked prerenal azotemia can precipitate AKI. Th e 
diagnosis of prerenal azotemia is usually suspected 
from the clinical setting and confi rmed by urinary 
laboratory indices ( Table 57–8 ). Treatment of prer-
enal azotemia is directed at correcting intravascular 
volume defi cits, improving cardiac function, restor-
ing a normal blood pressure, and reversing increases 
in renal vascular resistance. Th e hepatorenal syn-
drome is discussed in Chapter 33. 
 POSTRENAL AZOTEMIA 
 Azotemia due to urinary tract obstruction is termed 
postrenal azotemia. Obstruction of urinary fl ow 
from both kidneys is usually necessary for azotemia 
and oliguria/anuria in these conditions. Complete 
obstruction eventually develops into AKI and kid-
ney failure, whereas prolonged partial obstruction 
leads to chronic renal impairment. Rapid diagnosis 
and relief of acute obstruction usually restore nor-
mal renal function, oft en accompanied by a diure-
sis. Obstruction may be diagnosed by a physical 
examination (the upper margin of the bladder can 
be percussed) or ultrasound (showing a distended 
bladder) or suggested by a radiograph of the abdo-
men (revealing bilateral renal calculi), but is defi ni-
tively diagnosed by demonstrating dilation of the 
 TABLE 578 Urinary indices in azotemia. 
Index
Prerenal
Renal
Postrenal
Specific gravity
>1.018
<0.012
Variable
Osmolality (mmol/kg)
>500
<350
Variable
Urine/plasma urea 
nitrogen ratio
>8
<3
Variable
Urine/plasma 
creatinine ratio
>40
<20
Variable
Urine/sodium (mEq/L)
<10
>40
Variable
Fractional excretion 
of sodium (%)
<1
>3
Variable
Renal failure index
<1
>1
Variable
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1311 
synthesis by the latter group of agents decreases 
prostaglandin-mediated renal vasodilation, allow-
ing unopposed renal vasoconstriction. Other fac-
tors predisposing to AKI include preexisting renal 
impairment, advanced age, atherosclerotic vascular 
disease, diabetes, and dehydration. 
 Pathogenesis of AKI 
 Th e sensitivity of the kidneys to injury may be 
explained by their very high metabolic rate and 
ability to concentrate potentially toxic substances. 
Th e pathogenesis of AKI is complex and probably 
has both a vascular endothelial and a renal epithe-
lial (tubular) basis. Inadequate oxygen deliver to 
the kidney is the likely triggering event, leading 
to aff erent arteriolar constriction, decreased glo-
merular permeability, increased vascular perme-
ability, altered coagulation, infl ammation, leukocyte 
activation, direct epithelial cell injury, and tubular 
obstruction from intraluminal debris or edema. All 
can decrease glomerular fi ltration. A backleak of 
fi ltered solutes through damaged portions of renal 
tubules may allow reabsorption of creatinine, urea, 
and other nitrogenous wastes. 
 Oliguric versus Nonoliguric AKI 
 AKI is oft en classifi ed as oliguric (urinary volume 
<400 mL/d), anuric (urinary volume <100 mL/d), or 
nonoliguric (urinary volume >400 mL/d). Nonoli-
guric AKI accounts for up to 50% of cases. Urinary 
sodium concentrations in patients with nonoligu-
ric AKI are typically lower than those in oliguric 
patients. In some studies, nonoliguric patients also 
appear to have a lower complication rate and to 
require shorter hospitalizations. In another study of 
AKI patients who required dialysis, nonoliguric AKI 
patients had a delayed initiation of dialysis, a longer 
hospital stay, and an increased likelihood of death. It 
was speculated that it might be possible to convert 
oliguric AKI into nonoliguric AKI by administering 
mannitol, furosemide, “renal” doses of dopamine 
(1–2 mcg/kg/min), or fenoldopam. Th eoretically, 
the resulting increase in urinary output might be 
therapeutic by preventing tubular obstruction. How-
ever, recent studies have found increased mortality 
in patients with AKI who received diuretics, and a 
meta-analysis showed no improvement in mortality 
 Etiology of AKI 
 Causes of AKI are listed in  Table 57–9 . Up to 50% 
of cases follow major trauma or surgery; in the 
majority of instances, ischemia and nephrotoxins 
are responsible. AKI associated with ischemia is 
oft en termed  acute tubular necrosis . Postischemic 
acute tubular necrosis follows certain surgical pro-
cedures more frequently than others: open abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm resection, cardiac surgery with 
cardiopulmonary bypass, and operations to relieve 
obstructive jaundice. Aminoglycosides, ampho-
tericin B, radiographic contrast dyes, cyclosporine, 
and cisplatin are the most commonly implicated 
exogenous nephrotoxins. Amphotericin B, con-
trast dyes, and cyclosporine also appear to produce 
direct intrarenal vasoconstriction. Hemoglobin 
and myoglobin are potent nephrotoxins when 
they are released during intravascular hemolysis 
and rhabdomyolysis, respectively. Cyclooxygenase 
inhibitors, particularly nonsteroidal antiinfl am-
matory drugs, may play an important role in at 
least some patients. Inhibition of prostaglandin 
 TABLE 579 Causes of acute kidney injury. 
 Renal ischemia 
Hypotension
Hypovolemia
Impaired cardiac output
Abdominal compartment syndrome
 Nephrotoxins 
Endogenous pigments
Hemoglobulin (hemolysis)
Myoglobin (rhabdomyolysis from crush injury 
and burns)
Radiographic contrast agents
Drugs
Antibiotics (aminoglycosides, amphotericin)
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, methotrexate)
Tubular crystals
Uric acid
Oxalate
Sulfonamides
Heavy metal poisoning
Organic solvents
Myeloma protein
 Intrinsic kidney disease 
Glomerular disease
Interstitial nephritis
1312 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
tolerate the hemodynamic eff ects of intermittent 
“standard” hemodialysis. Th e main problem asso-
ciated with CRRT is the expense, as the membrane 
is prone to clot formation and, therefore, must be 
periodically replaced. Despite this limitation, many 
experts believe CRRT is the best way to manage 
uremic ICU patients with AKI. Th e indications for 
CRRT are being expanded from oliguria and uremia 
to metabolic acidosis, fl uid overload, and hyperkale-
mia. Nevertheless, recent clinical trials have failed to 
show benefi t of continuous technique over intermit-
tent hemodialysis in these critically ill patients. 
 Th e nutritional management of AKI with ure-
mia continues to evolve, and there is now consensus 
among nephrologists, intensivists, and nutritionists 
that nutrition should be provided, and 1.0–1.5 g/kg/d 
of protein can be given, particularly for patients on 
CRRT. 
 Infections & Sepsis 
 Th e systemic infl ammatory response to infec-
tion, termed  sepsis syndrome ( Figure 57–8 ), does 
not necessarily indicate the presence of bactere-
mia. Moreover, the infl ammatory response is not 
unique to severe infections: similar manifestations 
may be encountered with noninfectious illnesses. 
or decrease in need for dialysis; therefore diuretics 
should not be routinely administered in AKI. 
 Treatment of AKI 
 AKI accounts for approximately 15% of ICU admis-
sions. Despite advances in critical care medicine, the 
mortality rate for AKI remains approximately 50% 
and management is primarily supportive. Diuret-
ics continue to be useful for conventional medical 
indications (eg, pulmonary edema or rhabdomy-
olysis). AKI due to glomerulonephritis or vasculitis 
may respond to glucocorticoids. Standard treatment 
for oliguric and anuric patients includes restric-
tion of fl uid, sodium, potassium, and phospho-
rus. Daily weight measurements help guide fl uid 
therapy. Sodium and potassium intake is limited 
to 1 mEq/kg/d. Hyponatremia can be treated with 
water restriction. Hyperkalemia may require admin-
istration of an ion-exchange resin (sodium polysty-
rene), glucose and insulin, calcium gluconate, or 
sodium bicarbonate. Sodium bicarbonate therapy 
may also be necessary for metabolic acidosis when 
the serum bicarbonate level decreases to less than 
15 mEq/L. Hyperphosphatemia requires dietary 
phosphate restriction and phosphate binders such 
as sevelamer, aluminum hydroxide, calcium carbon-
ate, calcium acetate. Th e dosages of renally excreted 
drugs should be adjusted to the estimated glomeru-
lar fi ltration rate or measured creatinine clearance to 
prevent accumulation. 
 Renal replacement therapy may be employed 
to treat or prevent uremic complications (see 
 Table 30–6 ). A double-lumen catheter placed in the 
internal jugular, subclavian, or femoral vein is usu-
ally used. Th e high morbidity and mortality rates 
associated with AKI would seem to argue for early 
dialysis, but supporting studies are controversial. 
Dialysis does not appear to hasten recovery but 
may in fact aggravate kidney injury if hypotension 
occurs or too much fl uid is removed. 
 Because of concern that intermittent hemodialy-
sis associated with hypotension may perpetuate renal 
injury, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT; 
continuous venovenous hemofi ltration or continu-
ous venovenous hemodialysis, which removes fl uid 
and solutes at a slow controlled rate) has been used 
in critically ill patients with uremic AKI who do not 
Bacteremia
Infection
Fungemia
Viremia 
Parasitemia
Pancreatitis
Other
Trauma
Burns
SIRS
Sepsis
 FIGURE 578  The relationship among infection, 
sepsis, and the systemic inﬂ ammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS). (Modiﬁ ed from the American College of Chest Physicians/
Society of Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference: Deﬁ nitions 
for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines for the use of innovative 
therapies in sepsis. Crit Care Med 1992;20:864.) 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1313 
Th e use of the term  systemic infl ammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) has been suggested by the Soci-
ety of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM), European 
Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM), 
American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP), 
American Th oracic Society (ATS), and Surgical 
Infection Society (SIS) ( Table 57–10 ). A combined 
 conference of the preceding long list of societies 
classifi ed sepsis based on predisposition, insult, 
infection, response, and organ dysfunction. Severe 
sepsis exists when these features are associated 
with organ dysfunction. Th e term  multiple organ 
dysfunction syndrome (MODS) has been suggested 
to describe dysfunction of two or more organs 
associated with sepsis.  Septic shock is defi ned as 
acute circulatory failure in a patient with sepsis or, 
more specifi cally, systolic blood pressure less than 
90 mm Hg that is not responsive to volume resus-
citation and requiring vasopressors for life support. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SIRS 
 A mild systemic infl ammatory response to an 
injury, infection, or other bodily insult may nor-
mally have salutatory eff ects. However, a marked 
or prolonged response, such as that associated 
with severe infections, is oft en deleterious and can 
result in widespread organ dysfunction. Although 
gram-negative organisms account for most cases 
of infection-related SIRS, many other infectious 
agents are capable of inducing the same syndrome. 
Th ese organisms either elaborate toxins or stimu-
late release of substances that trigger this response. 
Th e most commonly recognized initiators are the 
lipopolysaccharides, which are released by gram-
negative bacteria. Lipopolysaccharide is composed 
of an O polysaccharide, a core, and lipid A. Th e O 
polysaccharide distinguishes between diff erent types 
of gram-negative bacteria, whereas lipid A, an endo-
toxin, is responsible for the compound’s toxicity. Th e 
resulting response to endotoxin involves a complex 
interaction between macrophages/monocytes, neu-
trophils, lymphocytes, platelets, and endothelial 
cells that can aff ect nearly every organ. 
 Th e central mechanism in initiating SIRS 
appears to be the abnormal secretion of cyto-
kines. Th ese low-molecular-weight peptides and 
 TABLE 5710 Diagnostic criteria 
for sepsis. 1–3 
Infection, 4 documented or suspected, and some of 
the following:
General variables
Fever (core temperature >38.3°C)
Hypothermia (core temperature <36°C)
Heart rate >90/min or >2 SD above the normal value 
for age
Tachypnea
Altered mental status
Significant edema or positive fluid balance (>20 mL/kg 
over 24 h)
Hyperglycemia (plasma glucose >120 mg/dL or 
7.7 mmol/L) in the absence of diabetes
Inflammatory variables
Leukocytosis (WBC count >12,000/µL)
Leukopenia (WBC count <4000/µL)
Normal WBC count with >10% immature forms
Plasma C-reactive protein >2 SD above the normal value
Plasma procalcitonin >2 SD above the normal value
Hemodynamic variables
Arterial hypotension 5 (SBP <90 mm Hg, MAP <70, or an 
SBP decrease >40 mm Hg in adults or <2 SD below 
normal value for age)
 SVO2 > 70% 5 
Cardiac index 5 >3.5 L/min per m 2 
Organ dysfunction variables
Arterial hypoxemia (Pa o 2 /F Io 2 < 300)
Acute oliguria (urine output <0.5 mL/kg/h or 45 mmol/L 
for at least 2 h)
Creatinine increase > 0.5 mg/dL
Coagulation abnormalities (INR > 1.5 or aPTT > 60 s)
Ileus (absent bowel sounds)
Thrombocytopenia (platelet count < 100,000/µL)
Hyperbilirubinemia (plasma total bilirubin > 4 mg/dL or 
70 mmol/L)
Tissue perfusion variables
Hyperlactatemia (>1 mmol/L)
Decreased capillary refill or mottling
 1 Reprinted, with permission, from Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC, et al: 
2001 SCCM/ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS International Sepsis Deﬁ nitions 
Conference. Crit Care Med 2003;31:1250.
 2 WBC, white blood cell; SBP, systolic blood pressure; MAP, mean 
arterial blood pressure; SVO2 , mixed venous oxygen saturation; INR, 
international normalized ratio; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin 
time.
 3 Diagnostic criteria for sepsis in the pediatric population are signs and 
symptoms of inﬂ ammation plus infection with hyper- or hypothermia 
(rectal temperature >38.4°C or <35°C), tachycardia (may be absent in 
hypothermia patients), and at least one of the following indications of 
altered organ function: altered mental status, hypoxemia, increased 
serum lactate level, or bounding pulses.
 4 Infection deﬁ ned as a pathological process induced by a 
microorganism.
 5 SVO2 >70% (normally, 75–80%) and cardiac index 3.5–5.5 are normal 
in children; therefore, neither should be used as a sign of sepsis in 
newborns or children.
1314 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
course of an infection but also the types of organ-
isms that can cause infection. Th us, organisms that 
normally do not cause serious infections in immu-
nocompetent patients can produce life-threatening 
infections in those who are immunocompromised 
( Table 57–11 ). 
 Critically ill patients frequently have abnormal 
host defenses from advanced age, malnutrition, drug 
therapy, loss of integrity of mucosal and skin barriers, 
and underlying diseases.  Th us, age greater 
than 70 years, corticosteroid therapy, chemo-
therapy of malignancy, prolonged use of invasive 
devices, respiratory failure, kidney failure, head 
trauma, and burns are established risk factors for 
nosocomial infections. Patients with burns involving 
more than 40% of body surface area have signifi -
cantly increased risk of mortality from infections. 
Topical antibiotics delay but do not prevent wound 
infections. Aft er burns, early removal of the necrotic 
eschar followed by skin graft ing and wound closure 
appears to reverse immunological defects and reduce 
infections. 
 Most nosocomial infections arise from the 
patient’s endogenous bacterial fl ora. Furthermore, 
many critically ill patients eventually become colo-
nized with resistant bacterial strains. Infections 
of the urinary tract account for many nosocomial 
infections. Urinary infections are usually due to 
gram-negative organisms and are typically asso-
ciated with the indwelling catheters or urinary 
obstruction. Community-acquired and ventilator-
associated pneumonias are problems in the ICU. 
Intravascular catheter-related infections are now 
relatively rare causes of ICU infections. Surgical site 
and other wound infections are, however, seen. 
 Nosocomial pneumonias are usually caused by 
gram-negative organisms. Gastrointestinal bacterial 
overgrowth with translocation into the portal cir-
culation and retrograde colonization of the upper 
airway from the gastrointestinal tract as a result of 
aspiration are possible mechanisms of entry for these 
bacteria. Preservation of gastric acidity inhibits over-
growth of gram-negative organisms in the stomach 
and their subsequent migration into the orophar-
ynx. Tracheal intubation does not provide eff ec-
tive protection because patients commonly aspirate 
gastric fl uid containing bacteria despite a properly 
13
glycoproteins function as intercellular mediators 
regulating such biological processes as local and 
systemic immune responses, infl ammation, wound 
healing, and hematopoiesis. Th e most important 
cytokines released during SIRS are interleukin-6, 
adrenomedullin, soluble CD 14 , the adhesion molecule 
sELAM-1, macrophage infl ammatory protein-1α, 
extracellular phospholipase A 2 , and C-reactive pro-
tein. Th e resulting infl ammatory response includes 
release of potentially harmful phospholipids, attrac-
tion of neutrophils, and activation of the comple-
ment, kinin, and coagulation cascades. 
 Increased phospholipase A 2 levels release ara-
chidonic acid from cell membrane phospholip-
ids. Cyclooxygenase converts arachidonic acid to 
thromboxane and prostaglandins, whereas lipoxy-
genase converts arachidonic acid into leukotrienes 
(slow-reacting substances of anaphylaxis). Increased 
phospholipase A 2 and acetyltransferase activities 
result in the formation of another potent proinfl am-
matory compound, platelet-activating factor. Attrac-
tion and activation of neutrophils releases a variety 
of proteases and free radical compounds that dam-
age vascular endothelium. Activation of monocytes 
causes them to express increased amounts of tissue 
factor, which in turn can activate both the intrinsic 
and extrinsic coagulation cascades. 
 INFECTIONS IN THE ICU 
 Infections are a leading cause of death in ICUs. Seri-
ous infections may be “community acquired” or sub-
sequent to hospital admission for an unrelated illness. 
Th e term  nosocomial infection describes hospital-
acquired infections that develop at least 48 h follow-
ing admission. Th e reported incidence of nosocomial 
infections in ICU patients has ranged between 10% 
and 50%, but with recent attention to aseptic place-
ment of central venous catheters and earlier removal 
of bladder catheters the incidence of bloodstream 
infections has markedly declined. Nearly universal 
elevation of the head of bed has also led to a marked 
reduction in ventilator- associated pneumonia. 
 Strains of bacteria resistant to commonly used 
antibiotics are oft en responsible for infections in 
patients with critical illness. Host immunity plays 
an important role in determining not only the 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1315 
Infection or Site
Pathogens
Pneumonia
Community-acquired 
(nonimmunocompromised 
host)
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Legionella pneumophila
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
Influenza virus
Health care–associated
MRSA
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Acinetobacter species
Stenotrophomonas species
L. pneumophila
Immunocompromised host
Neutropenia
Any pathogen listed above
Aspergillus species
Candida species
Human immunodeficiency 
virus
Any pathogen listed above
Pneumocystis carinii
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Histoplasma capsulatum
Other fungi
Cytomegalovirus
Solid organ transplant or 
bone marrow transplant
Any pathogen listed above
(Can vary depending on 
timing of infection to 
transplant)
Cystic fibrosis
H. influenzae (early)
S. aureus
P. aeruginosa
Burkholderia cepacia
Lung abscess
Bacteroides species
Peptostreptococcus species
Fusobacterium species
Nocardia (in 
immunocompromised 
patients)
Amebic (when suggestive by 
exposure)
Empyema
Usually acute
S. aureus
S. pneumoniae
Group A streptococci
H. influenzae
Usually subacute or chronic
Anaerobic bacteria
Enterobacteriaceae
M. tuberculosis
TABLE 5711 Pathogens commonly associated with serious infections in ICU patients.1
Meningitis
S. pneumoniae
Neisseria meningitidis
Listeria monocytogenes
H. influenzae
Neonates
Escherichia coli
Group B streptococci
Postsurgical or post-trauma
S. aureus
Enterobacteriaceae
P. aeruginosa
Brain abscess
Streptococci
Bacteroides species
Postsurgical or post-trauma
Enterobacteriaceae
S. aureus
Immunocompromised or 
HIV infected
Nocardia
Toxoplasma gondii
Encephalitis
West Nile virus
Herpes simplex virus
Arbovirus
Rabies virus
Bartonella henselae
Endocarditis
Streptococcus viridans
Enterococcus species
S. aureus
Streptococcus bovis
Intravenous drug user, 
prosthetic valves
MRSA
Prosthetic valve
Candida species
Catheter-associated 
bacteremia
Candida species
S. aureus
Enterococcus species
Enterobacteriaceae
P. aeruginosa
Pyelonephritis
Enterobacteriaceae
E. coli
Enterococcus species
(This group catheter-
associated, postsurgical)
P. aeruginosa
Acinetobacter species
Infection or Site
Pathogens
(continued)
1316 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
Muscle infection
Myonecrosis (gas gangrene)
Clostridium perfringens
Other Clostridia species
Pyomyositis
S. aureus
Group A streptococci
Anaerobic bacteria
Gram-negative bacteria (rare)
Septic shock
Community-acquired
S. pneumoniae
N. meningitidis
H. influenzae
Escherichia coli
Capnocytophaga (with 
splenectomy)
Health care–associated
MRSA
P. aeruginosa
Acinetobacter species
Candida species
Toxic shock syndrome
S. aureus
Streptococcus species
Regional illness or special 
circumstances
Rickettsial species
Ehrlichia species
Babesia species
B. henselae 
(immunocompromised hosts)
Yersinia pestis
Francisella tularensis
Leptospira
Salmonella enteritidis
Salmonella typhi
Peritonitis
Primary or spontaneous
Enterobacteriaceae
S. pneumoniae
Enterococcus species
Anaerobic bacteria (rare)
Secondary (bowel 
perforation)
Enterobacteriaceae
Bacteroides species
Enterococcus species
P. aeruginosa (uncommon)
Tertiary (bowel surgery, 
hospitalized on antibiotics)
P. aeruginosa
MRSA
Acinetobacter species
Candida species
Skin structure infections
Cellulitis
Group A streptococci
S. aureus
Enterobacteriaceae (diabetics)
Decubitus ulcer
Polymicrobial
Streptococcus pyogenes
Enterococcus species
Enterobacteriaceae
Anaerobic streptococci
P. aeruginosa
S. aureus
Bacteroides species
Necrotizing fasciitis
Streptococcus species
Clostridia species
Mixed aerobic/anaerobic 
bacteria
1Reproduced, with permission, from Gabrielli A, Layon AJ, Yu M: Civetta, Taylor & Kirby’s Critical Care, 4th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009; 
Table 104.3, Chapter 104.
TABLE 5711 Pathogens commonly associated with serious infections in ICU patients.1 (continued)
Infection or Site
Pathogens
Infection or Site
Pathogens
functioning cuff ; nebulizers and humidifi ers can also 
be sources of infection. Selective decontamination of 
the gut with nonabsorbable antibiotics may reduce 
the incidence of infection but does not change out-
come. Elevating the head of the bed more than 30 o 
reduces the likelihood of ventilator-associated pneu-
monia. Enteral nutrition reduces bacterial translo-
cation across the gut and reduces the likelihood of 
sepsis (see Chapter 53). 
 Wounds are common sources of sepsis in post-
operative and trauma patients; restricting antibiotic 
prophylaxis to the immediate perioperative time 
appears to decrease the incidence of postoperative 
infections in some groups of patients. Although 
more commonly seen in postoperative patients, 
intraabdominal infections due to perforated ulcer, 
diverticulitis, appendicitis, and acalculous chole-
cystitis can also develop in critically ill nonsurgical 
patients. Intravascular catheter-related infections 
are most commonly caused by  Staphylococcus epi-
dermidis, Staphylococcus aureus, streptococci,  Can-
dida species, and gram-negative rods. Bacterial 
sinusitis may be an unrecognized source of sepsis in 
patients ventilated through nasotracheal tubes. Th e 
diagnosis is suspected from purulent drainage and 
confi rmed by imaging and cultures. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care
1317
 SEPTIC SHOCK 
 Th e 
SCCM/ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS 
Consensus 
Conference defi ned  septic shock as sepsis asso-
ciated with hypotension (systolic blood pressure 
<90 mm Hg, mean arterial pressure <60 mm Hg, or 
systemic blood pressure <40 mm Hg from baseline) 
despite adequate fl uid resuscitation. Septic shock is 
usually characterized by inadequate tissue perfusion 
and widespread cellular dysfunction. In contrast to 
other forms of shock (hypovolemic, cardiogenic, 
neurogenic, or anaphylactic), cellular  dysfunction in 
septic shock is not necessarily related to the hypo-
perfusion. Instead, metabolic blocks at the cellu-
lar and microcirculation levels may contribute to 
impaired cellular oxidation. 
 Pathophysiology 
 An infectious process that induces a severe or pro-
tracted SIRS can result in septic shock. In hospital-
ized patients septic shock most commonly follows 
gram-negative infections in either the genitourinary 
tract or the lungs, but identical presentations can 
be seen with other pathogens. In up to 50% of cases 
of severe sepsis no organisms can be cultured from 
blood. Hypotension is due to a decreased circulating 
intravascular volume resulting from a diff use capil-
lary leak. Patients may also have myocardial depres-
sion. Activation of platelets and the coagulation 
cascade can lead to the formation of fi brin-platelet 
aggregates, which further compromise tissue blood 
fl ow. Hypoxemia from ARDS accentuates tissue 
hypoxia. Th e release of vasoactive substances and 
formation of microthrombi in the pulmonary circu-
lation increase pulmonary vascular resistance. 
 Hemodynamic Subsets 
 Th e circulation in patients with septic shock is oft en 
described as either hyperdynamic or hypodynamic. 
In reality, both represent the same process, but their 
expression depends on preexisting cardiac function 
and intravascular volume and the patient’s response. 
 Systemic venodilation and transudation of 
fl uid into tissues result in relative hypovolemia 
in patients with sepsis. Hyperdynamic septic shock 
is characterized by normal or elevated cardiac out-
put and profoundly reduced systemic vascular resis-
tance. Decreased myocardial contractility is oft en 
14
demonstrable by echocardiography even in hyper-
dynamic patients with increased cardiac output. 
Mixed venous oxygen saturation is characteristically 
increased in the absence of hypoxemia and likely 
refl ects the increased cardiac output and the cellular 
metabolic defect in oxygen utilization. 
 It used to be accepted wisdom that hypody-
namic septic shock, characterized by decreased car-
diac output with low or normal systemic vascular 
resistance, was usually seen later in the course of 
shock. Th is view is false; hypodynamic shock oft en 
occurs early in the course of septic shock. It is more 
likely to be seen in severely hypovolemic patients 
and in those with underlying cardiac disease. Myo-
cardial depression is prominent. Mixed venous 
oxygen saturation is reduced in these patients, and 
pulmonary hypertension is oft en prominent. Eleva-
tion of pulmonary vascular resistance widens the 
normal pulmonary artery diastolic-to-wedge pres-
sure gradient; large gradients have been associated 
with a higher mortality rate. Th e increase in pulmo-
nary vascular resistance may contribute to right ven-
tricular dysfunction. 
 Clinical Manifestations 
 Manifestations of septic shock appear to be pri-
marily related to host response rather than the 
infective agent. Septic shock classically presents 
with an abrupt onset of chills, fever, nausea (and 
oft en vomiting), decreased mental status, tachy-
pnea, hypotension, and tachycardia. Th e patient 
may appear fl ushed and feel warm (hyperdynamic) 
or pale with cool and oft en cyanotic extremities 
(hypodynamic). In old, debilitated patients and 
in infants, the diagnosis oft en is less obvious and 
hypothermia may be seen. 
 Leukocytosis with a left ward shift  to premature 
cell forms is typical, but leukopenia can be seen with 
overwhelming sepsis and is an ominous sign. Pro-
gressive metabolic acidosis (usually lactic acidosis) 
is typically partially compensated by a concomitant 
respiratory alkalosis. Elevated lactate levels refl ect 
both increased production resulting from poor tis-
sue perfusion and decreased uptake by the liver and 
kidneys. Hypoxemia may herald the onset of ARDS. 
Oliguria due to the combination of hypovolemia, 
hypotension, and a systemic infl ammatory insult 
1318 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
will oft en progress to kidney failure. Elevations in 
serum aminotransferases and bilirubin are due to 
hepatic dysfunction. Insulin resistance is uniformly 
present and produces hyperglycemia. Th rombocyto-
penia is common and is oft en an early sign of sepsis. 
Laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular 
coagulation (DIC) is oft en present but is rarely asso-
ciated with a bleeding diathesis. Th e latter responds 
only to control of the sepsis. Stress ulceration of gas-
tric mucosa is common. Respiratory and kidney fail-
ure are the leading causes of death in septic patients. 
 Neutropenic patients (absolute neutrophil 
count 500/µL) may develop macular or papular 
lesions that can ulcerate and become gangrenous 
(ecthyma gangrenosum). Th ese lesions are com-
monly associated with  Pseudomonas septicemia 
but can be caused by other organisms. Perirectal 
abscesses can develop very quickly in neutropenic 
patients with few external signs; conscious patients 
may complain only of perirectal pain. 
 Treatment 
 Septic shock is a medical emergency that requires 
immediate intervention. Treatment is threefold: 
(1) control and eradication of the infection by appro-
priate and timely intravenous antibiotics, drainage 
of abscesses, debridement of necrotic tissues, and 
removal of infected foreign bodies; (2) maintenance 
of adequate perfusion with intravenous fl uids and 
inotropic and vasopressor agents; and (3) supportive 
treatment of complications such as ARDS, kidney 
failure, gastrointestinal bleeding, and DIC. 
 Antibiotic treatment usually is initiated before 
pathogens are identifi ed but only aft er adequate cul-
tures are obtained (commonly, blood, urine, wounds, 
and sputum). Pending the results of  cultures and tests 
of antibiotic sensitivity, combination therapy with 
two or more antibiotics is generally indicated. Typi-
cally, the combination of a penicillin/β-lactamase 
inhibitor or third-generation cephalosporin with 
an aminoglycoside is used. Th e choice depends on 
which organisms are seen with the greatest frequency 
in one’s medical center. Additional diagnostic stud-
ies may be indicated (eg, thoracentesis, paracentesis, 
lumbar puncture, or imaging), depending on the 
history and physical examination. 
 Empiric antibiotic therapy in immunocompro-
mised patients should be based on pathogens that 
are generally associated with the immune defect (see 
 Table 57–11 ). Vancomycin is added if intravascular 
catheter-related infection is suspected. Clindamy-
cin or metronidazole may be given to neutrope-
nic patients if a rectal abscess is suspected. Many 
clinicians initiate therapy for a presumed fungal 
infection when an immunocompromised patient 
continues to experience fever despite antibiotic 
therapy. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or 
granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
may be used to shorten the period of neutropenia; 
granulocyte transfusion may occasionally be used 
in refractory gram-negative bacteremia. Diff use 
interstitial infi ltrates on a chest radiograph may sug-
gest unusual bacterial, parasitic, or viral pathogens; 
many clinicians initiate empiric therapy with trim-
ethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and erythromycin in 
such instances. Nodular infi ltrates on a radiograph 
suggest a fungal pneumonia and may warrant anti-
fungal therapy. Antiviral therapy should be consid-
ered in septic patients who are more than 1 month 
post–bone marrow or solid organ transplantation. 
 In general, therapy should follow the most 
recent SCCM/ESICM “surviving sepsis” guidelines. 
Th e presence of inadequate perfusion is determined 
by measurement of blood lactate. “Goal-directed” 
hemodynamic support is also recommended by 
many groups. Tissue oxygenation and perfusion are 
supported with oxygen, intravenous fl uids, inotro-
pes, and vasopressors. Central venous pressure is 
maintained at greater than 8 mm Hg and central 
venous oxygen saturation is maintained at greater 
than 70%. Packed red blood cell transfusions are 
given to keep hemoglobin levels greater than 8 g/dL, 
especially when central venous pressure and cen-
tral venous oxygen saturation are below targets. 
Marked “third-spacing” has long been regarded as 
characteristic of septic shock, but currently there is 
debate regarding the existence of the third space and 
the administration of large volumes of intravenous 
fl uid as to which is cause and which is eff ect. Colloid 
solutions more rapidly restore intravascular volume 
compared with crystalloid solutions but other-
wise off er no proven additional benefi t.  Vasopres-
sor therapy is generally initiated if hypotension 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1319 
with hypotension) or more commonly lower gastro-
intestinal bleeding. Th e presence of maroon stools 
usually localizes the bleeding to the area between the 
distal small bowel and the right colon. 
 Two large-bore intravenous cannulas should 
be placed, and blood should be sent for laboratory 
analysis (including hemoglobin, platelet count, pro-
thrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin 
time). Th e patient should also be cross-matched for 
at least 4 units of red cells. Fluid resuscitation guide-
lines are discussed in Chapter 51. Serial hemoglobin 
or hematocrit measurements are useful but may not 
accurately refl ect true blood loss. Intraarterial blood 
pressure monitoring can be helpful. Central venous 
cannulation is useful for both venous access and pres-
sure measurements. Placement of a nasogastric tube 
may help identify an upper gastrointestinal source 
if bright red blood or “coff ee grounds”–appearing 
material can be aspirated; inability to aspirate blood, 
however, does not rule out an upper gastrointestinal 
source. 
 Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Lavage through a nasogastric tube can help assess 
the rate of bleeding and facilitate esophagogastro-
duodenoscopy (EGD). EGD should be performed 
whenever possible to diagnose the cause of bleed-
ing. Arteriography should be performed if the site of 
bleeding cannot be visualized with endoscopy. Both 
EGD and arteriography can also be used therapeu-
tically to stop the bleeding. In unselected patients 
the more common causes of upper gastrointesti-
nal bleeding, in decreasing order of likelihood, are 
duodenal ulcer, gastric ulcer, erosive gastritis, and 
esophageal varices. Erosive gastritis may be due to 
stress, alcohol, aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinfl am-
matory drugs, and corticosteroids. Less common 
causes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding include 
angiodysplasia, erosive esophagitis, Mallory–Weiss 
tear, gastric tumor, and aortoenteric fi stula. 
 Bleeding from peptic ulcers (gastric or duo-
denal) can be coagulated via EGD. Surgery is gen-
erally indicated for severe hemorrhage (>5 units) 
and recurrent bleeding. H 2 -receptor blockers and 
proton pump inhibitors are ineff ective in stop-
ping hemorrhage but may reduce the likelihood of 
rebleeding. Selective arteriography of the bleeding 
(mean arterial pressure <65 mm Hg) or elevated 
blood lactate levels persist following administra-
tion of intravenous fl uids. Suggested choices are 
norepinephrine or dopamine; other positive ino-
tropic drugs (eg, dobutamine) are indicated only 
when the SVO2 falls below 70% despite fl uids and 
vasopressor therapy. Patients with persisting eleva-
tions of lactate or persisting low central venous oxy-
gen saturations, despite treatment, should receive 
a week-long course of steroids (200–300 mg/d of 
hydrocortisone or the equivalent in divided doses 
or by infusion). Blood glucose should be controlled 
with a target value of less than 180 mg/dL. In patients 
with hypotension that is refractory to norepineph-
rine plus dopamine or dobutamine, vasopressin may 
be administered to improve blood pressure. Severe 
acidosis may decrease the effi  cacy of inotropes and 
should therefore generally be corrected (pH > 7.20) 
with bicarbonate or THAM infusion in patients with 
refractory hypotension and lactic acidosis. “Renal” 
doses of dopamine or fenoldopam may increase uri-
nary output but have not been shown to improve 
or protect kidney function or patient outcomes. 
Clinical trials of naloxone, opsonins (fi bronectin), 
inhibitors of the coagulation cascade (drotrecogin 
alfa), and monoclonal antibodies directed against 
lipopolysaccharide in septic shock have been 
disappointing. 
 Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage 
 Acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage is a common rea-
son for admission to the ICU. Older age (>60 years), 
comorbid illnesses, hypotension, marked blood loss 
(>5 units), and recurrent hemorrhage (rebleeding) 
aft er 72 h are associated with increased mortality. 
Management consists of stabilizing the patient with 
rapid identifi cation of the site of bleeding. Although 
volume resuscitation is similar, the clinician must 
attempt to diff erentiate between upper and lower 
gastrointestinal bleeding. A history of hemateme-
sis indicates bleeding proximal to the ligament of 
Treitz. Melena oft en indicates bleeding proximal 
to the cecum. Hematochezia (bright red blood 
from the rectum) indicates either very brisk upper 
 gastrointestinal bleeding (likely to be associated 
1320 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
Radionuclide techniques can be used to identify the 
source of bleeding when colonoscopy cannot be car-
ried out because of inadequate preparation. 
 Cauterization of the site of bleeding is oft en 
possible via colonoscopy. When colonoscopy is 
unavailable or not possible because of brisk bleed-
ing, selective arteriography can be used to identify 
the source, which is either embolized or infused 
with vasopressin. Surgical treatment is reserved for 
severe or recurrent hemorrhage. 
 Head Trauma 
 Th e diagnosis and management of traumatic brain 
injury is described in Chapter 39. 
 End-of-Life Care 
 In the United States, death is a taboo subject for many, 
and most people avoid preparing for it until late in 
their own lives, and some not even then. Many attend 
to last wills and testaments, estate planning, and taxes, 
but less than 15% of the adult population is prepared 
to make advance decisions about restrictions on life-
supporting measures. Yet surveys consistently show 
a strong preference for a dignifi ed, comfortable, and 
peaceful death at home and a strong wish to avoid 
dying in a hospital, particularly in an ICU. 
 Th e quandary about what to do is particularly 
vexing when it concerns a surgical patient who 
sought relief from symptoms, improved functional-
ity, and a better quality of life, but who ends up with 
a bad outcome requiring ongoing life-supporting 
measures with little prospect of achieving the goals 
of the operation. 
 A substantial number of physicians cannot 
discuss such diffi  cult situations in a humane, non-
adversarial manner or deal with the anger, despair, 
and other emotions of family members and friends 
whose expectations have not been met. Good com-
munication skills are the essential foundation. 
Communications with the family, friends, and all 
caregivers must be timely, consistent (having only 
one physician serve as the spokesman has great 
advantages), accurate, clear to laypersons, advisory 
without being dictatorial, focused on what is best for 
vessel allows localized infusion of vasopressin 
(0.15–0.20 units/min) or embolization. 
 Erosive gastritis is better prevented than treated. 
Proton pump inhibitors, H 2 -receptor blockers, ant-
acids, and sucralfate are all eff ective for prevention. 
In the past some have advocated that all patients 
with critical illness receive a proton pump inhibi-
tor. However, overuse of proton pump inhibitors is 
associated with an increased incidence of hospital-
acquired pneumonia. Data show that patients who 
require mechanical ventilation for more than 48 h 
or who are coagulopathic derive the greatest benefi t 
from prophylaxis. Other groups of patients showing 
relative benefi t from prophylaxis include those with 
AKI, sepsis, liver failure, hypotension, traumatic 
brain injury, a history of prior gastrointestinal hem-
orrhage, recent major surgery, or those receiving 
large-dose corticosteroid therapy. Once bleeding has 
begun, there is generally no specifi c therapy other 
than embolization or coagulation. 
 Endoscopic therapy, either with bipolar electro-
coagulation or heater probes, is the most eff ective 
nonsurgical treatment that reduces blood transfu-
sions, rebleeding, hospital stay, and the need for 
urgent surgery. Sedation or anesthesia to facilitate 
these procedures is associated with an increased 
risk of aspiration. Intravenous vasopressin infu-
sions (0.3–0.8 units/min) are not as eff ective; con-
comitant infusion of nitroglycerin with vasopressin 
can help reduce portal pressure and may reduce the 
incidence of cardiac complications. Intravenous 
propranolol can also lower portal venous pressure 
and may reduce variceal bleeding. Balloon tampon-
ade (Sengstaken–Blakemore, Minnesota, or Linton 
tubes) may be used as adjunctive therapy but usually 
requires concurrent tracheal intubation to protect 
the airway against aspiration. 
 Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
 Common causes of lower gastrointestinal bleeding 
include diverticulosis, angiodysplasia, neoplasms, 
infl ammatory bowel disease, ischemic colitis, infec-
tious colitis, and anorectal disease (hemorrhoids, fi s-
sure, or fi stula). Rectal examination, anoscopy, and 
sigmoidoscopy can usually diagnose the more distal 
lesions. As with EGD, colonoscopy usually allows 
defi nitive diagnosis and is oft en useful therapeutically. 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1321 
the patient, and aligned with the patient’s wishes. A 
gradual stepwise approach over time allows family 
members and friends time to digest the information; 
get beyond their normal, initial reactions to the bad 
news; and make the diffi  cult decision to withdraw 
intensive support. 
 Finally, it is important to recognize two ethi-
cal principles that are relevant here. Th e fi rst is the 
principle of double eff ect. All medical interventions 
have potential benefi ts as well as burdens and risks. 
If the doses of morphine or sedative drug required to 
relieve pain and agitation result in unintended side 
eff ects, we accept them, even if the result is death.  Th is 
is not euthanasia. Th e second principle is that with-
drawal of medical therapies and interventions is no 
diff erent from withholding them: both may be done 
to respect the patient’s autonomy. Th ere is a broad 
religious consensus that heroic measures are not 
mandated to support a heartbeat at the end of life. 
 CASE DISCUSSION
An Obtunded Young Woman 
 A 23-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital 
obtunded with slow respirations (7 breaths/min). 
Blood pressure is 90/60 mm Hg and the pulse is 
90 beats/min. She was found at home in bed with 
empty bottles of diazepam, acetaminophen with 
codeine, and ﬂ uoxetine lying next to her. 
 How is the diagnosis of a drug overdose made? 
 The presumptive diagnosis of a drug overdose 
usually must be made from the history, circum-
stantial evidence, and any witnesses. Signs and 
symptoms may not be helpful. Conﬁ rmation of a 
suspected drug overdose or poison ingestion usu-
ally requires delayed laboratory testing for the sus-
pected agent in body ﬂ uids. Intentional overdoses 
(self-poisoning) are the most common mecha-
nism and typically occur in young adults who are 
depressed. Ingestion of multiple drugs is common. 
Benzodiazepines, antidepressants, aspirin, acet-
aminophen, and alcohol are the most commonly 
ingested agents. 
 Accidental overdoses frequently occur in intra-
venous drug abusers and children. Commonly 
abused substances include opioids, stimulants 
(cocaine and methamphetamine), and halluci-
nogens (phencyclidine [PCP]). Younger children 
occasionally accidentally ingest caustic household 
alkali (eg, drain cleaner), acids, and hydrocarbons 
(eg, petroleum products), in addition to unse-
cured medications of all types. Organophosphate 
poisoning (parathion and malathion) usually 
occurs in adults following agricultural exposure. 
Overdoses and poisoning less commonly occur as 
an attempted homicide. 
 What are appropriate steps 
in managing this patient? 
 Regardless of the type of drug or poison 
ingested, the principles of initial supportive care 
are the same. Airway patency with adequate ven-
tilation and oxygenation must be obtained. Unless 
otherwise contraindicated, oxygen therapy (100%) 
should be administered. Hypoventilation and 
obtunded airway reﬂ exes require tracheal intuba-
tion and mechanical ventilation. Many clinicians 
routinely administer naloxone (up to 2 mg), dex-
trose 50% (50 mL), and thiamine (100 mg) intrave-
nously to all obtunded or comatose patients until 
a diagnosis is established; this may help exclude 
or treat opioid overdose, hypoglycemia, and 
Wernicke–Korsakoﬀ  syndrome, respectively. The 
dextrose can be omitted if a glucose determina-
tion can be obtained by a ﬁ ngerstick. In this case, 
intubation should be performed prior to naloxone 
because the respiratory depression is likely due to 
both the codeine and the diazepam. 
 Blood, urine, and gastric ﬂ uid specimens 
should be obtained and sent for drug screening. 
Blood is also sent for routine hematological and 
chemistry studies (including liver function). Urine 
is usually obtained by bladder catheterization, and 
gastric ﬂ uid can be aspirated from a nasogastric 
tube; the latter should be placed after intubation 
to avoid pulmonary aspiration. Alternatively, eme-
sis material may be tested for drugs in conscious 
persons. 
 Hypotension should generally be treated with 
intravenous ﬂ uids unless the patient is obviously 
in pulmonary edema; an inotrope or vasopressor 
1322 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine 
substance can be reduced by emptying stomach 
contents and administering activated charcoal. 
Both methods can be eﬀ ective up to 12 h following 
ingestion. If the patient is intubated, the stomach 
is lavaged carefully to avoid pulmonary aspiration. 
Emesis may be induced in conscious patients with 
syrup of ipecac 30 mL (15 mL in a child). Gastric 
lavage and induced emesis are generally contrain-
dicated for patients who ingest caustic substances 
or hydrocarbons because of a high risk of aspira-
tion and worsening mucosal injury. 
 Activated charcoal 1–2 g/kg is administered 
orally or by nasogastric tube with a diluent. The 
charcoal irreversibly binds most drugs and poisons 
in the gut, allowing them to be eliminated in stools. 
In fact, charcoal can create a negative diﬀ usion gra-
dient between the gut and the circulation, allow-
ing the drug or poison to be eﬀ ectively removed 
from the body. 
 Alkalinization of the serum with sodium bicar-
bonate for tricyclic antidepressant overdose is ben-
eﬁ cial because, by increasing pH, protein binding is 
enhanced; if seizures occur the alkalinization pre-
vents acidosis-induced cardiotoxicity. 
 What other methods can enhance drug 
elimination? 
 The easiest method of increasing drug elimina-
tion is forced diuresis. Unfortunately, this method 
is of limited use for drugs that are highly protein 
bound or have large volumes of distribution. 
Mannitol or furosemide with saline may be used. 
Concomitant administration of alkali (sodium 
bicarbonate) enhances the elimination of weakly 
acidic drugs such as salicylates and barbiturates; 
alkalization of the urine traps the ionized form of 
these drugs in the renal tubules and enhances uri-
nary elimination. Hemodialysis is usually reserved 
for patients with severe toxicity who continue to 
deteriorate despite aggressive supportive therapy. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Aslakson R, Pronovost PJ: Health care quality in end-
of-life care: Promoting palliative care in the intensive 
care unit. Anesthesiol Clin 2011;29:111. 
 Chuasuwan A, Kellum JA: Acute kidney injury and its 
management. Contrib Nephrol 2011;171:218. 
may be necessary in some instances. Seizure 
activity may be the result of hypoxia or a phar-
macological action of a drug (tricyclic antidepres-
sants) or poison. Seizure activity is unlikely in this 
patient because she ingested diazepam, a potent 
anticonvulsant. 
 Should ﬂ umazenil be administered? 
 Flumazenil should generally not be adminis-
tered to patients who overdose on both a benzo-
diazepine and an antidepressant and those who 
have a history of seizures. Reversal of the benzo-
diazepine’s anticonvulsant action can precipitate 
seizure activity in such instances. Moreover, as is 
the case with naloxone and opioids, the half-life of 
ﬂ umazenil is shorter than that of benzodiazepines. 
Thus, it is often preferable to ventilate the patient 
until the benzodiazepine eﬀ ect dissipates, the 
patient regains consciousness, and the respiratory 
depression resolves. 
 Should any other antidotes be given? 
 Because the patient also ingested an unknown 
quantity of acetaminophen (paracetamol) admin-
istration of N-acetylcysteine (NAC; Mucomyst) 
should be considered. Acetaminophen toxicity is 
due to depletion of hepatic glutathione, resulting 
in the accumulation of toxic metabolic interme-
diates. Hepatic toxicity is usually associated with 
ingestion of more than 140 mg/kg of acetamino-
phen. NAC prevents hepatic damage by acting as 
a sulfhydryl donor and restoring hepatic glutathi-
one levels. If the patient is suspected of having 
ingested a toxic dose of acetaminophen, an initial 
dosage of NAC (140 mg/kg orally or by nasogastric 
tube) should be administered even before plasma 
acetaminophen levels are obtained; additional 
doses are given according to the measured plasma 
level. If the patient cannot tolerate oral or gastric 
administration of NAC, if the patient is pregnant, or 
if the risk of hepatotoxicity is high, NAC should be 
given intravenously. 
 What measures might limit drug toxicity? 
 Toxicity might be reduced by decreas-
ing drug absorption or enhancing elimina-
tion. Gastrointestinal absorption of an ingested 
 
CHAPTER 57 Critical Care 
1323 
 Field JM, Hazinski MF, Sayre MR, et al: Part 1: Executive 
summary: 2010 American Heart Association 
Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation 
2010;122:S640. 
 Gabrielli A, Layon AJ, Yu M (Eds):  Civetta, Taylor & 
Kirby’s Critical Care, 4th ed. Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2009. 
 Legrand M, Paven D: Understanding urine output 
in critically ill patients. Ann Intensive Care 
2011;1:13. 
 Levy MM, Dellinger, RP, Townsend SR, et al: 
Th e Surviving Sepsis Campaign: Results of an 
international guideline-based performance 
improvement program targeting severe sepsis. 
Intensive Care Med 2010;36:222. 
 Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC, et al: 2001 SCCM/
ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS International Sepsis 
Defi nitions Conference. Crit Care Med 2003;
31:1250. 
 Lilly CM, Zuckerman IH, Badawi O, Riker RR: 
Benchmark data from more than 240,000 adults 
that refl ect the current practice of critical care in the 
United States. Chest 2011;140:1232-1242. 
 Patroniti N, Isgrò S, Zanella A: Clinical management of 
severely hypoxemic patients. Curr Opin Crit Care 
2011;17:50. 
 Peñuelas O, Frutos-Vivar F, Fernández C, et al: 
Characteristics and outcomes of ventilated patients 
according to time to liberation from mechanical 
ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;184:430. 
 Tang BM, Craig JC, Eslick GD, et al: Use of 
corticosteroids in acute lung injury and acute 
respiratory distress syndrome: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2009;37:1594. 
 Van Norman GA, Jackson S, Rosenbaum SH, Palmer 
SK:  Clinical Ethics in Anesthesiology: A Case-Based 
Textbook. Cambridge Medicine, 2011. 
 Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Kochanek P, et al (Eds):  Textbook 
of Critical Care, 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders, 2011. 
 WEB SITES 
 Acute Kidney Injury Network. Available at:  http://www.
akinet.org/ (Accessed August 9, 2012). 
 Surviving Sepsis campaign. Available at:  http://www.
survivingsepsis.org/ (Accessed August 9, 2012). 
This page intentionally left blank 
 1325
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 In the 1980s, anesthesiologists were 
recognized for being the ﬁ rst medical 
specialty to adopt  mandatory safety-related 
clinical practice guidelines. Adoption of 
these guidelines, describing standards for 
basic monitoring during general anesthesia, 
was associated with a reduction in the 
number of patients suﬀ ering brain damage 
or death secondary to ventilation mishaps 
during general anesthesia. 
 In 1999 the Institute of Medicine of the (U.S.) 
National Academy of Sciences summarized 
available safety information in its report,  To Err 
is Human: Building a Safer Healthcare System, 
1
2
which highlighted many opportunities 
for improved quality and safety. 
 It has long been recognized that quality and 
safety are closely related to consistency and 
reduction in practice variation. 
 There is a natural tendency to assume that 
errors can be prevented by better education 
or better management of individual workers 
(ie, to look at errors as individual failures 
made by individual workers rather than as 
failures of a system or a process). To reduce 
errors one changes the system or process to 
reduce unwanted variation so that random 
errors are less likely. 
3
4
 PATIENT SAFETY ISSUES 
 As a profession, anesthesiology has spearheaded 
eff orts to improve patient safety. Some of the fi rst 
studies to evaluate safety of care focused on pro-
vision and sequelae of anesthesia. When spinal 
anesthesia was virtually abandoned in the United 
Kingdom (aft er two patients developed paraple-
gia following administration of spinal anesthet-
ics), Drs Robert Dripps and Leroy Vandam helped 
prevent this technique from being abandoned in 
North America by carefully reporting outcomes 
of 10,098 patients who received spinal anesthe-
sia. Th ey determined that only one patient (who 
proved to have a previously undiagnosed spinal 
meningioma) developed severe, long-term neuro-
logical sequelae. 
 Aft er halothane was introduced into clinical 
practice in 1954, concerns arose about whether it 
might be associated with an increased risk of 
hepatic injury. Th e National Halothane Study, per-
haps the fi rst clinical outcomes study to be per-
formed (long before the term  outcomes research
gained widespread use), demonstrated the remark-
able safety of the then relatively new agent com-
pared with the alternatives. It failed, however, to 
settle the question of whether “halothane hepatitis” 
actually existed. 
 In the 1980s, anesthesiologists were recog-
nized for being the fi rst medical specialists 
to adopt  mandatory safety-related clinical practice 
guidelines. Adoption of these guidelines was not 
without controversy, given that for the fi rst time 
1
58
 Safety, Quality, & 
Performance Improvement 
 K E Y C O N C E P T S 
1326 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 QUALITY OF CARE 
& PERFORMANCE 
IMPROVEMENT ISSUES 
 It has long been recognized that quality 
and safety are closely related to consistency 
and reduction in practice variation.  Th e quality 
and safety movement(s) in medicine have their ori-
gins in the work of Walter Shewhart and his associ-
ate W. Edwards Deming, who popularized the use 
of statistics and control charts in evaluating the reli-
ability of a process. In manufacturing (where these 
ideas were initially applied), reducing an error rate 
reduces the frequency of defective products and 
increases the customer’s satisfaction with the prod-
uct and the manufacturer. In medicine, reducing the 
error rate (for everything from accurate timing and 
delivery of prophylactic antibiotics to ensuring “cor-
rect side and site” surgery and regional anesthetic 
blocks) increases quality and reduces preventable 
injuries to patients, while also eliminating the addi-
tional costs resulting from those errors. 
 Strategies to Reduce 
Performance Errors 
 Both in manufacturing and in medicine, there 
is a natural tendency to assume that errors 
can be prevented by better education, better perfor-
mance, or better management of  individual workers . 
In other words, there is a tendency to look at errors 
as individual failures made by individual workers, 
rather than as failures of a system or a process. Using 
the latter point of view (as advocated by Deming), 
to reduce errors one changes the system or process 
to reduce unwanted variation so that random errors 
will be less likely. An outstanding example of this is 
the universal protocol followed by health care insti-
tutions prior to invasive procedures. Adherence to 
this protocol ensures that the correct procedure is 
performed on the correct part of the correct patient 
by the correct physician, that the patient has given 
informed consent, that all needed equipment and 
images are available, and that (if needed) the correct 
prophylactic antibiotic was given at the correct time. 
 A related example of a simple approach to 
improve safety and quality of a procedure is the use 
3
4
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
was “dictating” how physicians could practice. Th e 
eff ort resulted in standards for basic monitoring 
during general anesthesia that included detection 
of carbon dioxide in exhaled gas. Adoption of these 
standards was associated with a reduction in the 
number of patients suff ering brain damage or death 
secondary to ventilation mishaps during general 
anesthesia. A fortunate associated result was that 
the cost of medical liability insurance coverage also 
declined. 
 In 1984, Ellison Pierce, president of the ASA, 
created its Patient Safety and Risk Management 
Committee. Th e Anesthesia Patient Safety Founda-
tion (APSF), which celebrated its 25th anniversary 
in 2011, was also Dr Pierce’s creation. Th e APSF 
continues to spearhead eff orts to make anesthe-
sia and perioperative care safer for patients and 
practitioners. Similarly, through its guidelines, 
statements, advisories, and practice parameters, 
the ASA continues to promote safety and provide 
guidance to clinicians. As Dr Pierce noted, “Patient 
safety is not a fad. It is not a preoccupation of the 
past. It is not an objective that has been fulfi lled or a 
refl ection of a problem that has been solved. Patient 
safety is an ongoing necessity. It must be sustained 
by research, training, and daily application in the 
workplace.” 
 Meanwhile, other specialties of medicine began 
to place greater emphasis on quality and safety. 
 In 1999 the Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the 
(U.S.) National Academy of Sciences summa-
rized available safety information in a report enti-
tled  To Err is Human: Building a Safer Healthcare 
System. Th at document highlighted many opportu-
nities for improved quality and safety in the Ameri-
can health care system. A subsequent IOM report, 
 Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System 
for the 21st Century, explored the way that variation 
in medical practice reduced quality and safety of 
health care system. More recently, the Institute for 
Healthcare Improvement has been “motivating and 
building the will for change; identifying and testing 
new models of care in partnership with both 
patients and health care professionals; and ensuring 
the broadest possible adoption of best practices and 
eff ective innovations,” as described on its web site. 
2
 
CHAPTER 58 Safety, Quality, & Performance Improvement 
1327 
 Second, using a checklist underscores the 
importance of ensuring that every member of the 
surgical team has a stake in patient safety and good 
surgical outcomes. Th e team member who records 
the checklist “results” is usually not a physician 
but has the implicit authority to enforce adher-
ence to the checklist. On poorly functioning teams 
in which there is excessive deference to authority 
fi gures, team members may feel that their opin-
ions are not wanted or valued, or may be afraid 
to bring up safety concerns for fear of retaliation. 
On well-functioning teams, there is a “fl attening” 
of the hierarchy such that every team member has 
the authority and every team member feels an obli-
gation to halt the proceedings to prevent potential 
patient harm. 
 Quality Assurance Measures 
 In surgery there are well-recognized indicators 
of quality, such as having a very low incidence of 
surgical site infections and of perioperative mor-
tality. However, at present there is no consensus 
as to the important measurements that can be 
used to assess quality of anesthesia care. Never-
theless, surrogate anesthesia indicators have been 
monitored by a variety of well-meaning agencies. 
Examples include selection and timing of preop-
erative antibiotics and temperature of patients in 
the postanesthesia care unit after colorectal sur-
gery. Mindful of the importance of having accu-
rate and relevant outcome measures, the ASA 
established the Anesthesia Quality Institute in 
2009 and charged it with developing and collect-
ing valid quality indicators for anesthetic care that 
can be used for quality improvement programs. 
Aggregation of the large amounts of data required 
for statistical validity is dependent on widespread 
adoption of electronic medical records (EMR) 
and anesthesia information management systems 
(AIMS) (discussed in  Chapter 18 ). Currently 
these systems are present in a minority of hos-
pitals in the United States. It is our hope that as 
their use becomes more widespread, the data and 
indicators that are collected and aggregated will 
provide greater insight into how quality of anes-
thesia care may influence clinical outcomes that 
are important to patients. 
of a standardized checklist, as described in the pop-
ular press by Dr. Atul Gawande. Th e importance of 
checklist use is addressed elsewhere in this text, for 
example, in  Chapter 2 in the context of developing a 
culture of safety in the operating room. Such check-
lists provide the “script” for the preprocedure uni-
versal protocol ( Figure 58–1 ). Studies have shown 
that the incidence of catheter-related bloodstream 
infections can be reduced when central venous 
catheters are inserted aft er adequate cleansing and 
disinfection of the operator’s hands by an operator 
wearing a surgical hat and mask, sterile gown, and 
gloves; using chorhexidine (rather than povidone 
iodide) skin preparation of the insertion site; and 
with sterile drapes of adequate size to maintain a 
sterile fi eld. Studies have also shown that use of all 
elements in this central line “bundle” is much more 
likely when a checklist is required prior to every 
central line insertion; a sample checklist is shown in 
 Figure 58–2 . 
 Beneﬁ ts of Standardized Checklists 
 Checklists emphasize two important principles 
about improving quality and safety in the surgical 
environment. First, using a checklist requires that a 
physician  communicate with other members of the 
team. Good communication among team members 
improves quality and prevents errors. It is easy to 
fi nd examples of good communication strategies. 
By clearly and forcefully announcing that protamine 
infusion has been started (aft er extracorporeal 
perfusion has been discontinued during a cardiac 
operation), the anesthesiologist helps prevent the 
surgeon and perfusionist from making a critical 
error, such as resuming extracorporeal perfusion 
without administering additional heparin. By accu-
rately describing the intended surgical procedure 
(at the time the patient is “posted” on the surgical 
schedule), the surgeon helps prevent the operating 
room nurses from making the critical error of not 
having the necessary instrumentation for the pro-
cedure, and helps prevent the anesthesiologist from 
performing the wrong regional anesthetic proce-
dure. We have selected these examples of good com-
munication because we are aware of adverse patient 
outcomes that resulted from failure to transfer these 
specifi c points of information. 
1328 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 FIGURE 581  The “time out” checklist used at the 
Virginia Commonwealth University Health System before 
all regional anesthesia procedures. There is space for two 
separate time outs. An additional time out is performed 
whenever a patient’s position is changed for a second 
regional block (most commonly for lower extremity 
surgery). For convenience, the regional anesthesia time 
out checklist is printed on the reverse of the Consent for 
Anesthesia acknowledgment form. (Reproduced with permission 
from Virginia Commonwealth University Health System Authority.) 
Name
MRN
Patient Identification
Pre-Procedure and Time Out
Documentation
Procedure 1: _____________________________________________________________________
Procedure 2: _____________________________________________________________________
Pre-Procedure Verification
Time Out Verification
(Performed immediately prior to the procedure)
Circle
One
Circle
One
Ø   Patient’s identity confirmed using two identifiers
Ø   Procedure confirmed and consistent with documents,
          e.g. H&P, progress notes
Ø   Procedure site & side verified
Ø   Relevant images reviewed/available
Ø   Procedure site marked (required for procedures
          involving laterality, lesions, levels, digits)
Ø   Risk/benefits discussed and/or consent form completed
Ø   Patient’s identity confirmed using two identifiers
Ø   Procedure site and side verified
Ø   Correct procedure confirmed
Ø   Correct patient position confirmed
Ø   Availability of Implants/special equipment confirmed
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
NA
NA
NA
NA
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
NA
NA
NA
Signature & Printed Name or ID of Provider Performing Procedure
Date
Time
Date
Time
Signature, Title & Printed Name of Person Completing Form
(to be used for second block or any time patient position is changed (i.e., supine to prone)
Comments: ________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Pre-Procedure Verification
Time Out Verification
(Performed immediately prior to the procedure)
Circle
One
Circle
One
Ø   Patient’s identity confirmed using two identifiers
Ø   Procedure confirmed and consistent with documents,
          e.g. H&P, progress notes
Ø   Procedure site & side verified
Ø   Relevant images reviewed/available
Ø   Procedure site marked (required for procedures
          involving laterality, lesions, levels, digits)
Ø   Risk/benefits discussed and/or consent form completed
Ø   Patient’s identity confirmed using two identifiers
Ø   Procedure site and side verified
Ø   Correct procedure confirmed
Ø   Correct patient position confirmed
Ø   Availability of Implants/special equipment confirmed
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
NA
NA
NA
NA
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
NA
NA
NA
Signature & Printed Name or ID of Provider Performing Procedure
Date
Time
Date
Time
Signature, Title & Printed Name of Person Completing Form
 FIGURE 582  Mandatory checklist for insertion 
of central venous catheters in patients who are not 
currently undergoing anesthesia and surgery at the 
Virginia Commonwealth University Health System. 
A similar electronic document is contained within the 
Anesthesia Information Management electronic record for 
central venous lines. (Reproduced with permission from Virginia 
Commonwealth University Health System Authority.) 
QUALITY DOCUMENT. NOT PART OF
THE PERMANENT MEDICAL RECORD.
Return to designated area on your unit.
PATIENT NAME
MRN
(or PATIENT LABEL)
Intravascular Access Catheter Insertion Checklist
Purpose: To work as a team to decrease patient harm from catheter-related blood stream infections
When:     During all central venous catheter insertion or re-wirings
Who:       Assistant to complete this form during catheter insertion
1.   Date: _______________________ Time: _________________ a.m.          p.m.
2.   Procedure Site: ________________________________             ®   New            ®   Re-wiring
3.   Procedure is:                       ®   Elective         ®   Emergent
4.   Before procedure, did person(s) performing procedure:
             ÿ   Wash hands immediately prior?                                                     ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   Sterilize procedure site (chlorhexidine)? 
 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   Drape entire patient in sterile fashion?  
 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
5.   During procedure, did personnel performing procedure:
             ÿ   Wear sterile gloves? 
 
 
 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   Wear hat and mask? 
 
 
 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   Wear sterile gown? 
 
 
 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   Maintain a sterile field? 
 
 
 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
6.   Did all personnel assisting with procedure follow the policy? 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
7.   Procedure stopped at any time due to break in sterile field? 
        ®   Yes              ®   No
If yes, Corrective Actions Taken:
®   Person performing procedure applied appropriate barrier, re-prepped and draped the pateint
®   New checklist initiated
®   Complete new set up: staff barriers, prep, drape new line
®   New checklist initiated
®   Attending/designee paged; problem corrected
®   Attending/designee paged; problem not corrected
8.   After procedure, were:
             ÿ   Sterile dressings applied to the site?                                            ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   New IV bag & tubing set up?  
 
         
       ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   New stopcocks and access devices used? 
 
       ®   Yes              ®   No
             ÿ   All ports closed with sterile dead enders? 
 
       ®   Yes              ®   No
9.   Comments– Please note any additional corrective actions taken: _______________________________________
      __________________________________________________________________________________________
      __________________________________________________________________________________________
The assistant should STOP any procedure that does not meet this standard of care. The procedure
should not continue until everyone is in compliance. The assistant will contact unit or division leadership
immediately for anyone refusing to comply with this policy.
Name of Person Performing Procedure (&  ID  #)
PRINT NAME
Assistant Completing Checklist
PRINT NAME
1329 
1330 
SECTION V Perioperative & Critical Care Medicine
 Maltby JR, Hutter CDD, Clayton KC: Th e Woolley and 
Roe case. Brit J Anaesth 2000;84:121. 
 Pierce EC Jr: Th e 34th Rovenstine Lecture. 40 years 
behind the mask: Safety revisited. Anesthesiology 
1996;84:965. 
 Summary of the National Halothane Study. Possible 
association between halothane anesthesia and 
postoperative hepatic necrosis. JAMA 1966;197:775. 
 WEB SITES 
 American Society of Anesthesiologists Standards, 
Guidelines, Statements and other Documents. 
Available at:  https://www.asahq.org/For-Healthcare-
Professionals/Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.
aspx (accessed August 4, 2012). 
 Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Available at:  www.
ihi.org (accessed August 4 2012). 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Berwick DM: Controlling variation in health care: A 
consultation from Walter Shewhart. Medical Care 
1991;29:1212-1225. 
 Deming WE:  Out of the Crisis. MIT Press, 1986. 
 Dripps RD, Vandam LD: Long-term follow-up of patients 
who received 10,098 spinal anesthetics: Failure to 
discover major neurological sequelae. J Am Med 
Assoc 1954;156:1486. 
 Gawande A:  Th e Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Th ings 
Right. Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt, 2009. 
 Institute of Medicine:  Crossing the Quality Chasm: A 
New Health System for the 21st Century. National 
Academy Press, 2001. Available at  http://www.
nap.edu/ 
Institute of Medicine:  To Err Is Human: Building a Safer 
Healthcare System.  National Academy Press, 2000. 
Available at http://www.nap.edu/
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by f and t indicate fi gures and tables, respectively.
1331
A
Abdominal compartment syndrome, 820
Abdominal pain, 1051–1052
Absorbent granules, 38
Absorption, 144
defi nition, 144
ACC/AHA guidelines, 378, 399, 407, 
420, 421
Acceleromyography, 139
ACE inhibitors, 607
Acetaminophen, 1053
ingestion, 709
intravenous, 287
Acetylcholine
parasympathetic nervous system, 225f
synthesis and hydrolysis, 224f
Acetylcholinesterase (ACh) receptors, 202
structure of, 201, 201f
Acid–base management, 1141
acid-base disorders, diagnosis, 
1156–1157
acidosis, acidemia, physiological 
eff ects of, 1148–1149
acids/bases, 1142–1143
alkalemia, anesthetic considerations, 
1156
alkalosis
physiological eff ects, 1154
respiratory alkalosis, 1154–1155
anesthetic considerations, 1154
blood gas tensions/ pH, measurement of
sample source/collection, 1157
temperature correction, 1157
body buff ers
bicarbonate buff er, 1144–1145
hemoglobin as a buff er, 1145–1146
case discussion, 1158–1159
clinical disorders, 1143–1144
compensatory mechanisms, 1144
conjugate pairs/buff ers, 1143
defi nitions of, 1142
high anion gap metabolic acidosis, 1151
exogenous nonvolatile acids, 
ingestion of, 1152
failure to excrete endogenous 
nonvolatile acids, 1151
increased endogenous nonvolatile 
acid production, 1151–1152
hydrogen ion concentration, 1142
metabolic acidosis
anion gap, 1150–1151
metabolic acidosis, treatment of, 1153
bicarbonate space, 1153–1154
metabolic alkalosis
causes of, 1156
chloride-resistant metabolic 
alkalosis, 1156
chloride-sensitive metabolic 
alkalosis, 1155
treatment of, 1156
normal anion gap metabolic 
acidosis, 1152
HCO3
− gastrointestinal loss, 1152
HCO3
−, renal loss of, 1152–1153
hyperchloremic acidosis, causes 
of, 1153
pH, 1142
renal compensation, 1146
during acidosis, 1146
alkalosis, 1148
ammonia, 1147–1148
base excess, 1148
HCO3
−, 1146–1147
titratable acids, 1147
respiratory acidosis, 1149
acute respiratory acidosis, 
1149–1150
chronic respiratory acidosis, 1150
treatment of, 1150
respiratory compensation, 1146
metabolic acidosis, 1146
strong ion diff erence (SID), 1143, 
1143f
α1-Acid glycoprotein (AAG), 145
Acidic drugs, 145
Acquired immunodefi ciency syndrome 
(AIDS), 1174
Action potentials, 264, 265f
Activated clotting time (ACT), 446
Acupuncture, 1084
Acute herpes zoster/postherpetic 
neuralgia, 1049–1050
Acute intravascular hemolysis, 1172
Acute kidney failure, 660
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 641, 654, 1309
causes of, 642t
diff erential diagnosis, 654f
drugs and toxins, 644t
RIFLE criteria for, 655f
risk index, 643t
severity of, 655t
vs. reversible azotemia, 1310
etiology of, 1311
oliguric vs. nonoliguric, 1311–1312
pathogenesis of, 1311
treatment of, 1312
Acute kidney injury network (AKIN) 
staging system, 655, 656t
Acute lung injury (ALI), 560
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI), 
1308–1309
Acute pain service (APS), 1102
Adaptability/fl exibility
crew resource management (CRM), 25
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 348, 576, 
695, 1307
Adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) 
valves, 32, 34–35, 68
Adrenal gland, 738
catecholamine excess, 740–741
glucocorticoid defi ciency, 739–740
glucocorticoid excess, 739
mineralocorticoid defi ciency, 739
mineralocorticoid excess
anesthetic considerations, 738–739
clinical manifestations, 738
physiology, 738
Adrenergic agonists, 243–249. See also 
Specifi c agents
α2, 245–246
case discussion on 
pheochromocytoma, 252–253
dobutamine, 248
dopamine, 247–248
dopexamine, 248
eff ects of, 244t
ephedrine, 247
epinephrine, 246
fenoldopam, 248–249
isoproterenol, 248
norepinephrine, 247
phenylephrine, 245
selectivity of, 244t
structure of, 245f
1332 
INDEX
Adrenergic antagonists
α-blockers (phentolamine), 249
β-blockers, 249–250
carvedilol, 251
case discussion on 
pheochromocytoma, 252–253
esmolol, 250
metoprolol, 250
mixed antagonists (labetalol), 249
nebivolol, 251
perioperative β−blocker therapy, 
251–252
propranolol, 251
β-Adrenergic-blocking agents, 169, 186, 
390–391
comparison of, 391t
α-Adrenergic vasopressors, 666
Adrenoceptors (adrenergic receptors), 
240–243
α1, 240
α2, 240
β1, 240–242
β2, 242
β3, 242–243
dopamine (DA) receptors, 243
epinephrine synthesis, 243f
norepinephrine synthesis, 242f, 243f
physiology of, 240–243
in sympathetic nervous system, 
240, 241f
transmembrane structure of, 243f
Adrenocortical suppression, 185
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
555, 738
Agent-specifi c variable-bypass 
vaporizers, 61f–62f
schematic of, 61f–62f
Age-related physiological changes, 909
α2-Agonists, 245–246
clinical considerations, 245–246
dosing & packaging, 246
Air
medical gas cylinders, 12t
in medical gas systems, 13
Airtraq optical laryngoscope, 324f
Airway. See also Airway management
anatomy, 310–312, 310f
assessment, 312–314
dichotomous division of, 490f
instrumentation, physiological 
responses, 335–336
oral & nasal, 314–315
oropharyngeal airway, 314f
patency, 1261
resistance to gas fl ow, 498–501, 499t
fl ow-related airway collapse, 
500–501, 500f
forced vital capacity, 501, 501f
volume-related airway collapse, 
499, 499f
sensory nerve supply of, 311f
trauma, 334–335
Airway, diffi  cult, 316f
algorithm, 329f
case discussion on, 336–340
intubating laryngeal mask, 340f
nerve block in, 338f
portable storage unit for, 339t
positioning in, 316
superior laryngeal nerve block and 
transtracheal block in, 339f
Airway equipment, sizing
pediatric anesthetic techniques, 890t
Airway management, 309–340
bag and mask ventilation (BMV), 
316–317
direct and indirect laryngoscopy 
& intubation techniques, 
325–331
endotracheal intubation, 320–322
equipment in, 314–316
extubation techniques, 333–334
face mask design & technique, 
315–316
of high tracheal lesion, 566f
King laryngeal tubes (LTs), 320
laryngoscope, 322
laryngoscopy & intubation, 
complications of, 334–336
oral & nasal airways, 314–315
oral opening, Mallampati classifi cation 
of, 313f
preoxygenation, 316
problems following intubation, 333
routine airway management, 312
situations, 314
surgical airway techniques, 332–333
technique for, 337f
video laryngoscopes, 322–325
Airway pressures, 79f, 1297
Aladin cassette vaporizer, 63–64
Aldosterone, 737
antagonists, 648
intravenous dosage, 648
side eff ects, 648
uses, 648
hypersecretion of, 738
Alfentanil, 186
biotransformation of, 196
Alkaline phosphatase, 710
Allen’s test, 93
Allergic reactions
due to atracurium, 216
due to pancuronium, 218
Allow Natural Death (AND), 1279
Alveolar concentration (FA)
of anesthetics inhalation, 155–159
concentration of, 158
uptake in, 155–157, 156t, 157f, 158f
ventilation in, 157–158
Alveolar dead space, 504
Alzheimer disease (AD)
anesthetic considerations, 619–620
preoperative considerations, 619
Ambient oxygen therapy equipment, 1282
Ambulatory anesthesia and surgery, 920
Ambulatory/offi  ce-based anesthesia, 
920–921
Ambulatory surgery
cardiac conditions, 924
glucose control, 924
malignant hyperthermia, 924
obesity/obstructive sleep apnea, 
921–924
safe discharge, guidelines, 926t
unanticipated hospital admission, 927
American Association of Nurse 
Anesthetists, 6
American College of Cardiology 
(ACC), 377
American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association, 297
American College of Physicians, 298, 529
American College of Surgeons’ (ACS) 
Committee on Trauma, 806
American Heart Association (AHA), 377
American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) standards, 24
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA), 5, 44, 920, 1326
classifi cation, 297, 297t
γ-Aminobutyric acid type A 
(GABAA), 176
Amino precursor uptake and 
decarboxylation (APUD) 
cells, 491
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 621
Analgesia, for burn, 822
Analgesic agents, 189–198. See also 
Specifi c agents, disorders, and 
surgeries
cyclooxygenase inhibitors, 196–198
opioids, 189–196
Anaphylactic reactions to latex, 1222
Anaphylactoid reactions, 1220
Anaphylaxis, 1217, 1218
Anatomic dead space, 504
Anesthesia
devices, 131f
history of (See also History, of 
anesthesia)
 
INDEX 
1333 
inhalation (See Inhalation anesthesia)
intravenous (See Intravenous 
anesthesia)
providers, 10
scope of, 6–7
sedation and, outside operating room, 
929t
workstation, 44
Anesthesia, adjuncts to, 277–293, 584
aspiration of, 278–283
antacids, 281–282
histamine-receptor antagonists, 
278–281
metoclopramide, 282
pneumonia prophylaxis, 
pharmacology of, 281t
proton pump inhibitors, 283
case discussion on aspiration 
pneumonia, 290–293
drugs used as adjuvants to, 286–290
clonidine (catapres, duraclon), 
287–288
dexmedetomidine (precedex), 288
doxapram (dopram), 288–289
fl umazenil (romazicon), 290
ketorolac, 286–287
naloxone (narcan), 289
naltrexone, 290
postoperative nausea & vomiting 
(PONV), 283–286
butyrophenones, 285
dexamethasone (decadron), 285
5-HT3 receptor antagonists, 284–285
neurokinin-1 receptor 
antagonist, 286
risk factors for, 283t
SAMBA guidelines to, 284t
strategies of, 286
Anesthesia information management 
systems (AIMS), 301, 1327
Anesthesia machines, 34, 43–85, 129. See 
also Emergency (E-cylinder) 
cylinder
airway pressures, 79f
basics of, 46t, 47
breathing circuit in, 64–71, 64f–66f 
(See also Breathing circuits)
bypass tube with, 60f
case discussion on, 85–86
checkout list for, 83–85, 83t–84t
electronic fl ow control and 
measurement in, 59f
fl ow control circuits in, 52–64 (See 
also Flow control circuits)
gases, vapor pressure, 60f
gas supply in, 49–52
graphic and digital fl owmeter, 59f
heat and moisture exchanger (HME) 
functions, 71f
modern machine, 45f
older, unacceptable/undesirable 
features of, 47t
overview of, 47–49
safety features of, 44, 46t
schematic of
agent-specifi c variable-bypass 
vaporizers, 61f–62f
copper kettle vaporizer, 61f
electronic Datex-Ohmeda Aladin 
vaporizer, 63f
functional, 47f
highly sophisticated, 50f–51f
simplifi ed internal, 48f–49f
spirometer designs, 69–70f
ventilators in, 72–81 (See also 
Ventilators)
waste-gas scavengers, 81–83
Anesthesia, physiologic considerations 
in, 546–549
lateral decubitus position in, 546–547, 
546f, 547f
open pneumothorax in, 547–548
Anesthesia ventilators
excessive positive pressure, 79
problems associated with, 79–81
tidal volume discrepancies, 79–81
ventilator–fresh gas fl ow coupling, 79
Anesthesiologist, 891, 921
Anesthesiology
clinical practice, 143
practice of, 1–7
defi nition of, 2t
Anesthesiology Assistant programs, 6
Anesthetic agents, 587, 658–660
choice of, 386
induction agents, 386
inhalation agents, 659–660
nitrous oxide, 659
volatile anesthetic agents, 659
intravenous agents, 658–659
anticholinergic agents, 658
barbiturates, 658
benzodiazepines, 658
H2-receptor blockers, 659
ketamine, 658
opioids, 658
phenothiazines, 659
propofol & etomidate, 658
maintenance agents, 386
muscle relaxants, 386, 659–660
cisatracurium and atracurium, 659
curare (d-tubocurarine), 659–660
pancuronium, 660
reversal agents, 660
succinylcholine, 659
vecuronium & rocuronium, 659
vasopressors, 386
Anesthetic complications
adverse anesthetic outcomes
ASA Closed Claims Project, 1205
causes, 1205
human errors, 1205t
incidence, 1203–1205
airway injury, 1211–1212
allergic reactions, 1217
anaphylactic reactions, 1218–1221
to anesthetic agents, 1221
to antibiotics, 1222
immediate hypersensitivity 
reactions, 1218
latex allergy, 1221–1222
anesthesiology, occupational hazards, 
1222–1225
anesthetic gases, chronic 
exposure, 1223
chronic exposure, 1223–1225
ionizing radiation exposure, 1225
substance abuse, 1225
awareness, 1215–1216
brain injury, 1205
cardiopulmonary arrest during spinal 
anesthesia, 1216–1217
case discussion, 1226
equipment problems, 1210
prevention, 1210–1211
eye injury, 1216
hearing loss, 1217
litigation, 1200–1203
mortality, 1205
mortality/brain injury, 1205–1207
equipment malfunctions, 1205t
IV catheters, injuries, 1207f
retrospective data collection, 1206f
obstetric anesthesia, 1207–1208
out of operating room, 1210
pediatric anesthesia, 1209–1210
peripheral nerve injury, 1212
positioning, complications, 
1214–1215
positioning, role of, 1212–1214
quality management, 1211
regional anesthesia, 1208–1209
vascular cannulation, 1207
Anesthetic gas analysis, 127–129
clinical considerations, 127–129
galvanic cell, 127–128
indications in, 127
paramagnetic analysis, 128–129
piezoelectric analysis, 127
spirometry, 129
techniques for, 127
1334 
INDEX
Anesthetic management–related factors
contributing to enhanced recovery 
programs (ERPs), 1090
Anesthetics
depth, monitors characteristics, 132t
mishaps, 1205
Anesthetics, general. See also Specifi c 
agents
course of, 154
Anesthetics, inhalation, 2–3. See also 
Specifi c agents
agents, 155f
clinical pharmacology of, 163–173, 165t
desfl urane, 170–171
halothane, 167–169
isofl urane, 169–170
nitrous oxide, 163–167, 163t
pharmacodynamics of, 159–163
anesthetic neuroprotection and 
cardiac preconditioning, 162
anesthetic neurotoxicity, 161–162
minimum alveolar concentration, 
161f, 162–163, 163t, 164t
theories of anesthetic action in, 
159–161
pharmacokinetics of, 154–159
alveolar concentration (FA), 
155–159
arterial concentration (Fa), 159
elimination in, 159
inspiratory concentration (FI), 
154–155
partition coeffi  cients in, 156, 156t
sevofl urane, 171–173
xenon, 173
Anesthetics, intravenous, 4–5, 175–188. 
See also Specifi c agents
barbiturates, 175–179
benzodiazepines, 179–181
case discussion on, 187–188
etomidate, 184–185
ketamine, 182–184
propofol, 185–187
Anesthetics, local, 263–276. See also 
Specifi c agents
agents of, 270
amides, 271
clinical pharmacology, 269–275
clinical use of, 272t
drug interactions, 275
eff ects on organ systems, 271–274
cardiovascular, 273–274
hematological, 274
immunological, 274
musculoskeletal, 274
neurological, 271–273
respiratory, 273
esters, 270
mechanisms of action, 264–266, 265f
nerve fi ber classifi cation of, 266t
neurotoxicity, 161–162
overdose, case discussion on, 275–276
pharmacokinetics of, 269–271
absorption, 269–270
biotransformation and excretion, 
270–271
distribution, 270
physicochemical properties of, 
267t–268t
site of injection of, 270
structure-activity relationships, 
266–269
tissue/blood partition coeffi  cient, 270
tissue mass, 270
tissue perfusion, 270
vasoconstrictor, presence of, 270
voltage-gated sodium (Na) 
channels, 265f
Anesthetic techniques, 135
Angina
chronic stable, 388
unstable, 388
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE), 1128
inhibitors, 367, 380
Angle-closure glaucoma, 235
Anhepatic phase, 720
Ankle block, 1015–1017
needle placement, 1017f
needle placement for, 1017f
Ankylosing spondylitis, 1047
Antacids
clinical uses, 281–282
dosage, 282
drug interactions, 282
mechanism of action, 281
side eff ects, 281
Antianginal agents
comparison of, 389t
Anticholinergic agents, 532, 658
Anticholinergic drugs, 233–237
atropine, 235–236
central anticholinergic syndrome, case 
discussion on, 236–237
clinical pharmacology, 234–235
general pharmacological 
characteristics, 234–235, 234t
cardiovascular, 234–235
cerebral, 235
gastrointestinal, 235
genitourinary, 235
ophthalmic, 235
respiratory, 235
thermoregulation, 235
mechanisms of action, 233–234
physical structures, 234f
scopolamine, 236
Anticholinesterases, 224
Anticholinesterases drugs, 749
Anticonvulsant medications, 1057
Antidepressant drugs, 624
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 638, 
1114, 1122
Antiepileptic drugs
mechanisms of action and common 
side eff ects, 617t
Antifi brinolytic agents, 457
Antihistaminic drugs, 280
Antihypertensives. See Hypotensive 
agents
Antimuscarinics, 233
Antispasmodics, 1056
Antithrombotic therapy, 949
recommendations for, 421t
Aorta, lesions of, 477–478
aneurysms in, 477
coarctation of, 478
dissection of, 477
occlusive disease of, 478
trauma in, 478
Aortic arch, upper esophageal TEE 
views, 453f
Aortic regurgitation, 416–418
anesthetic management, 417–418
choice of agents, 418
monitoring, 418
objectives, 417–418
pathophysiology, 416–417
preoperative considerations, 416
regurgitant fraction & measurements 
of severity calculation, 417
treatment, 417
Aortic stenosis, 414–415
pathophysiology, 414–415
preoperative considerations, 414
Aortic valve, 449f
anesthetic management, 415–416
choice of agents, 416
monitoring, 415–416
objectives, 415
calculation of area of, 415–416
treatment, 415
Apgar score, 871t
Apneic oxygenation, 561
Apneic threshold, 167
Arachnoiditis, 971
Arginine, 1196
Arginine vasopressin (AVP), 361, 638
Arnold–Chiari malformation, 622
Arrhythmias
due to pancuronium, 217–218
 
INDEX 
1335 
Arterial blood pressure. See Blood 
pressure, arterial
Arterial concentration (Fa)
of anesthetics inhalation, 159
ventilation/perfusion mismatch, 159
Arterial hypertension, 742
Arterial supply, to spinal cord, 944f
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), 
594, 607
Arthritides, 1047
“As low as reasonably practical” 
(ALARP)
principles, 16–17
Aspiration pneumonia
strategies to prevent, 769t
Assertiveness
crew resource management 
(CRM), 25
Assessment of blood consumption (ABC) 
score, 813
Asthma, 530–534
anesthetic considerations, 532–534
intraoperative management, 
533–534, 534f
pathophysiology of, 531
preoperative considerations, 
530–532
preoperative management, 
532–533
sympathomimetic agents, 531, 532t
treatment, 531–532
Asystole, 1251f
Atmospheric pressure, 60
Atracurium, 216, 659, 744, 884
metabolism & excretion
ester hydrolysis, 216
Hofmann elimination, 216
physical structure, 216
side eff ects & clinical 
considerations, 216
allergic reactions, 216
bronchospasm, 216
chemical incompatibility, 216
hypotension and tachycardia, 216
laudanosine toxicity, 216
temperature and pH sensitivity, 216
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 632
Atrial septal defects (ASDs), 424–425
Atrioventricular septal defects, 425
Atropine, 235–236, 1243
clinical considerations, 235–236
dosage & packaging, 235
physical structure, 235
Auscultation
for arterial blood pressure 
monitoring, 90
sites for, 328f
Autonomic blockade, at spinal nerve roots
cardiovascular manifestations, 
945–946
gastrointestinal manifestations, 
946–947
metabolic/endocrine 
manifestations, 947
pulmonary manifestations, 946
urinary tract manifestations, 947
Autonomic dysfunction, 622
anesthetic considerations, 622
preoperative considerations, 622
Autoregulation, 167
of circulation, 359
Axillary artery
blood pressure monitoring via, 93
positioning of terminal nerves, 993f
terminal nerves, positioning of, 993f
Axillary brachial plexus block, 993f
axillary, musculocutaneous, and 
medial brachial cutaneous 
nerves, 992f
patient positioning and needle 
angle, 993f
ultrasound image of, 994f
Azotemia, 1310
B
Babinski sign, 1185
Back pain syndromes. See Low back 
pain syndromes
“Backward, upward, rightward, pressure” 
(BURP), 327
Baclofen, 1056
Bacterial contamination, 40
Bacterial infections, 1047
Baffl  e system, 39
Bag and mask ventilation (BMV), 
316–317
esophageal–tracheal combitube design 
& technique, 320
supraglottic airway devices (SADs), 
317–320
Bain circuit, 35, 64
Barbiturates, 4, 175–179, 583, 658, 696. 
See also specifi c agents
coma, 817
dosages of, 178t
drug interactions, 179
eff ects on organ systems, 177–179
cardiovascular, 177–178
cerebral, 178–179
hepatic, 179
immunological, 179
renal, 179
respiratory, 178
mechanisms of action, 175–176
pharmacokinetics, 176–177
absorption, 176
biotransformation, 177
distribution, 176–177, 177f
excretion, 177
structure–activity relationships, 176
structure of, 176f
Barium hydroxide, 37, 37t
Baroreceptor refl ex, 361
Basal/maximal oxygen consumption, 911
Becker’s muscular dystrophy, 753
Beer–Lambert law, 125, 127
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 674
Benzocaine, 271
Benzodiazepines, 179–181, 584, 658, 696, 
750, 1190
doses of, 180t
drug interactions, 181
eff ects on organ systems, 181
cardiovascular, 181
cerebral, 181
respiratory, 181
mechanisms of action, 179
pharmacokinetics, 179–181
absorption, 179–180
biotransformation, 180–181
distribution, 180
excretion, 181
structure–activity relationships, 179
structures of, 180
Bernoulli equation, 118, 119f
Biceps femoris muscle
patient positioning, 1014, 1015f
Bilateral orchiectomy, 682
Biliary system, 698f
Bilirubin, 710
Biopsies, 932
Biotransformation, 146–147
Biphasic runcated exponential 
(BTE), 1241
Bipolar disease, 625
Bispectral analysis, 130, 131
Bispectral index (BIS), 130
calculation, 133f
scale, 134f
Bleomycin, 684
α-Blockers (phentolamine), 249
clinical considerations, 249
dosing & packaging, 249
β-Blockers, 249–250
pharmacology of, 250t
β-Blocker therapy, 257
American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association 
guidelines, 257
Block room, preoperative holding 
area, 800f
1336 
INDEX
Blood
respiratory gases, transport of, 
514–520
carbon dioxide, 518–520
oxygen, 514–518
volume, normal distribution of, 359t
Blood-brain barrier, 579
Blood component therapy, 1161–1180
intravascular volume, clinical 
estimation of, 1161–1162
hemodynamic monitoring, 1163
laboratory evaluation, 1162–1163
patient history, 1162
physical examination, 1162
Blood glucose, 731
Blood pressure, 775
classifi cation of, 380t
cuff , width of, 91, 92f
Blood pressure, arterial
immediate control, 361
intermediate control, 361–362
long-term control, 362
peripheral movement of pulse on, 
87, 88f
site of measurement on, 88, 89f
Blood pressure monitoring, arterial, 
87–97, 88f, 89f
invasive, 92–97
cannulation in
complications of, 93–94
of radial artery, 93, 94f
selection of artery for, 92–93
clinical considerations in, 94–97
indications and contraindications 
for, 92–94
noninvasive, 88–92
arterial tonometry in, 90, 91f
auscultation in, 90
automatic, 92
clinical considerations in, 
90–92, 92f
Doppler probe in, 88–90, 90f
indications and contraindications 
to, 88
oscillometry in, 90, 91f
palpation in, 88
Blood transfusion, complications, 1172. 
See also Transfusion
autologous transfusion, 1176
case discussion, 1176–1180
donor-directed transfusions, 1176
immune complications, 1172
hemolytic reactions, 1172
infectious complications
bacterial infections, 1174–1175
parasitic infections, 1174
viral infections, 1174
massive transfusion
acid–base balance, 1175
citrate toxicity, 1175
coagulopathy, 1175
hypothermia, 1175
serum potassium concentration, 
1175–1176
nonhemolytic immune reactions
anaphylactic reactions, 1173
febrile reactions, 1173
graft -versus-host disease, 
1173–1174
post-transfusion purpura, 1174
transfusion-related acute lung 
injury (TRALI), 1173
transfusion-related 
immunomodulation, 1174
urticarial reactions, 1173
normovolemic hemodilution, 1176
salvage/reinfusion, 1176
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 656, 1162
Body surface area (BSA)
nomograms for, 352f
Bone cement implantation syndrome
clinical manifestations of, 790
Botox. See Botulinum toxin
Botulinum toxin, 1060
Bougie, 330f
Bourdon pressure gauge, 52, 52f
Brachial artery, blood pressure 
monitoring via, 93
Brachial plexus, 981, 985f
ultrasound image, 986f
ultrasound image of, 988f
Bradycardia, 209
algorithm, 1252f
Brain
cerebral oximetry and monitors 
of, 136
death, 1280
herniation, potential sites of, 581f
oxygen requirements, 576f
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 368, 
403, 1121
Brain protection, 586–589
anesthesia on electrophysiological 
monitoring and, 587–588
cerebral ischemia in, 586
electroencephalography in, 588
evoked potentials in, 588–589
inhalation anesthetics in, 588
intravenous agents in, 588
strategies for, 586–587
Brainstem auditory evoked responses 
(BAERs), 134
Brain tissue oximetry, 577
Braxton Hicks contractions, 833
Breathing circuits, 29, 64–72, 64f–66f
adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) 
valve, 68–71
characteristics of, 36t
circuit pressure, 68
humidifi ers, 71
oxygen analyzers, 36t
spirometers, 67–68
Breathing, control of, 520–522
central respiratory centers, 521
central sensors, 521, 521f
eff ects of anesthesia, 522, 523f
peripheral sensors, 521–522, 522f
lung receptors, 522
peripheral chemoreceptors, 
521–522
Breathing mechanisms, 493
mechanical ventilation, 493
spontaneous ventilation, 493, 494f
Breathing systems, 29–42, 30f
case discussion on, 41–42
circle system, 36–40, 36t, 37f (See also 
Circle system)
classifi cation and characteristics of, 33t
draw-over anesthesia in, 31–32, 
32f, 32t
insuffl  ation in, 30–31, 30f, 31f
Mapleson circuits in, 32–36, 33t, 
34f–36f
open-drop anesthesia in, 31
resuscitation, 40–41, 41f
Breathing tubes, 34
Bronchitis
chronic, clinical diagnosis of, 
534–535
Bronchodilators, 532t
Bronchospasm
due to atracurium, 216
Bubble-through humidifi er, 71
Burns, 819–822
abdominal compartment 
syndrome, 820
anesthetic considerations, 822
carbon monoxide poisoning, 822
fl uid resuscitation, 820
pulmonary complications, 820–821
rule of nines, 821f
Buttock pain, 1043
Butyrophenones, 285
Bypass tube, 60f
C
Calcitonin, 1131
Calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP), 1033
Calcium, 1129
antagonists, 260–261
 
INDEX 
1337 
Calcium balance, disorders
extracellular ionized calcium 
concentration, regulation 
of, 1131
calcitonin, 1131
parathormone (PTH), 1131
vitamin D, 1131
hypercalcemia
anesthetic considerations, 1132
causes of, 1131t
clinical manifestations, 1131–1132
treatment of, 1132
hypocalcemia, 1132–1133
anesthetic considerations, 1133
causes of, 1132t
clinical manifestations, 1133
treatment of, 1133
normal plasma calcium concentration, 
1130–1131
Calcium channel blockers, 348, 389–390
comparison of, 390t
Calcium-regulating hormones, 736t
Cancer-related pain, 1052–1053
Cannulas, 1282
Cannulation, 101f
for arterial blood pressure monitoring
blood gas sampling via, 97
catheter-tubing-transducer system, 
95, 95f
complications of, 93–94
digital readouts vs. arterial waveform 
in, 95–97, 95f, 96f
of radial artery, 93, 94f
right internal jugular, Seldinger’s 
technique of, 100, 101, 102f
selection of artery for, 92–93
subclavian and internal jugular veins, 
100, 101f
Capnograph, 128f
Capnography, 125–127, 775
clinical considerations, 127
diverting (sidestream) capnographs, 
126–127
indications & contraindications, 125
nondiverting (mainstream) 
capnographs, 126
techniques & complications, 125–127
Caput medusae, 713
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
absorbent, 36–39, 38f
absorber, 36–39, 38f
absorption spectrum for, 126
accumulation, 30
bicarbonate, 519
blood respiratory gases, transport of, 
518–520, 518t
carbamino compounds, 519
dissociation curve, 519–520, 520f
dissolved carbon dioxide, 518
hemoglobin buff ering eff ect on 
transport, 519, 519t
in medical gas systems, 13
stores in, 520
Carbon dioxide tension
alveolar tension, 513–514, 514f
arterial tension, 514
end-tidal tension, 514
mixed venous tension, 513
pulmonary end-capillary tension, 514
Carbon–fl uoride bonds, 167
Carbonic anhydrase, 519
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 648–649
alkalinization of urine, 648
correction of metabolic alkalosis in 
edematous patients, 648
intravenous dosage, 649
reduction of intraocular pressure, 648
side eff ects, 649
Carbon monoxide
poisoning, 171, 1307
Carboprost tromethamine, 836
Carboxyhemoglobin (COHb), 125
Carcinoid syndrome, 743
principal mediators of, 743t
Cardiac action potentials, 344–345, 
346f, 347t
Cardiac compressions, 873
Cardiac contraction, mechanism of, 
104, 104f
Cardiac cycle, 350–351, 350f, 364f
Cardiac function
echocardiographic examination 
of, 714
Cardiac impulse
initiation & conduction, 345–348
Cardiac ion channels, 347t
Cardiac manifestations, 1129
Cardiac muscarinic receptors, 349
Cardiac output (CO), 97, 109–120, 177
dye dilution, 112–113
echocardiography, 114–120
esophageal Doppler, 113–114
Fick principle, 114
indications of, 109
pulse contour devices, 113
techniques & complications, 110–120
thermodilution, 110–112
thoracic bioimpedance, 114
Cardiac resynchronizaton therapy 
(CRT), 402
functional benefi ts of, 402t
Cardiac rhythm management device 
(CRMD), 20
Cardiac risk stratifi cation, 379t
Cardiac surgery, 443–468. See also 
Cardiovascular surgery; 
specifi c surgeries
anesthetic management of
in adults, 443–468
bypass period in, 458–462
anesthesia in, 461
cerebral protection in, 461–462
fl ow & pressure in, 458
hypothermia and coagulation in, 
459–460
initiation in, 458
monitoring in, 458–459
respiratory gas management in, 
460–461
ventilation in, 460
postbypass period in, 466–468
anesthesia in, 467–468
anticoagulation, reversal of, 
466–467
persistent bleeding in, 467
transportation in, 468
postoperative period in, 468
prebypass period in, 456–458
anticoagulation in, 456–457
bleeding prophylaxis, 457
cannulation, 457
preinduction period in, 444–456
anesthetic agents in, 454–456
“high-dose” opioid 
anesthesia, 454
mixed intravenous/inhalation 
anesthesia, 455
muscle relaxation, 455–456
total intravenous anesthesia 
(TIVA), 454–455
induction in, 453–454
monitoring in, 444–453
arterial blood pressure, 444–445
central venous and pulmonary 
artery pressure, 445
electrocardiography, 444
electroencephalography, 
452–453
laboratory parameters, 446
surgical fi eld, 446
temperature, 445
transcranial Doppler (TCD), 453
transesophageal 
echocardiography, 446–452
urinary output, 445
premedication in, 444
preparation in, 444
venous access in, 444
termination of bypass in, 462–466
hemodynamic subgroups, 463t
weaning in, 463–466
1338 
INDEX
Cardiac transplantation, 472–476
anesthetic management in, 473–474
pericardial disease in, 474–476
preoperative considerations in, 472–473
Cardioplegia pump, 439
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), 566
pumps, 437
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR), 1231
airway, 1232–1237
adult emergency cardiac care, 
universal algorithm for, 1233t
basic life support techniques, 1236t
consciousness, loss of, 1235f
Heimlich maneuver, 1236f
asystole, 1251f
bradycardia algorithm, 1252f
breathing, 1237–1239
catheter and withdraw, 1238f
percutaneous cricothyrotomy, 1238f
puncture, membrane, 1238f
transtracheal jet ventilation aft er 
cricothyrotomy, 1239f
cardiovascular eff ects, 1245t–1248t
case studies, 1254–1255
circulation, 1239–1241
chest compression, 1240–1241
defi brillation, 1241–1249
arrhythmia recognition, 1243
drug administration, 1243–1249
emergency pacemaker therapy, 1249
intravenous access, 1242–1243
invasive cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 1242
emergency cardiac care (ECC), 1232t
pulseless electrical activity 
algorithm, 1250f
recommended resuscitation protocols, 
1249–1253
synchronized cardioversion, steps, 1249t
tachycardia overview algorithm, 1253f
ventricular fi brillation/pulseless 
ventricular tachycardia (VF/VT)
treatment algorithm, 1244f
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiac care 
(CPR-ECC), 1231
Cardiotomy suction pump, 439
Cardiovascular diseases, anesthesia 
with, 375–433, 908
cardiac conditions for, 377t
case discussion on, 429–433
congenital heart disease, 422–428
energy requirements for, 378t
noncardiac surgery, perioperative 
evaluation and preparation, 
377–405
transplanted heart, patient with, 
428–429
valvular heart disease, 405–422
Cardiovascular monitors, 87–122
arterial blood pressure, 87–97 
(See also Blood pressure 
monitoring, arterial)
cardiac output, 109–120
case discussion on, 121
central venous catheterization, 99–104
electrocardiography, 97–100, 99f
pulmonary artery catheterization, 
104–109, 105f, 107f, 108t, 109t 
(See also Pulmonary artery 
catheterization)
Cardiovascular physiology
circulation in, 358–365 (See also 
Circulation, systemic)
coronary circulation in, 362–365
Cardiovascular receptors, 227
Cardiovascular surgery
anesthesia for, 435–485
cardiac surgery, 443–468 (See also 
Cardiac surgery)
cardiac transplantation, 472–476
cardiopulmonary bypass, 
437–443
basic circuit in, 437–440
accessory pumps & devices, 
439–440
arterial fi lter, 439
heat exchanger, 438
main pump, 438–439
oxygenator, 438
reservoir, 438
hypothermia in, systemic, 440
myocardial preservation in, 
440–442
potassium cardioplegia in, 
441–442
physiological eff ects of, 442–443
eff ects on pharmacokinetics, 443
hormonal, humoral, & 
immunological responses, 
442–443
cardioversion in, case discussion on, 
483–485
off -pump coronary artery bypass 
surgery, 468–472 (See also 
Coronary artery bypass 
surgery, off -pump)
with pericardial disease, 474–476
vascular surgery, 476–483 (See also 
Vascular surgery)
Cardioversion, case discussion on, 
483–485
Carina, 312f
Carotid artery surgery, 481–483
general anesthesia, 482–483
monitoring cerebral function, 483
preoperative anesthetic evaluation & 
management, 482
preoperative considerations, 481–482
regional anesthesia, 483
Carotid endarterectomy (CEA), 588
Carvedilol, 251
Catabolism, 701
Catheter
balloon-tipped pulmonary artery 
fl otation (Swan–Ganz), 
105, 105f
central venous, monitoring with, 100, 
101t, 103, 104f
vs. ECG tracing, 104f
pulmonary artery catheters, 106, 107f
Catheterization, 137
Catheter–tubing–transducer system, 
95, 95f
Caudal anesthesia, 964–966
Caudal block, 964, 965
Caudal injection, 1077
Cefazolin, prophylactic antibiotic 
therapy, 676
Celiac plexus block, 1073, 1074f
anatomy, 1073, 1074f
complication, 1074
indications, 1073
technique, 1074
Central nervous system (CNS), 
154, 579
degree, 178
depression, 1149
Central venous cannulation, 687
Central venous catheterization, 100–104
clinical considerations, 103–104
indications & contraindications, 100
relative rating of, 101t
techniques & complications, 100–103
Central venous pressure (CVP), 419, 
558, 720
monitoring, 1163
Centrifugal pumps, 438–439
Centrilobular vein, 691, 692f
Cerebral aneurysms, craniotomy and 
anesthesia for, 604–607
intraoperative management in, 
606–607
preoperative considerations in, 604
preoperative management in, 606
ruptured aneurysms in, 604–605
unruptured aneurysms in, 604
Cerebral autoregulation, 615f
curve, 577f
dose-dependent depression of, 582f
 
INDEX 
1339 
Cerebral blood fl ow (CBF), 159, 
576–577, 594
arterial respiratory gas tensions 
and, 578f
autoregulation, 577–578
cerebral perfusion pressure 
(CPP), 577
extrinsic mechanisms, 578–579
regulation of, 577–579
Cerebral circulation, 590f
Cerebral edema, 594
Cerebral metabolic rate (CMR), 576
Cerebral metabolism, 576
Cerebral oxygen consumption 
(CMRO2), 165
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 178, 
595, 720
Cerebral physiology, 576–581
anesthetic agents on, 581–586, 581t
inhalation, 582–583
nitrous oxide, 583
volatile anesthetics, 582–583
intravenous
anesthetic adjuncts, 584
induction agents, 583–584
neuromuscular blockers 
(NMBs), 586
vasodilators, 585–586
vasopressors, 584–585
Cerebral receptors, 227
Cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF), 154, 575, 
579–580, 580f, 943
Cerebrovascular disease
intracranial mass lesions, 615–616
intraoperative management, 614–615
preoperative considerations, 613–614
preoperative management, 614
Cervical medial branch blockade
fl uoroscopic image of, 1070f
Cervical pain, 1046
Cervical paravertebral nerve blocks, 
1066, 1067f
anatomy, 1066
complications, 1066–1067
technique, 1066
Cervical spine, 796f
injury, 807
Cervicothoracic block, 1072
anatomy, 1072
complications, 1072–1073
indications, 1072
paratracheal technique, 1072
Cesarean section, 835t, 856
indications for, 855t
Chemical incompatibility
due to atracurium, 216
Chest compressions force, 1240
Chloroform
anesthetic properties, 5
history of, 2
Cholestasis, 709
Cholinergic antagonists, 233
Cholinergic receptors, 224
Cholinesterase inhibitors
clinical use, 224
dose of, 229t
Chromogranin A, 743
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), 534–537
signs and symptoms of, 535t
treatment for, 536
Chronic pain management, 1025
acute pain, 1026
somatic pain, 1026
visceral pain, 1027
chronic pain, 1027
defi nitions, 1025
terms used in, 1026t
Circle system, 36–40, 36t, 37f
bacterial contamination, 40
carbon dioxide absorber and 
absorbent, 36–39, 38f
components of, 36–39
dead space, 40
disadvantages of, 40
fresh gas requirement, 40
humidity and heat conservation, 40
optimization of, 39–40
performance characteristics of, 40
resistance, 40
unidirectional valves, 39, 39f
Circuit pressure, 68
Circulation
coronary, 362–365
anatomy im, 362
coronary perfusion in, 362–363
myocardial oxygen balance in, 
364–365
renal, 639–641, 640f
systemic, 358–365
arterial blood pressure in, 360–362
autonomic control of systemic 
vasculature in, 360
autoregulation of, 359
endothelium-derived factors, 
359–360
Circulatory steal phenomenon, 582
Circulatory system, 344
Circumfl ex artery (CX), 362
Cirrhosis, 708
Cirrhotic liver, 717
Cisatracurium, 216–217, 659
dosage, 217
metabolism & excretion, 217
physical structure, 216
side eff ects & clinical 
considerations, 217
Clark electrode, 66
Clevidipine, 386, 390, 740
Clonidine (catapres, duraclon), 246, 
287–288
clinical uses, 287
dosage, 287–288
drug interactions, 288
mechanism of action, 287
side eff ects, 287
Clopidogrel, 299
Coagulopathy, 720
Cocaine
cardiovascular reactions, 274
induced arrhythmias, 274
Color-fl ow Doppler, 412
Combination therapy, 392
Combined spinal–epidural (CSE) 
analgesia, 835
Combitube, 320f
Communication
crew resource management (CRM), 25
Compartment models, 147–149
Compartment syndromes, 1215
Compensatory mechanisms, in heart 
failure, 367–368
Complex regional pain syndrome 
(CRPS), 1048
Computed tomography (CT), 595
Computer-assisted surgery (CAS), 797
Concentrating eff ect, 158
Concentration-response relationship, 149
Conductive gel, 98
Congenital abnormalities, 1046–1047
Congental heart disease (CHD), 422–428
anesthetic management, 423
atrial septal defects (ASDs), 424–425
atrioventricular septal defects, 425
classifi cation of, 422t
hypoplastic left  heart syndrome, 
427–428
obstructive lesions, 424
partial anomalous venous return, 426
patent ductus arteriosus, 425–426
in patients, 422t
perioperative risk for, 423t
predominantly left -to-right (simple) 
shunts, 424–426
predominantly right-to-left  (complex) 
shunts, 426–428
preoperative considerations, 422–423
pulmonic stenosis, 424
survivors of surgery, 423t
tetralogy of fallot, 426–427
transposition of great arteries, 427
1340 
INDEX
Congental heart disease (CHD) (Cont.)
tricuspid atresia, 427
truncus arteriosus, 427
ventricular septal defect (VSD), 425
Connecting segment, 637
Constant-fl ow generators, 73
Constant-pressure generators, 73
Constant-pressure variable orifi ce 
fl owmeters, 57f
Consultant opinions, 923t
Continuous peripheral nerve blocks 
(CPNBs), 1095
Continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP), 32, 741, 1298, 1299
delivery system, 558
end-expiratory pressure, 1299
vs. PEEP, 1299
adverse nonpulmonary eff ects, 
1300–1301
optimum use of, 1301
pulmonary eff ects of, 1299–1300
Continuous pressure technique, 850f
Continuous renal replacement therapy 
(CRRT), 663
Continuous spinal anesthesia, 856
Continuous venovenous hemodialysis 
(CVVHD), 720
Continuous-wave Doppler, 450f
Contraction mechanism, 348–349
Copper kettle vaporizer, 60–61, 61f
schematic of, 61f
Coronary arteries
anatomy of, 363f
angiographic views of, 452f
to right and left  ventricles, 363f
supply of left  and right ventricles 
in, 453f
Coronary artery bypass surgery, off -
pump, 437f, 468–472
cardiopulmonary bypass in, 471–472
in children, 469–472
induction in, 470–471
hemodynamic anesthetic goals, 470
monitoring, 470–471
route of, 471
venous access in, 471
maintenance in, 471
postbypass period in, 472
preinduction period in, 470
fasting requirements in, 470
premedication in, 470
preoperative evaluation in, 469–470
Coronary artery disease (CAD), 379
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), 1118
Countercurrent multiplier mechanism, 
636, 637f
COX-1 inhibition
classical complication, 198
COX inhibitors, 197, 1054
Cranial computerized tomography (CCT)
Fisher grading scale of, 605t
Craniotomy, for mass lesions, 595–597
emergence in, 597
induction in, 596
intraoperative management of, 
595–597
maintenance of anesthesia in, 597
monitoring in, 595–596
positioning in, 596
premedication in, 595
preoperative management of, 595
Crew resource management (CRM), 25
assertiveness, 25
principles of, 25
Cricothyroid membrane (CTM), 312
Cricothyrotomy, 332, 1237
Critical care
ambient oxygen therapy 
equipment, 1282
brain death, 1280
economic/ethical/legal issues, 
1278–1279
ethical/legal issues, 1279–1280
medicine, 1278
Critical volume hypothesis, 160
Cryoanalgesia, 1079
Crystalloid proponents, 1163
Cuff  defl ation, 791
Curare (d-tubocurarine), 659–660
Curvilinear probe, 979f
Cushing’s Disease, 280
Cyanide toxicity, 1307
acute, 258
Cyanmethemoglobin, 258
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), 279, 349, 531
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate 
(cGMP), 257, 349, 531
Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors, 189
drug interactions, 196
eff ects on organ systems, 194–196
cardiovascular, 197
gastrointestinal, 198
respiratory, 198
mechanisms of action, 196–197
pharmacokinetics, 197
absorption, 197
biotransformation, 197
distribution, 197
excretion, 197
structure–activity relationships, 197
Cyclooxygenase (COX) pathway, 1035
Cylinder inlet regulator, 53f
Cyproheptadine, 280
L-Cysteine, 231
Cystic fi brosis, 904
Cytochrome P-450 (CYP) enzymes, 154, 
193, 696
mixed-function oxidases, 281
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 1174
D
Damage control surgery (DCS), 815
Datex-Ohmeda balance regulator, 55f
D1-dopamine receptors, 260
Dead space, 40
Death, cause of, 928f
Deceleration time (DT), 358
Decreased diff usion lung capacity 
(DLCO), 535
Deep brain stimulation (DBS), 1082
Deep somatic pain, 1026
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT), 540t, 792
Degenerative and demyelinating 
diseases, 618–623. See also 
Specifi c diseases
Delivery
spinal opioid dosages for, 848t
Deoxygenated hemoglobin absorb 
light, 136
Deoxyhemoglobin, 124
Depolarizing muscle relaxants, 205–211
evoked responses, 205t
succinylcholine, 205–211
Depression, 624–625
atypical antidepressants and 
selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors, 625
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 
624–625
tricyclic antidepressants, 624
Dermal analgesia, 270
Desfl urane, 588
biotransformation & toxicity, 171
clinical pharmacology of, 157f, 170–171
contraindications, 171
drug interactions, 171
eff ects on organ systems
cardiovascular, 170
cerebral, 170–171
hepatic, 171
neuromuscular, 171
renal, 171
respiratory, 170
history of, 3
physical properties of, 170
vapor, 63
vaporizer, 63
Dexamethasone (decadron), 285, 1264
Dexmedetomidine (precedex), 246, 
288, 331
clinical uses, 288
dosage, 288
drug interactions, 288
 
INDEX 
1341 
mechanism of action, 288
side eff ects, 288
Dextran, 1165
Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial, 298
Diabetes insipidus, 604, 1115
Diabetes mellitus, 728
diagnosis and classifi cation, 729t
perioperative insulin 
management, 731t
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy, 730
clinical signs of, 730t
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 728
Diabetic neuropathy, 1048
Diabetic renal dysfunction, 730
Diacetylcholine. See Succinylcholine
Dialysis
indications for, 663t
Diameter index safety system 
(DISS), 51
3,4-Diaminopyridine (DAP), 751
Diaphragmatic herniation, 899
Diarrhea, 1196
Diastolic blood pressure (DBP), 87
Diastolic dysfunction, 909
Diastolic function, assessment of, 358
Diastolic ventricular dysfunction, 405
Diazepam
uses and doses of, 180t
Dibucaine number, 207
Diethylbarbituric acid, 4
Diff use neuronal injury, 816
Diff usion hypoxia, 159
Diff usion lung capacity for carbon 
monoxide (DLCO), 556
Digital nerve blocks, 999
Dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers, 261
Dilutional hyperchloremic acidosis, 1153
Diphenhydramine (ethanolamine), 
279, 619
Direct and indirect laryngoscopy 
& intubation techniques, 
325–331
direct laryngoscopy, preparation for, 
325–327
intubation, indications for, 325
nasotracheal intubation, 330–331
orotracheal intubation, 327–330
Direct myocardial depressant, 183
Discharge criteria, 926–927
Discography, 1044
Disequilibrium syndrome, 661
Dissection/preanhepatic phase, 720
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC), 862, 867, 1187, 1318
Dissociative anesthesia, 182
Distribution, 144–146
Diuretics, 645–649
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 648–649
alkalinization of urine, 648
correction of metabolic alkalosis in 
edematous patients, 648
intravenous dosage, 649
reduction of intraocular pressure, 648
side eff ects, 649
loop diuretics, 646–647
edematous states (sodium 
overload), 646
evaluation of acute oliguria, 646
hypercalcemia, treatment of, 646
hypertension, 646
hyponatremia, rapid correction 
of, 646
intravenous dosages, 646
oliguric kidney failure to 
nonoliguric failure, conversion 
of, 646
side eff ects, 647
osmotic diuretics (mannitol), 645–646
acute oliguria, evaluation of, 645
acute reduction of intracranial 
pressure & cerebral edema, 645
acute reduction of intraocular 
pressure in the perioperative 
period, 645
intravenous dosage, 645
prophylaxis against acute kidney 
injury in high-risk patients, 645
side eff ects, 645–646
potassium-sparing diuretics, 647–648
aldosterone antagonists 
(spironolactone & 
eplerenone), 648
noncompetitive potassium-sparing 
diuretics, 648
therapy, 1155
thiazide & thiazide-like diuretics, 647
edematous disorders (sodium 
overload), 647
hypercalciuria, 647
hypertension, 647
intravenous dosages, 647
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 647
side eff ects, 647
Diverting (sidestream) capnographs, 
126–127
DNA
synthesis, 166
Dobutamine, 248
clinical considerations, 248
dosing & packaging, 248
Documentation, 301–305
American Society of Anesthesiologists’ 
physical status 
classifi cation, 297t
anesthetic plan, 296t
intraoperative anesthesia record in, 
301–304, 303f
postoperative notes in, 304, 305t
preoperative note in, 301, 302f
Do Not Resuscitate (DNR), 1279
Dopamine, 247–248
clinical considerations, 247–248
dosing & packaging, 248
Dopamine (DA) receptors, 243
Dopexamine, 248
clinical considerations, 248
dosing & packaging, 248
Doppler device, 114
Doppler echocardiography, 358f, 409
Doppler eff ect, 89
Doppler principle, 119
Doppler probe, for arterial blood 
pressure monitoring, 
88–90, 90f
Doppler technology, 89
Dorsal column stimulation, 1081
Dorsalis pedis artery, blood pressure 
monitoring via, 93
Dorsolateral funiculus, 1037
Dose–response relationship, 
149, 149f
Double-burst stimulation (DBS), 
139, 204
Double-circuit design ventilators, 77
Double-circuit system, 75
design, 76
Double-lumen tubes
characteristics, 549
Down syndrome, 903–904
Doxacurium, 219
Doxapram (dopram), 288–289
clinical uses, 288
dosage, 289
drug interactions, 289
mechanism of action, 288
side eff ects, 288–289
Dräger oxygen failure protection device 
(OFPD), 54f
Draw-over anesthesia, 31–32, 
32f, 32t
properties, 32t
Droperidol, 584, 1190
Drugs
classes of, 278
molecules, 145
receptors, 151
toxicity, complications of, 972
Dual air–oxygen fl ow meters, 1286
Duloxetine, 1055
Duragesic patch, 1060
Dye dilution, 112–113
Dye indicator curve, 112
1342 
INDEX
E
Ear surgery
intraoperative management
facial nerve identifi  cation, 784
hemostasis, 784
nausea/vomiting, 784
nitrous oxide, 784
postoperative vertigo, 784
oral surgical procedures, 784–785
Eaton–Lambert myasthenic 
syndrome, 202
Echocardiography, 114–120, 115, 
116, 116f, 909
Echo probe, 117f
Echothiophate, 762
Edrophonium, 229–230
clinical considerations, 229
dosage & packaging, 230
molecular structures, 228f
physical structure, 229
Ejection fraction (EF), 356–358
Electrical safety
electrical shock protection in, 17–19, 18f
electrocution risk in, 17
isolation transformer and monitor, 
circuit diagram, 19f, 20f
line isolation monitor, 21f
surgical diathermy in, 19–22
Electric potential, 129
Electrocardiograms (ECGs), 123, 730
Electrocardiography (ECG), 97–100, 
100f, 103f
during cardiac surgery, 100f
clinical considerations, 98–100
indications & contraindications, 97
techniques & complications, 98
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 624
Electrode
ECG, silver chloride, 98, 98f
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 129, 130, 
169, 178, 195
Electroencephalography (EEG), 129–134
clinical considerations, 130–134
indications & contraindications, 129
techniques & complications, 129–130
Electrolyte disorders, 397
Electrolyte disturbances, 1107
extracellular fl uid, 1109
fl uid compartments, 1108–1109
interstitial fl uid, 1110
intracellular fl uid, 1109
intravascular fl uid, 1110
nomenclature of solutions, 1108
molarity/molality/equivalency, 1108
osmolality, 1108
osmosis, 1108
tonicity, 1108
Electromyography, 598, 1040
Electronic Datex-Ohmeda Aladin 
vaporizer, 63f
schematic of, 63f
Electronic fl ow
control and measurement in, 59f
meters, 54
Electronic medical equipment, 17
Electronic sensor, 68
Electronic vaporizers, 63–64
Aladin cassette vaporizer, 63–64
desfl urane vaporizer, 63
Electrosurgical burn, 20f
Electrosurgical units (ESUs), 19, 20
Emergency cardiac care (ECC), 1232
Emergency (E-cylinder) cylinder
of oxygen, 11, 12t
Emesis, 764
Emphysema, 535–536
Employee identifi cation (ID) badges, 27
Encephalitis, 624
End-diastolic point (EDP), 356
Endocarditis
prophylaxis for dental procedures, 419t
regimens for dental procedure, 420t
Endocrine disease
adrenal gland, 738
catecholamine excess, 740–741
glucocorticoid defi ciency, 739–740
glucocorticoid excess, 739
mineralocorticoid defi ciency, 739
mineralocorticoid excess
anesthetic considerations, 
738–739
clinical manifestations, 738
physiology, 738
carcinoid syndrome, 743–744
case discussion, 744
obesity, 741–743
pancreas
diabetes mellitus, 728–733
physiology, 728
parathyroid glands
hyperparathyroidism, 736–737
hypoparathyroidism, 737–738
physiology, 736
thyroid
hyperthyroidism, 733–735
hypothyroidism, 735–736
physiology, 733
Endoscopy, 774
intraoperative management, 774–776
laser precautions, 776–777
preoperative considerations, 774
sinus surgery, orbital fracture, 778f
Endothelium-derived factors, 359–360. 
See also Specifi c factors
Endothelium-derived relaxing factor, 257
Endotracheal intubation, 320–322
fl exible fi beroptic bronchoscopes, 
324–325
tracheal tubes, 320–322
Endotracheal tube, 783f
End-plate depolarization, 203
End-plate receptors, 202
End-stage renal disease (ESRD), 
660–661, 662
End-systolic point (ESP), 356
Energy-consuming sodium–potassium 
pump, 264
Enhanced recovery aft er surgery 
(ERAS), 1088
Enhanced recovery programs (ERPs)
anesthetic management–related 
factors, 1090
evolution of, 1088
implementation, 1103–1104
intraoperative period, 1092
antibiotic prophylaxis, 1092
antithrombotic prophylaxis, 1092
surgical stress response, 1092–1096
perioperative elements, 1089f
preoperative period
food/fl uid intake, guidelines, 1092
patient education, 1090
risk assessment, 1090–1091
smoking/alcohol cessation, 
1091–1092
Enteral nutrition (EN), 1193
infusion, 1197
Enterohepatic recirculation, 147
Enzymatic pathways, 694
Ephedrine, 247
clinical considerations, 247
dosing & packaging, 247
Epidural anesthesia, 953, 958
activating, 961–962
catheters, 959–960
epidural agent, 962–963
factors aff ecting level, 962
failed epidural blocks, 963–964
local anesthetic pH adjustment, 963
needles, 959
specifi c techniques, 960–961
Epidural blockade, 1080t
Epidural catheters, 959
optimal regions, 1094f
Epidural hematoma, 816
Epidural injection, 1077f
Epidural morphine, 857
Epidural needle
angulation of, 960f
Epidural steroid injections, 1076
Epiglottitis, acute, 902
 
INDEX 
1343 
Epinephrine, 246, 874, 946
clinical considerations, 246
dosing & packaging, 246
eye drops, 763
synthesis, 243f
Eplerenone, 648
Epstein–Barr virus, 1174
Equi-analgesic doses, 851
Esmolol, 250
Esophageal Doppler, 113–114
Esophageal perforations, 1212
Esophageal stethoscopes, 123–124, 124f
contraindications in, 123
indications in, 123
techniques & complications, 123–124
Esophageal surgery, 570–571
anesthetic considerations, 571
preoperative considerations, 570–571
Esophageal–tracheal Combitube 
(ETC), 1236
design & technique, 320
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
(EDTA), 962
Etomidate, 184–185, 583–584, 658, 1190
doses of, 183t
drug interactions, 185
eff ects on organ systems, 185
cardiovascular, 185
cerebral, 185
endocrine, 185
respiratory, 185
mechanisms of action, 184
pharmacokinetics, 184–185
absorption, 184
biotransformation, 185
distribution, 184–185
excretion, 185
structure–activity relationships, 184
structures of, 182f
Eutectic mixture of local anesthetic 
(EMLA) cream, 175
Evoked potentials (EPs), 134–136
clinical considerations, 135–136
indications & contraindications, 134
motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), 134
somatosensory-evoked potentials 
(SEPs), 134
techniques & complications, 134–135
Excitation–contraction coupling
in heart, 348–349
Excretion, 147
Exponential decay time (EDT), 110
Exposure–response relationships, 
149–150
Extraction
ratio, 146
Extravascular lung water (EVLW), 110
Extubation techniques, 333–334
Eye surgery, 764
F
Face mask
clear adult face mask, 315f
design & technique, 315–316
Rendell–Baker–Soucek pediatric, 315f
use of, 315
Facet syndrome, 1046
Facial nerve block
anatomy, 1064
complications, 1064
indications, 1064
techniques, 766f, 767
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, 753
Fascia iliaca block, 1005f
Fast-track surgery programs, 1093t
Fat embolism syndrome, 792
Femoral artery, blood pressure 
monitoring via, 93
Femoral block
provides sensory innervation, 1002f
using nerve stimulation, 1003f
Femoral nerve
provides sensory innervation, 1002f
Femoral nerve blocks, 1001
ultrasound, 1004f
Femoroacetabular impingement 
(FAI), 798
Fenoldopam, 248–249, 260–261
clinical considerations, 248
clinical uses, 260
dosing & packaging, 249
eff ects on organ systems, 261
mechanism of action, 260
metabolism, 260–261
Fentanyl, 4, 186, 851, 897. See also 
Opioids
Fetal circulation
before and aft er birth, 837f
Fetal distress, signs of, 860t
Fetal heart rate (FHR)
monitoring of, 868
periodic changes in, 869f
Fetal/neonatal circulation
schematic comparison of, 838f
Fetal/neonatal resuscitation, 868
Fetal physiology, 836–839
Fetal resuscitation
accelerations, 868
baseline heart rate, 868
baseline variability, 868
deceleration patterns, 868–870
fetus, treatment, 870
monitoring of fetal heart rate 
(FHR), 868
Fetus, at birth
physiological transition, 839
Fiberoptic bronchoscope, 331f
cross section of, 325f
Fiberoptic intubation (FOI), 330
Fick principle, 114
Field block targets terminal cutaneous 
nerves, 978f
Filtration fraction (FF), 640
Fires
crew resource management, 25–26
extinguishers, 24
laser safety, 24
operating rooms, 22, 22t
future design of, 26–27
radio frequency identifi cation 
(RFID) technology, 26–27
safety interlock technology, 26
workfl ow design, 26
prevention & preparation, 22–24
tracheal tube, 22t
Fish oil, 1196
Flow control circuits, 52–64
common (fresh) gas outlet, 64
fl ow valves & meters, 54–60
oxygen supply failure protection 
devices, 52–54
pressure regulator, 52
vaporizers, 60–64
Flowmeters, 55
malfunction, 55
sequence of, 57f
Flow valves & meters, 54–60
minimum oxygen fl ow, 58
oxygen/nitrous oxide ratio 
controller, 58–60
Flow–volume loops, 565f
Fluid and electrolyte disorders, 616t
Fluid disturbances, 1107
calcium balance, disorders of 
(See Calcium balance, 
disorders)
fl uid compartments, exchange, 1110
diff usion through capillary 
endothelium, 1111
diff usion through cell membranes, 
1110–1111
hyperosmolality/hypernatremia
anesthetic considerations, 1117, 
1120
central diabetes insipidus, 1115
clinical manifestations, 1116, 
1118–1119
increased total body sodium 
content, 1116, 1118
low total body sodium content, 
1114–1115, 1117–1118
1344 
INDEX
Fluid disturbances (Cont.)
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 1115
normal total body sodium content, 
1115, 1118
treatment of, 1116–1117, 1119–1120
magnesium balance, disorders of (See 
Magnesium balance, disorders)
phosphorus balance, disorders of (See 
Phosphorus balance, disorders)
plasma osmolality, control of, 1114
antidiuretic hormone, nonosmotic 
release, 1114
antidiuretic hormone 
secretion, 1114
thirst, 1114
potassium balance, disorders of (See 
Potassium balance, disorders)
sodium balance, disorders of (See 
Sodium balance, disorders)
water balance, disorders of, 1111
normal water balance, 1111
plasma sodium concentration, 
1111–1114
Fluid management, 1161–1180
Fluid resuscitation, 820
Flumazenil, 179, 1260
clinical uses, 290
dosage, 290
drug interactions, 290
mechanism of action, 290
side eff ects, 290
Fluoroscopic procedures
ionizing radiation, in operating rooms, 
16–17
Fluoroscopy, 1061
Focused assessment with sonography for 
trauma (FAST), 813
Foley catheter, 137, 138
Foot, cutaneous innervation of, 1015f
Forced vital capacity (FVC), 501
Fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2), 14
Fresh gas
inlet, 34
outlet, 64
requirement, 40
Front-end kinetic models, 148
Front-line monitors, 123
Fuel cell, 127–128. See also Galvanic 
fuel cell
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 
316, 496–497, 528, 546, 827, 
878, 1281
body habitus, 497
diaphragmatic tone, 497
lung disease, 497
posture, 497
sex, 497
G
Galvanic fuel cell, 66, 127–128
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 618
activated chloride channel, 160
binding sites, 912
receptor system, 184
Ganglion impar block
anatomy, 1075
complications, 1076
indications, 1075
technique, 1075–1076
Gantacurium, 220
Gases
exchange, eff ects of anesthesia, 509–510
fl ow-control needle valve, 56f
reservoirs, 1284
vapor pressure, 60f
Gasserian ganglion, 1028
Gas supply
in anesthesia machines, 49–52
cylinder inlets, 51–52
pipeline inlets, 49–51
Gas systems, medical, 10–13
air, 13
carbon dioxide, 13
cylinders, characteristics of, 12t
nitrogen, 13
nitrous oxide, 12–13
oxygen, 10–12, 11f, 12f
vacuum system, 13
Gastric decompression, 8F tube, 872
Gastric distention, 899
Gastroesophageal refl ux disease (GERD), 
280, 299, 570, 828
history of, 299
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 1319
Gastrointestinal receptors, 227
Gauze-covered mask. See 
Schimmelbusch mask
Genitourinary surgery, 672
case discussion, 687–689
cystoscopy
intraoperative considerations
lithotomy position, 672–674
preoperative considerations, 672
lithotripsy, 677–679
prostate, transurethral resection of
intraoperative considerations, 
674–677
preoperative considerations, 674
renal transplantation, 686–687
upper ureter/kidney, noncancer 
surgery of, 679–680
urological malignancies, surgery for, 
680–686
Gentamicin, prophylactic antibiotic 
therapy, 676
Geriatric anesthesia, 907
age-related anatomic/physiological 
changes
cardiovascular system, 908–910
common diseases, 909t
gastrointestinal function, 911–912
metabolic/endocrine function, 911
musculoskeletal, 913
nervous system, 912–913
renal function, 911
respiratory system, 910–911
age-related pharmacological changes
inhalational anesthetics, 914
muscle relaxants, 915
nonvolatile anesthetic agents, 914–915
arterial oxygen tensions, 911f
case discussion, 915–916
delirium, prevention of, 914t
Doppler study of diastolic infl ow, 910f
elderly people and infants, 908t
predisposing/precipitating factors for 
delirium, 913t
Gerota’s fascia, 685
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, 
601, 602t
Gleason score of the biopsy, 681
Glidescope, 324f
Global-end diastolic volume (GEDV), 110
Global tissue hypoperfusion, 810
Glomerular fi ltration rate (GFR), 640, 655
Glossopharyngeal block, 1065f
anatomy, 1064
complications, 1064–1065
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 310
Glottic edema, 1267
Glucocorticoids, 532, 737, 738, 739
Gluconeogenesis, 695
Glucose homeostasis, 881
Glycopyrrolate, 774, 886
clinical considerations, 236
dosage & packaging, 236
physical structure, 236
G6PD defi ciency, 1180t
G proteins, 240
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), 1172
Granulocyte-macrophage colony- 
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 
1172
Granulocyte transfusions, 1171
Graphic and digital fl owmeter, 59f
Graves’ disease, 733
Great arteries
transposition of, 427
Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), 240
Guest–host complex, 231
Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), 621
 
INDEX 
1345 
H
Hagedorn, 731
Halothane
biotransformation & toxicity, 168
clinical pharmacology of, 167–169
contraindications, 168
drug interactions, 169
eff ects on organ systems
cardiovascular, 167
cerebral, 167
hepatic, 168
neuromuscular, 168
renal, 168
respiratory, 167
hepatitis, 168
hypoxic model, 168
physical properties of, 167
vaporizer, 63
vapor pressure of, 60
5-Hdroxytryptamine (5-HT)3 receptor 
antagonists, 284–285
clinical uses, 285
mechanism of action, 284–285
serotonin physiology, 284
cardiovascular, 284
gastrointestinal, 284
hematological, 284
respiratory, 284
side eff ects, 285
Headache, 1050–1051
classifi cation of, 1050t
cluster, 1051
migraine, 1051
temporal arteritis, 1051
tension, 1050
trigeminal neuralgia, 1051
Head injury
Glasgow Coma Scale, 815t
Head/neck cancer surgery
intraoperative management, 779–782
preoperative considerations, 778–779
Head trauma
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, 
601, 602t
surgery for, 601–604
diagnostic studies in, 603
hypotension in, 603
intraoperative management in, 
603–604
intubation in, 602–603
preoperative management in, 
602–603
Heart, 344–358
cardiac action potentials, 344–345
cardiac cycle in, 350–351
cardiac impulse, initiation & 
conduction, 345–348
innervation of, 349–350
Starling’s law, 353f
ventricular function in, assessment of, 
356–358
ventricular performance in, 351–356
Heart disease
New York Association functional 
classifi cation, 406t
pressure–volume loops in, 409f
Heart failure, 403–405
biventricular, 469
pathophysiology of, 365–368
therapy, stages in development, 404f
Heart murmurs
strategy for evaluation, 407f
Heart rate, 351. See also Arrhythmias
diastolic time and, 364f
Heat and moisture exchangers 
(HMEs), 892
functions, 71f
units, 71
Heat conservation, 40
Heimlich valve, 1269
Helicobacter pylori infection, 280
Helium–oxygen (heliox) mixtures, 1286
Hemiarthroplasty, 794
Hemodialysis
Complications of, 661t
Hemoglobin dissociation curve, 516
Hemolytic reactions, 1172
acute, 1172
delayed, 1172–1173
Hemoptysis, 408
Hemostatic resuscitation, 812
Henry’s law, 515
Heparin, 540
dose–response curve, 459f
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
(HIT), 456
Heparinization, 686
Hepatic artery, 693
Hepatic blood fl ow, 693f, 947
Hepatic encephalopathy, 716
Hepatic enzymes, 183
Hepatic function tests, 171
Hepatic physiology
bile, composition of, 698t
bile formation, 698
biliary system, 698f
case discussion, 701–706
coagulation factors, 698t
coagulation test abnormalities, 700t
drug metabolism, 696–698
functional anatomy, 691–692
hepatic blood fl ow, 692–693, 693f
hepatic function, anesthesia on, 700
metabolic functions, 701
hepatic lobule, 692f
hepatic venous compliance, 693f
hepatocytes, important metabolic 
pathways, 694f
intrinsic/extrinsic coagulation 
pathways, 697f
liver, metabolic functions of, 695f
liver tests, 698–700
abnormalities in, 699t
blood ammonia, 699
point-of-care viscoelastic 
coagulation monitoring, 700
prothrombin time, 700
serum albumin, 699
serum alkaline phosphatase, 699
serum aminotransferases, 699
serum bilirubin, 699
liver tests, abnormalities in, 699t
metabolic function, 694–696
postoperative jaundice
causes of, 701t
reservoir function, 693–694
thromboelastograph tracings, 700t
Hepatic surgery, 718–721
child’s classifi cation for, 713t
Hepatitis, 709
acute
drug-induced, 709–711
intraoperative considerations, 711
viral, 709
chronic, anesthetic management, 711
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), 709
hepatitis C, 1224
post-transfusion viral infections, 1174
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 714t
Hepatorenal syndrome, 716
Hering–Breuer infl ation refl ex, 522
Hicks contractions, 833
“High-dose” opioid anesthesia, 454
High-effi  ciency particulate fi lters 
(HEPA), 16
Hip arthroplasty
intraoperative management, 795–798
preoperative considerations, 795
Hip arthroscopy, 798
Hip dislocation, 798
Hip fracture
blood loss, 794f
intraoperative management, 793–794
preoperative considerations, 793
Histamine (H2 ) receptor, 275
Histamine-receptor antagonists, 278–281
H1-receptor antagonists, 279–280
H2-receptor antagonists, 280–281
physiology of, 278–279
cardiovascular, 279
dermal, 279
1346 
INDEX
Histamine-receptor antagonists (Cont.)
gastrointestinal, 279
immunological, 279
respiratory, 279
History, of Anesthesia, 2–6
inhalation, 2–3
intravenous anesthesia, 4–5
induction agents, 4
neuromuscular blocking agents, 4
opioids, 4–5
local & regional, 3
specialty, evolution of, 5–6
American origins, 5–6
British origins, 5
offi  cial recognition, 6
Hoarseness/inspiratory stridor, 795
Horner’s syndrome, 988, 1064
Hospital information systems, 49
Hot-wire anemometer, 68
H1-receptor antagonists, 279–280
clinical uses, 280
dosage, 280
drug interactions, 280
mechanism of action, 279–280
properties of, 279t
H2-receptor antagonists, 280–281
clinical uses, 280
dosage, 281
drug interactions, 281
mechanism of action, 280
side eff ects, 281
H2 -receptor blockers, 659
Humidifi ers, 71
active humidifi ers, 71
passive humidifi ers, 71
Humidity, 40
in operating rooms, 16
Hydralazine, 260
eff ects on organ systems, 260
Hydrochloric acid
secretion of, 278f
Hydrocortisone, 740
Hydromorphone, 684
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), 
284–285
Hyperammonemia, 675
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy, 1287
Hyperbaric solutions, 956
Hypercalcemia, 1261
Hyperechoic, 979
Hyperextended position, 680
Hyperextension, 673
Hyperglycemia, 731
chronic, 730
Hyperkalemia, 662
due to succinylcholine, 209–210
Hyperkalemic cardiac arrest, 209
Hyperkalemic paralysis, 756
Hypermagnesemia, 662, 1261
Hypernatremia, 1114
Hyperparathyroidism, 737t
Hypersensitivity reactions, type I, 1218
Hypertension, 380–381
acute treatment, parenteral agents 
for, 387t
complications of, 380
due to pancuronium, 217
intraoperative management, 385–386
anesthetic agents, choice of, 386
induction of, 385–386
monitoring, 385
objectives, 385
long-term treatment, 381
pathophysiology, 380–381
postoperative management, 387
during pregnancy, 864
preoperative management, 381–385
history of, 382–383
physical examination & laboratory 
evaluation, 383–385
premedication, 385
Hyperthermia, 136
Hyperthyroidism
medical treatment of, 733
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(HCM), 405
Hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy, 947
Hypertrophied interventricular 
septum, 405f
Hypervolemia, 1123
Hypoalbuminemia, 710
Hypoglycemia, 710, 729
Hypokalemia, 1124
neuromuscular eff ects of, 1126
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis, 756
Hypokinesis, 355
Hypomagnesemia, 385, 1136, 1137
Hypoparathyroidism, 734, 737, 737t
Hypoperfused tissues, 811
Hypophosphatemia, 1137
Hypoplastic left  heart syndrome, 
427–428
Hypotension, 362, 853
due to atracurium, 216
in head trauma surgery, 603
Hypotensive agents, 255–262. See also 
Specifi c agents
calcium antagonists, 260–261
case discussion on controlled 
hypotension, 261–262
diastolic pressure, 256f
fenoldopam, 260–261
hydralazine, 260
nitroglycerin, 259–260
nitrovasodilators, 257–260
non-nitrovasodilator hypotensive 
agents, 260–261
sodium nitroprusside, 257–259
Hypothermia, 136, 207, 587, 
1184–1185, 1264
deleterious eff ects, 1184
deleterious eff  ects, 1184t
diff erential diagnosis of, 1189
exacerbates, 755
multiple deleterious physiological 
eff ects, 1184
postoperative considerations, 1185
unintentional during general 
anesthesia, 1184f
Hypoventilation, 1268
Hypovolemia, 740
Hypoxemia, 1269
interventions, 560–561
Hypoxia, 839
acute
case discussion, 933–934
management of, 560–561
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction 
(HPV), 510, 549
I
Imidazobenzodiazepine. See Flumazenil
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 531
mediated allergic sensitivity, 1219f
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies, 748
Immunomodulating nutrients, 1196
Implantable cardioverter-defi brillators 
(ICDs), 924
Implanted cardioverter defi brillator
preoperative considerations, 924f, 925f
Indirect stimulatory eff ects, 183
Induction agents. See also Specifi c agents; 
specifi c agents
barbiturates, 583
benzodiazepines, 584
on cerebral physiology, 583–584
etomidate, 583–584
history of, 4
ketamine, 584, 585f
opioids, 583
propofol, 584
Induction technique, 596
Infectious croup, 902
Infraclavicular block, 989, 990f
coverage and anatomy, 990f
using nerve stimulation, 991f
Infraclavicular block coverage and 
anatomy, 990f
Infusion pumps, 982f
portable, 982f
 
INDEX 
1347 
Inhalational-based anesthetic, 1260
inhalation anesthesia. See Anesthetics, 
inhalation; specifi c agents
Inhibitory adrenergic pathways, 1036
Inotropic agents, 465t
Inspiratory concentration (FI)
of anesthetics inhalation, 154–155
Inspiratory-to-expiratory (I:E) ratio, 74
Insuffl  ation, 30–31, 30f, 31f
Insulin
bioavailability characteristics, 733t
eff ects of, 728t
Insulin stimulates anabolism, 728
Intensive care unit (ICU), 72
Intercostal nerve block
anatomy and needle positioning, 1019f
Intercostobrachial nerve, 978f
Intercostobrachial nerve block, 1000f
Intercostobrachial nerve cutaneous 
innervation, 1000f
Interleukins (IL), 1218
Intermittent mandatory ventilation 
(IMV), 75
Intermittent pneumatic compression 
(IPC), 792
Intermittent positive-pressure ventilation 
(IPPV), 31
Internal cardioverter-defi brillator (ICD), 
392, 678
International normalized ratio (INR), 
406, 793
International 10–20 system, 130f
Interscalene block, 984f
using nerve stimulation, 985f
Interventional pain therapy, 1053
acetaminophen, 1053
α2-adrenergic agonists, 1057
anticonvulsants, 1057
antidepressants, 1055
antispasmodics/muscle relaxants, 1056
botulinum toxin, 1060
corticosteroids, 1056–1057
local anesthetics, 1057
neuroleptics, 1056
nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), 1053–1055
opioids, 1057–1060
Intestines, malrotation of, 898
Intraaortic balloon pump (IABP), 464
counterpulsation, 464f
Intraarterial blood pressure 
monitoring, 866
Intracerebral microdialysis, 577
Intracoronary steal, 258
Intracranial hypertension, 593–595
cerebral edema, 594
treatment of, 594–595
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 577, 
580–581, 580f, 593, 816
monitoring, 721, 817t
Intraglomerular mesangial cells, 632
Intraocular pressure (IOP), 760
anesthetic agents, eff ect of, 761t
cardiac/respiratory variables, eff ect 
of, 760t
strategies to prevent, 768t
Intraoperative bronchospasm, 534
Intraoperative considerations, 924–925
Intraoperative fi beroptic bronchoscopy, 
333
Intraoperative hypertension, 194
Intraoperative nerve monitoring, 779
Intrapulmonary shunting, 497
Intrathecal morphine, 848
Intrathoracic blood volume (ITBV)., 111
Intrathoracic thermal volume 
(ITTV), 110
Intravenous anesthesia. See also specifi c 
agents; specifi c surgeries
history of, 4–5
induction agents, 4
neuromuscular blocking agents, 4
opioids, 4–5
Intravenous bisphosphonates 
pamidronate, 736
Intravenous fl uid therapy, 1163, 1243
colloid solutions, 1165–1166
crystalloid solutions, 1164–1165
Intravenous heparin, 298
Intravenous regional anesthesia, 1000f
Intravenous regional block, 1076
Intubation
complications of, 334t
conditions associated with, 336t
Invasive monitoring, 889
INVOS® near-infrared spectroscopy 
technique
principle, 136
Ionized (charged) drugs, 144
Ionizing radiation
in operating rooms, 16–17
radiation safety, principle of, 16
Iowa trumpet, 847
Ischemia
electrocardiographic signs of, 397f
Ischemic heart disease, 387–403
arrhythmias, pacemakers, and internal 
cardioverter-defi brillator 
management, 397–403
chronic stable angina, 388
intraoperative management, 395–396
objectives, 395–396
monitoring, 396–397
electrocardiography, 396
hemodynamic monitoring, 396
transesophageal echocardiography, 
396–397
preoperative considerations, 387–388
preoperative management, 392–395
coronary angiography, 394–395
echocardiography, 394
exercise electrocardiography, 394
history of, 392–393
Holter monitoring, 393
myocardial perfusions scans and 
imaging techniques, 394
physical examination & routine 
laboratory evaluation, 393
premedication, 395
specialized studies, 393–395
treatment of, 388–392
β-adrenergic blocking agents, 
390–391
calcium channel blockers, 389–390
combination therapy, 392
nitrates, 389
unstable angina, 388
Ischemic optic neuropathy (ION), 1216
Isofl urane
biotransformation & toxicity, 169
clinical pharmacology of, 169–170
contraindications, 169–170
drug interactions, 170
eff ects on organ systems
cardiovascular, 169
cerebral, 169
hepatic, 169
neuromuscular, 169
renal, 169
respiratory, 169
physical properties of, 169
Isolation transformer, 18, 19f
Isoproterenol, 248
J
Jugular venous bulb saturation, 136
Juxtamedullary nephrons, 635
K
Ketamine, 182–184, 426, 584, 585f, 658, 
734, 1190
doses of, 183t
drug interactions, 184
eff ects on organ systems, 183–184
cardiovascular, 183
cerebral, 184
respiratory, 183–184
mechanisms of action, 182
pharmacokinetics, 182–183
absorption, 182
biotransformation, 182–183
1348 
INDEX
Ketamine (Cont.)
distribution, 182
excretion, 183
structure–activity relationships, 182
structures of, 182f
Ketoacidosis, blood glucose, 729
Ketorolac, 286–287
clinical uses, 286
dosage, 286
drug interactions, 286
mechanism of action, 286
NSAID adjuvant drugs, 286–287
side eff ects, 286
Kidney
donor, 687
function, 880
Kidney disease, 653–668
anesthetic agents, 658–660
case discussion on, 666–668
kidney failure, 660–665
mild to moderate renal impairment, 
665–666
renal function evaluation, 655–658
Kidney failure, 480, 660–665
acute kidney failure, 660
management priorities in, 660t
anesthesia maintenance, 664–665
end-stage renal disease (ESRD), 
660–661
fl uid therapy, 665
induction, 664
intraoperative considerations, 
664–665
manifestations of, 661–663
cardiovascular, 662
endocrine, 662–663
gastrointestinal, 663
hematological, 662
metabolic, 661–662
neurological, 663
pulmonary, 662
uremia, 661t
monitoring, 664
premedication, 664
preoperative considerations, 660–664
preoperative evaluation, 663–664
King–Denborough syndrome, 
1186, 1187
King laryngeal tubes (LTs), 320, 320f
supralaryngeal device, 807, 807f
Knee arthroscopy
preoperative considerations, 798
Knee replacement, 799f
Knee surgery
intraoperative management, 798
postoperative pain management, 798
preoperative considerations, 798
L
Labor
anesthetic agents, 835
β2-adrenergic agonists, 836
ergot alkaloids, 836
inhalational agents, 835
magnesium, 836
oxytocin, 835–836
parenteral agents, 835
prostaglandins, 836
regional anesthesia, 835
vasopressors, 835
course of, 834f
physiology of, 833
maternal, 834–835
spinal opioid dosages for, 848t
Laerdal resuscitator, 41
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
(LEMS), 555, 751
Laparoscopic radical prostatectomy, 682
Laplace’s law, 354, 494
Laryngeal mask, 318f
insertion of, 319t
Laryngeal mask airway (LMA), 317, 
319t, 559, 857, 884, 920, 
1236, 1258
advantages and disadvantages, 319t
variations in design, 319
Laryngoscope, 322
blades, assortment of, 323f
rigid, 322f
Laryngoscopy
direct, 326
glottis, view of, 327f
indirect, varieties of, 323
Laryngoscopy and intubation, 
complications of, 334–336
airway instrumentation, physiological 
responses, 335–336
tracheal tube malfunction, 336
tracheal tube positioning, errors 
of, 335
Laryngospasm, 335, 336, 1267
Larynx
cartilaginous structures, 311f
laryngeal nerve injury, eff ects of, 312t
Laser airway surgery, 23
risk, 776
Laser endotracheal tube selection, 24
Laser precautions, 776
Lateral decubitus position, 546–547, 
546f, 547f
awake state, 546, 546f
induction of anesthesia, 546–547, 547f
positive-pressure ventilation, 547
Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve 
block, 1004f
Lateral spinothalamic, 1031
Lateral thoracotomy, 559f
Laudanosine toxicity
due to atracurium, 216
Leadership
crew resource management 
(CRM), 25
Leakage current, 17
LeFort I, diagrammatic representation, 
783f
LeFort osteotomies, 782
Left  anterior descending artery 
(LAD), 362
Left  ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
(LVEDP), 104, 354
Left  ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), 380
Left  ventricular outfl ow tract (LVOT), 
405, 417
Left  ventricular vent, 439
Leukocyte-depleted blood 
cardioplegia, 443
Leukotrienes, 1035
Levofl oxacin, prophylactic antibiotic 
therapy, 676
Leyden–Mobius dystrophies, 754
LiDCO™ system, 112
Lidocaine, 764, 856, 1096
Ligand-gated ion channels, 160
Light-emitting diode, 125
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, 754
Limbic encephalitis, 751
Lindegaard ratio, 605
Line isolation monitor, 18, 21f
electrical safety, 21f
Lipid-soluble barbiturates, 177
Lipid-soluble opioids, 192
Liquid oxygen storage system, 11, 12f
Lithotomy position, 673f
Lithotripsy, 678
Liver
abnormalities, 699
failure due to vecuronium, 218
metabolic functions of, 695f
Liver disease
cardiopulmonary dysfunction
diff erential diagnosis of, 714t
cirrhosis, 711–717
manifestations of, 712t
cirrhotic patient
hemodynamic and pathological 
changes, 714t
coagulation, 708
coagulation test abnormalities, 708t
drugs and substances, 710t
enzymatic pathways, 694
hepatic surgery, 718–721
child’s classifi cation for, 713t
 
INDEX 
1349 
hepatitis, 709
acute
drug-induced, 709–711
intraoperative considerations, 711
viral, 709
chronic, anesthetic management, 711
hepatopulmonary syndrome, 714t
liver transplantation, indications for, 
718t
Model for End-stage Liver Disease 
(MELD) score, 719, 719f
portopulmonary hypertension, clinical 
features of, 715t
Liver tests, 698–700
abnormalities in, 699t
blood ammonia, 699
point-of-care viscoelastic coagulation 
monitoring, 700
prothrombin time, 700
serum albumin, 699
serum alkaline phosphatase, 699
serum aminotransferases, 699
serum bilirubin, 699
Liver transplantation, 718, 720
contraindications, 719t
indications for, 718t
Local anesthetic deposition, 983f
Local anesthetic nerve blocks, 1060
Long-term antihypertensive therapy
adverse eff ects, 384t
Loop diuretics, 646–647
edematous states (sodium overload), 
646
evaluation of acute oliguria, 646
hypercalcemia, treatment of, 646
hypertension, 646
hyponatremia, rapid correction of, 646
intravenous dosages, 646
oliguric kidney failure to nonoliguric 
failure, conversion of, 646
side eff ects, 647
Lorazepam
uses and doses of, 180t
Low back pain syndromes, 1042
applied anatomy of, 1043
arthritides, 1047
bacterial infections, 1047
buttock pain, 1043–1044
cervical pain, 1046
congenital abnormalities, 1046–1047
degenerative disc disease, 1044
from facet syndrome, 1046
herniated/prolapsed intervertebral 
disc, 1044–1046
lumbar disc radiculopathies, 1045t
lumbosacral joint sprain/strain, 1043
paravertebral muscle, 1043
spinal stenosis, 1046
tumors, 1047
Low-dose intravenous ketamine, 847
Lower extremity peripheral nerve blocks
femoral nerve block, 1001–1004
lateral femoral cutaneous nerve 
block, 1004
lumbar/sacral plexus anatomy, 1001
obturator nerve block, 1006
posterior lumbar plexus, 1006–1009
Low-molecular-weight heparin 
(LMWH), 541, 849, 949
Low-pressure circuit leak test, 64
Lumbar epidural anesthesia, 942f
Lumbar epidural steroid injection, 1078f
Lumbar medial branch blockade, 
left , 1070f
Lumbar medial branch blocks
anatomy, 1068–1069
complications, 1069–1070
indications, 1068
technique, 1069
Lumbar nerve roots, 1008
Lumbar neuraxial anesthesia
awake/asleep, 949
Lumbar paravertebral nerve blocks, 1068
anatomy, 1068
complications, 1068
technique, 1068
Lumbar plexus, 1007f, 1008f
blocks, 1007f
Lumbar spinal nerve roots, 1043
Lumbar sympathetic block, 1074, 1075f
anatomy, 1074
complications, 1075
indications, 1074
technique, 1075
Lumbar vertebrae
sagittal view, 944f
Lumbosacral plexus, 1001f
ventral rami, 1001f
Lung compliance, 495
Lung mechanics, 493–504
elastic resistance in, 493–496
compliance in, 495–496, 495f
surface tension forces, 493–495
lung volumes in, 496–498, 496f, 
496t, 503f
closing capacity, 497–498, 497f, 498f
functional residual capacity, 
496–497
vital capacity (VC), 498
nonelastic resistances in, 498–502
tissue resistance, 501
pulmonary mechanics, eff ects of 
anesthesia, 502–504
on airway resistance, 503–504
lung volumes & compliance, 
502–503
respiratory pattern, 504
work of breathing, 504
work of breathing in, 502, 502f, 503f
Lung, nonrespiratory functions of, 
522–523
fi ltration & reservoir function, 
522–523
metabolism, 523
Lung resection, 555–564
bronchiectasis, 557
bronchopleural fi stulas, 564
considerations, 563–564
infection in, 557
intraoperative management, 
558–561
induction of anesthesia, 558–559
maintenance of anesthesia, 
559–560
monitoring, 558
positioning, 559
preparation, 558
venous access, 558
lung abscesses, 564
massive pulmonary hemorrhage, 563
postoperative management, 561–563
general care, 561
postoperative analgesia, 561–562
postoperative complications, 
562–563
preoperative management, 557–558
pulmonary cyst & bulla, 563
tumors in, 555–557
clinical manifestations, 555
evaluation for, 556–557
resectability & operability, 556
treatment of, 556
Lung transplantation, 567–570
indications for, 568t
intraoperative management, 569–570
double-lung transplantation, 570
induction & maintenance, 569
monitoring, 569
posttransplantation 
management, 570
single-lung transplantation, 569
postoperative management, 570
preoperative considerations, 568–569
preoperative management, 569
Lymphoid hyperplasia, 902
Lysergic acid diethylamine (LSD), 1190
M
Machine’s ventilator, 316
Macintosh and Miller blades, 322
Macintosh blade, 326f
1350 
INDEX
Magnesium
defi ciency, 1133
intake, 1135
Magnesium balance, disorders, 
1135–1137
case discussion, 1137–1138
hypermagnesemia, 1135
anesthetic considerations, 1136
causes of, 1136
clinical manifestations of, 1136
treatment of, 1136
hypomagnesemia, 1136
anesthetic considerations, 1137
clinical manifestations, 1136–1137
treatment of, 1137
normal magnesium balance, 1135
plasma magnesium 
concentration, 1135
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
scans, 595
Malignant hyperthermia (MH), 
1185–1190
clinical manifestations, 1186–1187
due to succinylcholine, 210
intraoperative considerations, 
1187–1189
pathophysiology, 1186
postoperative considerations, 
1189–1190
Malpositioned sensor, 125
Mandibular nerve, 1063
Mapleson circuits, 32–36, 33t, 34f–36f, 40
adjustable pressure-limiting valve 
(pressure-relief valve, pop-off  
valve), 34–35
breathing tubes, 34
classifi cation and characteristics 
of, 33t
components of, 34–35, 34f
fresh gas inlet, 34
performance characteristics of, 
35–36
reservoir bag (breathing bag), 35, 35f
Mapleson D circuit, 33t, 35
Mapleson systems, 32
Masks, 1284
Masseter muscle rigidity (MMR), 1186
clinical manifestations, 1186–1187
intraoperative considerations, 
1187–1189
pathophysiology, 1186
postoperative considerations, 
1189–1190
confi rmation of diagnosis, 
1189–1190
prophylaxis, postanesthesia care, 
and discharge, 1190
Massive hemoptysis, 563
Massive transfusion, 1175
Mass spectrometry, 127
Master alarm panel
medical gas systems, 15f
Maternal fever, 854
Maxillofacial reconstruction, 782–784
Maxillomandibular wiring, 784
Maximal midexpiratory fl ow (MMEF) 
rates, 528
McGrath laryngoscope, 324f
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 87, 577
Mean transit time (MTT), 110
Mechanical ventilation, 1288
acute kidney injury (AKI), 1309
acute myocardial infarction (AMI), 
1308–1309
case studies, 1321–1322
classifi cation of, 1289
inspiratory characteristics, 1289
microprocessor-controlled 
ventilators, 1290
time-cycled ventilators cycle, 
1289–1290
discontinuing, 1297
PSV, 1298
SIMV, 1298
T-piece/CPAP, 1298
end-of-life care, 1320–1321
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, 1319
lower gastrointestinal 
bleeding, 1320
upper gastrointestinal bleeding, 
1319–1320
head trauma, 1320
ICUs, infections of, 1314–1316
indicators of, 1288t
infections/sepsis, 1312–1313
near-drowning/drowning, 1305
clinical manifestations, 1306
pathophysiology, 1305–1306
treatment, 1306
patients care
initial ventilator settings, 1296
monitoring, 1296
sedation and paralysis, 1296
tracheal intubation, 1295–1296
positive airway pressure therapy, 1298
continuous positive airway 
pressure, 1299
CPAP vs. PEEP, 1299
end-expiratory pressure, 1299
PEEP/CPAP, adverse nonpulmonary 
eff ects, 1300–1301
PEEP/CPAP, optimum use of, 1301
PEEP/CPAP, pulmonary eff ects of, 
1299–1300
positive-pressure ventilators, 1289
postrenal azotemia, 1310
prerenal azotemia, 1309–1310
pulmonary edema, 1302
increased permeability pulmonary 
edema, 1304–1305
increased transmural pressure 
pulmonary edema, 
1303–1304
pathophysiology, 1302–1303
pulmonary edema, causes of, 1303
respiratory care techniques, 1301
respiratory failure, 1301
treatment, 1302
septic shock, 1317
clinical manifestations, 1317–1318
hemodynamic subsets, 1317
pathophysiology, 1317
treatment, 1318–1319
SIRS, pathophysiology of, 1313–1314
smoke inhalation, 1306
clinical manifestations, 1306–1307
pathophysiology, 1306
treatment, 1307–1308
ventilatory modes
airway pressure release ventilation 
(APRV), 1294
assist-control (AC) ventilation, 
1290–1291
continuous mandatory ventilation 
(CMV), 1290
diff erential lung ventilation, 1295
high-frequency ventilation (HFV), 
1294–1295
intermittent mandatory ventilation 
(IMV), 1291–1293
inverse I:E ratio ventilation 
(IRV), 1294
mandatory minute ventilation 
(MMV), 1293
pressure control ventilation (PCV), 
1293–1294
pressure support ventilation 
(PSV), 1293
Mechanical ventilator, 47
Median nerve block
at elbow, 995f
cross-sectional anatomy, 995f
at wrist, 996f
Median nerve course, 995f
Medical expulsive therapy (MET), 677
Medical gas systems. See also Gas 
systems, medical
delivery of, 13–15, 14f
master alarm panel, 15f
pin index safety system, 15f
sources of, 10–13
 
INDEX 
1351 
Medical malpractice
case discussion on, 305–306
Medical providers, 10
Medtronic Xomed NIM® 
electromyographic (EMG) 
nerve, 781f
Meningitis, 971
Meperidine, 194
postoperative shivering, 1185
Metabolic acidosis, 1150
Metabolic biotransformation, 146
Metabolic equivalents (METS), 908
Methemoglobinemia, 125
Methohexital, 177, 1190
N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors, 159, 182, 584
Methylergonovine, 836
Methylparaben, 274
Methylprednisolone, 818
Metoclopramide
clinical uses, 282
dosage, 282
drug interactions, 282
mechanism of action, 282
side eff ects, 282
Metoprolol, 250
clinical considerations, 250
Meyer–Overton rule, 160
Microelectrode recording 
(MER), 600
Micrognathia, 300
Microprocessors, 77
Microshock, 17
Midazolam
uses and doses of, 180t
Midazolam–ketamine anesthetic 
technique, 290
Midesophageal aortic valve
color fl ow Doppler image, 119f
Midgut volvulus, 898
Minimum alveolar concentration 
(MAC), 160, 268, 510, 533, 
597, 826, 912
of inhalation anesthetics, 162–163
Minimum local analgesic concentration 
(MLAC), 826
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory (MMPI), 1039
Mitral regurgitation, 410–413
anesthetic management, 412–413
choice of agents, 413
monitoring, 412–413
objectives, 412
pathophysiology, 410–411
preoperative considerations, 410
regurgitant fraction calculation, 412
treatment, 412
Mitral stenosis, 408–410
anesthetic management, 409–410
choice of agents, 410
monitoring, 409–410
objectives, 409
mitral valve area & transvalvular 
gradient calculation, 409
pathophysiology, 408–409
preoperative considerations, 408
treatment, 409
Mitral valve
anatomy of, 450f
apparatus, 451f
leafl et motion, classifi cation of, 411f
prolapse, 413–414
anesthetic management, 414
preoperative considerations, 
413–414
regurgitation, pulmonary capillary 
wedge waveform, 413f
Mixed antagonists (labetalol), 249
clinical considerations, 249
dosing & packaging, 249
Modern anesthesia machine, 45f
Modern conventional vaporizer, 
61–63
Monitored Anesthesia Care 
(MAC), 1210
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs), 618, 1190
Monophasic amped sine (MDS), 1241
Morphine, 744. See also Opioids
history of, 4
Motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), 134
neuroanatomic pathways, 135f
Mouth-to-mouth/mouth-to-mask, 1237
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome 
(MODS), 1278, 1313
Multiple sclerosis, 620–621
anesthetic considerations, 620–621
preoperative considerations, 620
Murphy tracheal tube, 321f
Muscarine
characteristics of, 226t
molecular structures, 226f
receptors, blockade of, 234
side eff ects, 227t
Muscle pains
due to succinylcholine, 210
Muscle relaxants, 200, 386, 659–660. 
See also Specifi c agents
depolarizing (See also Depolarizing 
muscle relaxants)
diseases with, 215t
nondepolarizing (See also 
Nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants; specifi c agents)
Musculocutaneous nerve, 992
block, 997
course, 999f
Myasthenia, 751
Myasthenia gravis crisis, 749
Myasthenia gravis foundation, 748t
anesthetic considerations, 750–751
case discussion, 756–757
diff erential diagnosis of, 749t
drugs, potentiate weakness, 749t
muscular dystrophies, 755
Becker’s muscular dystrophy, 753
Duchenne’s/Becker’s muscular 
dystrophies, 754
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, 
752–753
facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, 
753–754
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, 
754
myotonic dystrophy, 753, 754–755
preoperative considerations, 752
myotonias, 755
paraneoplastic neuromuscular 
syndromes, 752
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome (LEMS), 751
limbic encephalitis, 751
neuromyotonia, 751–752
polymyositis, 752
stiff  person syndrome, 752
periodic paralysis, 755–756
Myocardial cells, 348
Myocardial contractility, 355
Myocardial infarction (MI), 377
Myocardial ischemia, 387, 730
Myocardial oxygen balance, 364–365, 
365t
Myofascial pain syndrome, 1042
Myotonic contraction, 754
Myotonic dystrophy, 753
Myxedema coma, 735
N
NabotulinumtoxinA. See Botulinum 
toxin
Naloxone (narcan), 874
clinical uses, 289
dosage, 289
drug interactions, 289
mechanism of action, 289
side eff ects, 289
Naltrexone, 290
Nasal cannula, 1282
Nasal mask, 1283
Nasal polyps, 777
Nasal RAE™ tube, 783f
1352 
INDEX
Nasal/sinus surgery
airway fi re protocol, 777t
intraoperative management, 777–778
cardiovascular stability, 775–776
muscle relaxation, 775
oxygenation, 775
ventilation, 775
laser airway surgery, tracheal tubes 
for, 776t
preoperative considerations, 777
Nasopharyngeal probes, 137
National Electrical Code, 19
National Fire Protection Agency 
(NFPA), 10, 16
National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH), 81
ND:YAG-compatible tubes, 24
Near infrared spectroscopy, 577
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), 136
Nebivolol, 251
clinical considerations, 251
Nebulizers, 1316
Needle insertion, 980
Neohepatic phase, 720
Neonatal resuscitation
chest compressions, guidelines, 
873–874
depressed neonate, 872
drug therapy, 874
epinephrine, 874
naloxone, 874
general care of, 870–871
meconium-stained neonates, 871–872
vascular access, 874
ventilation, guidelines, 872–873
volume resuscitation, 874
Neonate
chest compressions, 873f
alternative technique, 874f
intubation, 873f
Neostigmine, 228–229
clinical considerations, 229
dosage & packaging, 228–229
molecular structures, 228f
physical structure, 228
Nephron, 632–639
anatomic divisions of, 633f
collecting tubule in, 637–638
distal tubule, 636–637
functional divisions of, 634f
juxtaglomerular apparatus, 
638–639, 638f
loop of Henle, 634–636
proximal tubule in, 632–634
reabsorption of solutes, 636f
renal corpuscle in, 632
sodium reabsorption in, 635f
Nephrotic syndrome, 699
Nerve blocks, 992f
effi  cacy of, 1060
Nerve injuries, 1208
Nerve localization, 979f
Nerve-sparing technique, 681
Nerve stimulation, 1011–1012
infraclavicular block, 990f
interscalene block using, 985f
Nerve stimulator, 979f
Neuraxial anesthesia, 793, 794
case discussion, 972–973
Neuraxial anesthesia, role of, 938
anatomy
spinal cord, 942
vertebral column, 940–942
mechanism of action, 945
autonomic blockade, 945–947
somatic blockade, 945
obstetric patient, 939–940
sick elderly patient, 939
spinal cord, 942–945
Neuraxial blockade, 947
Neuraxial block-induced 
sympathectomy, 946
Neuraxial blocks, 939
technical considerations, 949–950
anatomic approach, 950–953
Buie’s/Jackknife position, 951
lateral decubitus, 951
paramedian approach, 953–954
patient positioning, 950–951
sitting position, 950–951
surface anatomy, 950
ultrasound-guided, 954
Neuraxial blocks, complications of, 
966–972, 966t
cardiac arrest during spinal anesthesia, 
967–968
high neural blockade, 967
needle/catheter insertion
arachnoiditis, 971
backache, 969
epidural catheter, sheering of, 972
inadequate anesthesia/analgesia, 
968
intravascular injection, 968
meningitis, 971
neurological injury, 970
postdural puncture headache, 
969–970
spinal epidural abscess (EA), 
971–972
spinal/epidural hematoma, 
970–971
subdural injection, 968–969
total spinal anesthesia, 968
spinal anesthesia, 967
urinary retention, 968
Neuraxial techniques, 938
Neurogenic infl ammation, 1035
Neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist, 286
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), 
626, 1190
Neurological diseases
cerebrovascular, 613–616
degenerative and demyelinating 
diseases, 618–623
Alzheimer disease (AD), 619–620
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS), 621
autonomic dysfunction, 622
Guillain–Barré syndrome 
(GBS), 621
multiple sclerosis (MS), 620–621
Parkinson disease (PD), 618–619
spinal cord injury, 623–624
syringomyelia, 622–623
seizure disorders, 616–618
Neurological system monitors, 129–136
brain, cerebral oximetry and monitors 
of, 136
electroencephalography, 129–134
evoked potentials, 134–136
Neurolytic nerve blocks, 1060
Neuromuscular blockade, 230t
Neuromuscular blockers (NMBs), 586, 
596, 618, 717
history of, 4
Neuromuscular blocking agents 
(NMBAs), 138, 139, 168, 
199–221, 775
case discussion on respiratory failure, 
231–232
chemical structures, 206f
cholinergic pharmacology, 224–228
clinical pharmacology, 226–228
general pharmacological 
characteristics, 226–228
mechanism of action, 225–226
cholinesterase inhibitors & 
pharmacologic antagonists to, 
223–232
considerations, 230–231
L-cysteine, 231
depolarizing muscle relaxants, 205–211
succinylcholine, 205–211
depolarizing vs. nondepolarizing 
blockade, 202–205, 202t, 205t
mechanisms of action of, 202–203
response to peripheral nerve 
stimulation of, 204–205
reversal of actions of, 203–204
history of, 4
 
INDEX 
1353 
neuromuscular transmission, 200–202
non-classic reversal agents, 231
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants, 
211–216, 211–220
atracurium, 216
cisatracurium, 216–217
pancuronium, 217–218
rocuronium, 218–219
vecuronium, 218
potentiation and resistance, 208t
specifi c cholinesterase inhibitors, 
228–231
edrophonium, 229–230
neostigmine, 228–229
physostigmine, 230
pyridostigmine, 229
sugammadex, 231
Neuromuscular disease
case discussion, 756–757
muscular dystrophies, 755
Becker’s muscular dystrophy, 753
Duchenne’s/Becker’s muscular 
dystrophies, 754
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, 
752–753
facioscapulohumeral dystrophy, 
753–754
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, 754
myotonic dystrophy, 753, 754–755
preoperative considerations, 752
myasthenia gravis, 748–751
anesthetic considerations, 750–751
women, 751
myotonias
paramyotonia congenita, 755
paraneoplastic neuromuscular 
syndromes
anesthetic considerations, 752
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome (LEMS), 751
limbic encephalitis, 751
neuromyotonia, 751–752
polymyositis, 752
stiff  person syndrome, 752
periodic paralysis, 755–756
Neuromuscular junction, 200f
Neuromuscular transmission, 200–202
Neuropathic pain, 1037, 1047
acute herpes zoster/postherpetic 
neuralgia, 1049–1050
complex regional pain syndrome 
(CRPS), 1048
diabetic neuropathy, 1048
headache, 1050–1051
sympathetically maintained/
sympathetically independent 
pain, 1048–1049
Neurophysiology, 575–591
blood-brain barrier, 579
brain protection in, 586–589
anesthesia on electrophysiological 
monitoring and, 587–588
cerebral ischemia in, 586
electroencephalography in, 
588, 588t
evoked potentials in, 588–589
inhalation anesthetics in, 588
intravenous agents in, 588
strategies for, 586–587
case discussion on postoperative 
hemiplegia, 589–591
cerebral, 576–581 (See also Cerebral 
physiology)
anesthetic agents on, 581–586
cerebral blood fl ow (CBF), 576–577
autoregulation, 577–578
cerebral perfusion pressure 
(CPP), 577
extrinsic mechanisms, 578–579
regulation of, 577–579
cerebral metabolism, 576
cerebrospinal fl uid, 579–580
intracranial pressure, 580–581
Neurosurgery, 593–611
case discussion on, 609–611
craniotomy and anesthesia in
for arteriovenous malformation, 607
for intracranial aneurysms, 604–607
for mass lesions, 595–597 (See also 
Craniotomy, for mass lesions)
head trauma, 601–604
intracranial hypertension, 593–595
posterior fossa, 597–600
spine surgery, 608–609
stereotactic, 600–601
Newly born infant
algorithm for resuscitation, 871f
Nicardipine, 386, 740
Nicotine
characteristics of, 226f
molecular structures, 226f
Nicotinic receptors, 224
Nifedipine, 389
Nitrates, 389
Nitric oxide, 257
Nitrogen
medical gas cylinders, 12t
in medical gas systems, 13
Nitroglycerin, 259–260
clinical uses, 259
mechanism of action, 259
metabolism, 259–260
Nitrous oxide, 583, 1190
biotransformation & toxicity, 166
clinical pharmacology of, 157f, 
163–167, 163t
contraindications, 166
critical temperature, 12
drug interactions, 166–167
eff ects on organ systems, 164–166
cardiovascular, 164–165
cerebral, 165–166
gastrointestinal, 166
hepatic, 166
neuromuscular, 166
renal, 166
respiratory, 165
history of, 3
medical gas cylinders, 12t
in medical gas systems, 12–13
physical properties of, 163–164
Nitrovasodilators, 257–260
Nociception, 1025
anatomy
brain, lateral/coronal views, 1029f
fi rst-order, 1028
pain pathways, 1028, 1028f
Rexed’s spinal cord laminae, 1030f
second-order, 1029–1032, 1029f
alternate pain pathways, 1032
spinal cord, cross section of, 
1032f
spinothalamic tract, 1031–1032
sympathetic/motor systems, 
integration, 1032
spinal cord lamina, 1031t
third-order, 1032
Nociception, physiology of
central modulation
facilitation, 1036
inhibition, 1036–1037
chemical mediators, 1033–1034
chemical mediators of, 1033–1034
chronic pain, pathophysiology, 1037
fi bromyalgia, 1042
modulation of, 1034–1039
primary hyperalgesia, 1034–1035
secondary hyperalgesia, 1035
myofascial pain syndromes, 1042
nociceptors, 1032–1033
deep somatic, 1033
visceral nociceptors, 1033
pain syndromes, selected, 1041
entrapment neuropathies, 1041t
entrapment syndromes, 1041–1042
patient, evaluation, 1039
electromyography/nerve 
conduction studies, 1040–1041
pain measurement, 1039
psychological evaluation, 
1039–1040
1354 
INDEX
Nociception, physiology of (Cont.)
systemic responses, to acute pain, 
1037–1038
cardiovascular eff ects, 1038
endocrine eff ects, 1038
gastrointestinal/urinary 
eff ects, 1038
hematological eff  ects, 1038
immune eff ects, 1038
psychological eff ects, 1038
respiratory eff ects, 1038
systemic responses, to chronic 
pain, 1038
Nociceptors, 1032
Noise
in operating rooms, 16
Noncardiac surgery
cardiac risk stratifi cation, 379t
coronary artery disease, 379
heart failure, 403–405
hypertension, 380–381
ischemic heart disease, 387–403
perioperative evaluation and 
preparation, 377–405
Noncardiovascular monitoring, 123–142
awareness, checklist for 
prevention, 133t
case discussion on, 141–142
neurological system monitors, 
129–136
peripheral nerve stimulation, 
138–140
respiratory gas exchange monitors, 
123–129
temperature in, 136–137
urinary output in, 137–138
Non-classic reversal agents, 231
Noncompetitive potassium-sparing 
diuretics, 648
intravenous dosages, 648
side eff ects, 648
uses, 648
Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants, 
211–216, 211–220, 225, 1190
atracurium, 216
cisatracurium, 216–217
clinical characteristics of, 212t
evoked responses, 205t
general pharmacological 
characteristics, 214–215
acid–base balance, 214
age, 214, 214t
concurrent disease, 214–215
drug interactions, 214
electrolyte abnormalities, 214
muscle groups, 215
temperature, 214
pancuronium, 217–218
pharmacological characteristics, 
211–214
autonomic side eff ects, 213
hepatic clearance, 213–214
histamine release, 213
maintenance relaxation, 213
potentiation by inhalational 
anesthetics, 213
potentiation by other 
nondepolarizers, 213
preventing fasciculations, suitability 
for, 213
renal excretion, 214
suitability for intubation, 
211–213
pharmacology of, 211t
rocuronium, 218–219
vecuronium, 218
Nondiverting (mainstream) 
capnographs, 126
Nondiverting sensor, 126f
Noninvasive blood pressure 
(NIBP), 1259
Noninvasive brain oximetry 
monitors, 125
Noninvasive stress imaging, 714
Noninvasive technique, 114
Nonionized (uncharged) drugs, 144
Non-nitrovasodilator hypotensive 
agents, 260–261
Non-operating room anesthesia, 919, 
927–931, 933t
common locations for, 931t
equipment/monitoring requirements 
for, 930t
locations, 929t
space requirements, 930t
Nonrebreathing valve, 41
Nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), 196, 197, 286, 
641, 654
Noradrenaline, 224
Norepinephrine, 240, 247
clinical considerations, 247
dosing & packaging, 247
synthesis, 242f, 243f
Normal cerebral perfusion pressure 
(CPP), 817
Noxious sensations, 1032
Nucleus raphe magnus (NRM), 1036
Nutrients, specifi c, 1196–1197
Nutritional needs, basic, 1194–1195
Nutritional repletion, 1193
Nutritional support
complications of, 1196
Nutrition, enteral, 1197
O
Obese patients
algorithm for, 859f
optimal positioning, 858f
optimal positioning for, 858
Obesity, 742
Obstetric anesthesia, 844
anesthetic risk
anesthetic mortality, 845
maternal mortality, 844–845
obstetric anesthesia closed 
claims, 845
cesarean section, 855–856
for emergency, 860
general anesthesia, 857–860
regional anesthesia, 856–857
general anesthesia, 854–855
general approach, 845
labor/vaginal delivery, 846
pain pathways, 846
parenteral agents, 846–847
psychological/nonpharmacological 
techniques, 846
pudendal nerve block, 847
regional anesthetic techniques, 847–848
combined spinal & epidural (CSE) 
analgesia, 854
epidural opioids, 848–849
intrathecal opioids, 848
local anesthetic/local anesthetic–
opioid mixtures, 849
lumbar epidural analgesia, 849–854
spinal anesthesia, 854
spinal opioids alone, 848
Obstetric morbidity
incidence of, 845t
Obstructive lesions, 424
Obstructive pulmonary disease, 530–537
asthma, 530–534 (See also Asthma)
chronic, 534–537
signs and symptoms, 535t
chronic bronchitis, 534–535
emphysema, 535–536
intraoperative management, 537
preoperative management, 536–537
treatment for, 536
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 921, 922t
perioperative risk from, 923t
scoring system, 923t
Obturator nerve block, 1007f
Obturator nerve innervation, 1006f
Occipial nerve stimulator 
placement, 1082f
Occipital nerve block, 1065, 1065f
anatomy, 1065
complications, 1066
technique, 1065–1066
 
INDEX 
1355 
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 16
Octopus retractor
schematic illustration of, 469f
Offi  ce-based anesthesia, 919, 920–921
Off -site anesthesia, 927
of trunk
intercostal block, 1018–1019
paravertebral anatomy, 1020f
paravertebral block, 1019–1020, 1020f
superfi cial cervical plexus block, 1017
transversus abdominis plane (TAP) 
block, 1021–1022, 1021f
Ohmeda Universal Portable Anesthesia 
Complete (U-PAC), 32
Older anesthesia machine
unacceptable/undesirable features of, 47t
Olfactory nerve, 310
OnabotulinumtoxinA, 1060
Ondansetron, 285
structure, 284f
One-handed face mask technique, 315f
One-handed needle advancement, 850f
One-lung ventilation, 548–555
alternatives to, 561
anatomic considerations in, 
550–551, 550f
double-lumen bronchial tubes in, 
549–554, 552f, 553f, 553t
double-lumen tubes, complications 
of, 554
double-lumen tubes, placement of, 
551–554
indications for, 549t
management of, 560
single-lumen tracheal tubes with 
bronchial blocker in, 554–555
Open-drop anesthesia, 31
Open pneumothorax, 546, 547–548
mediastinal shift , 547–548, 548f
paradoxical respiration, 548, 548f
Operating rooms
case discussion on, 27–28
electrical safety in, 17–22 (See also 
Electrical safety)
environmental factors in, 15–17
fi res and explosions in, 22–27
future design of, 26–27
locations, special considerations, 
931–933
medical gas systems in, 10–15 (See 
also Gas systems, medical)
radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) 
technology, 26–27
safety culture, 10
safety interlock technology, 26
workfl ow design, 26
Ophthalmic surgery, 760
case discussion, 768–770
eye blocks, needle/catheter, 767f
facial nerve block techniques, 766f
general anesthesia for
extubation/emergence, 764–765
induction, 763–764
monitoring/maintenance, 764
premedication, 763
intraocular gas expansion, 762
intraocular pressure dynamics
anesthetic drugs, eff ect of, 761
intraocular pressure, physiology of, 
760–761
oculocardiac refl ex, 761–762
open-eye surgical procedures, 760t
ophthalmic drugs, systemic eff ects of, 
762–763
oral RAE™ endotracheal tube, 764f
regional anesthesia
eye, topical anesthesia, 767
facial nerve block, 767
intravenous sedation, 768
peribulbar blockade, 766–767
retrobulbar blockade, 765–766
sub-Tenon’s block, 767
retrobulbar block, 765f
systemic eff ects of, 763t
Ophthalmoscopy, 383
Opiates, 1190
Opioid-induced hyperalgesia, 195
Opioids, 583, 627, 658, 711, 848, 884
agonists and antagonists, chemical 
structure, 191f
classifi cation, 190t
depress ventilation, 194f
dose, 454t
drug interactions, 196
eff ects on organ systems, 194–196
cardiovascular, 194
cerebral, 195
endocrine, 196
gastrointestinal, 195–196
respiratory, 194–195
history of, 4–5
mechanisms of action, 189–190
pharmacokinetics, 192–194
absorption, 192
biotransformation, 193
distribution, 192–193
excretion, 193–194
physical characteristics, 192t
receptor types, 189
sparing strategies, 1263
structure–activity relationships, 
190–191
uses and doses, 196t
Optical intubating stylet, 323f
Oral antihypertensive agents, 382t–383t
Oral drug administration, 144
Oral lactulose, 716
Oral tracheal tube
size guidelines, 321t
Organophosphate pesticides, 208
Organophosphates, 226
Oropharynx, 872
Orthognathic surgery, 782–784
Orthopedic surgery, anesthesia
case discussion, 801–803
hip surgery (See Hip fracture)
perioperative management
bone cement, 790–791
deep vein thrombosis (DVT), 
792–793
fat embolism syndrome, 792
pneumatic tourniquets, 791–792
pulmonary embolism (PE), 
792–793
Oscillometry, for arterial blood pressure 
monitoring, 90
Osmotic diuretics (mannitol), 645–646
acute oliguria, evaluation of, 645
acute reduction of intracranial 
pressure & cerebral edema, 645
acute reduction of intraocular 
pressure in the perioperative 
period, 645
intravenous dosage, 645
prophylaxis against acute kidney 
injury in high-risk 
patients, 645
side eff ects, 645–646
therapy, 817
Otorhinolaryngologic surgery
case discussion, 785
ear surgery
intraoperative management
facial nerve identifi  cation, 784
hemostasis, 784
nausea/vomiting, 784
nitrous oxide, 784
postoperative vertigo, 784
oral surgical procedures, 784–785
endoscopy, 774
intraoperative management, 
774–776
laser precautions, 776–777
preoperative considerations, 774
head/neck cancer surgery
intraoperative management, 
779–782
preoperative considerations, 
778–779
maxillofacial reconstruction, 782–784
1356 
INDEX
Otorhinolaryngologic surgery (Cont.)
nasal/sinus surgery
intraoperative management, 
777–778
preoperative considerations, 777
orthognathic surgery, 782–784
Outside operating room
anesthesia/sedation, 929t
safe sedation and anesthesia, 929t
Oxidize fatty acids, 695
Oxygen
administration of, 23
blood respiratory gases, transport of, 
514–518
consumption, 827
content of, 517
dissolved oxygen, 515
emergency (E-cylinder) cylinder, 11, 12t
hemoglobin, 515
hemoglobin dissociation curve, 
515, 515f
factors infl uencing, 516–517, 517f
hemoglobins, abnormal ligands & 
abnormal forms of, 517
high-pressure cylinders, 11, 11f
liquid oxygen storage system, 11, 12f
mask, 1283
in medical gas systems, 10–12, 11f, 12f
stores in, 518
therapy, 1269
transport of, 517–518
Oxygen analyzers, 36t
types of, 66
Oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation 
curve, 125
Oxygen ratio monitor controller 
(ORMC), 58
Oxygen supply failure protection 
devices, 52–54
Oxygen tension
alveolar tension, 511
arterial tension, 512–513, 512t, 513f
mixed venous tension, 513, 514t
pulmonary end-capillary tension, 
511–512
Oxygen therapy equipment, 1282
device/system, 1282t
hazards of, 1287
absorption atelectasis, 1287
fi re hazard, 1288
hyperbaric oxygen toxicity, 1288
hypoventilation, 1287
pulmonary toxicity, 1287–1288
retinopathy of prematurity 
(ROP), 1288
high-fl ow/fi xed-performance 
equipment, 1282–1283
air-entraining nebulizers, 1285–1286
air-entraining venturi masks, 1285
air–oxygen systems, 1286
anesthesia bag/bag-mask-valve 
systems, 1284
helium–oxygen therapy, 1286–1287
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, 1287
oxygen hoods, 1286
low-fl ow/variable-performance 
equipment, 1282
masks, with gas reservoirs, 1284
nasal cannula, 1282–1283
nasal mask, 1283
simple/oxygen mask, 1283–1284
variable-performance equipment, 1282
Oxyhemoglobin, 124
Oxytocin, 835
P
Pain management, chronic. See 
Interventional pain therapy
multidisciplinary treatment
acupuncture, 1084
physical therapy, 1083–1084
psychological interventions, 1083
procedural therapy, 1060
chemical neurolysis, 1079–1080
cryoneurolysis, 1077–1079
diagnostic/therapeutic blocks, 
1060–1061
diff erential neural blockade, 
1080–1081
epidural injections, 1076–1077
neuromodulation, 1081–1083
radiofrequency ablation (RFA), 
1077–1079
somatic nerve blocks, 1061–1062
sympathetic nerve blocks, 1072–1076
vertebral augmentation, 1083
Palpation, for arterial blood pressure 
monitoring, 88
Pancreas
insulin, eff ects of, 728t
physiology, 728
Pancuronium, 217–218, 660, 915
dosage, 217
metabolism & excretion, 217
physical structure, 217
side eff ects & clinical considerations, 
217–218
allergic reactions, 218
arrhythmias, 217–218
hypertension and tachycardia, 217
Paradoxical air embolism, 599
Paralysis
due to succinylcholine, 211
Paramagnetic analysis, 128–129
Paramagnetic sensors, 67
Paramyotonia congenita, 755
Paraneoplastic syndromes, 751
Paraplegia, 479–480
Parasympathetic nervous system, 225f
Parasympathetic system, 360
Parathyroid glands
hyperparathyroidism, 736–737
hypoparathyroidism, 737–738
physiology, 736
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 736
Paravertebral anatomy, 1020f
Parenteral nutrition (PN), 1193
Parietal cells, 278
Parkinson disease (PD), 618–619
anesthetic considerations, 619
preoperative considerations, 618–619
Partial anomalous venous return, 426
Partition coeffi  cients
in anesthetics inhalation, 156, 156t
Passover humidifi er, 71
Patent ductus arteriosus, 425–426
Patient-controlled analgesia, 897
Patient safety issues, 1325–1326. 
See also Performance 
improvement issues
Pediatric anesthesia
anatomic/physiological 
development, 878
cardiovascular system, 879
glucose homeostasis, 881
metabolism/temperature regulation, 
879–880
renal/gastrointestinal function, 880
respiratory system, 878–879
inhalational anesthetics, 883–884
MAC values, 883t
muscle relaxants, 884–886
nonvolatile anesthetics, 884
pharmacological diff erences, 881–886
risk, 887
Pediatric anesthetic techniques, 887
age-related changes, 880f
airway equipment, sizing, 890t
cardiac arrest, mechanisms of, 886f
congenital diaphragmatic hernia
anesthetic considerations, 899
pathophysiology, 899
cystic fi brosis, 904
ED95 for muscle relaxants, 885t
emergence/recovery
laryngospasm, 896
postintubation croup, 896
postoperative pain management, 
896–897
epiglottitis, acute, 902
foreign body aspiration, 902
 
INDEX 
1357 
gastroschisis/omphalocele
anesthetic considerations, 901
pathophysiology, 901
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
anesthetic considerations, 901
pathophysiology, 901
induction, 889
infectious croup, 902
inhalational induction, 890–891
intestinal malrotation/volvulus
anesthetic considerations, 898–899
pathophysiology, 898
intravenous access, 891
intravenous induction, 889–890
laboratory tests, 887
maintenance, 892–893
monitoring, 888–889
neonates/infants, characteristics of, 879t
perioperative fl uid requirements
defi cits, 893
maintenance, 893
replacement requirements, 893–894
prematurity
anesthetic considerations, 897–898
pathophysiology, 897
premedication, 888
preoperative fasting, 888
preoperative interview, 887
regional anesthesia and analgesia, 
894–895
sagittal section of, 880f
scoliosis, 904
sedation for procedures, 895–896
tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy, 
902–903
tracheal intubation, 891–892
tracheoesophageal fi stula
anesthetic considerations, 900–901
pathophysiology, 899–900
tracheoesophageal fi stula, types of, 900f
trisomy 21 syndrome, 903–904
tympanostomy tubes, myringotomy/
insertion of, 903
upper respiratory tract infection 
(URI), 887
Pediatric drug dosages, 881t–882t
Pediatric patients
sedation/analgesia/anesthesia, 933t
Pediatric perioperative cardiac arrest 
(POCA), 886
Pediatric Tuohy needle, 1020
Penumbra, 615f
Percutaneous catheter, placement of, 981f
Percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI)
management of patients with, 398f
treatment for, 398f
Percutaneous cricothyrotomy, 1238
Percutaneous endoscopic placement of 
gastrostomy (PEG) tubes, 1195
Percutaneous introducer, 106, 106f
Performance improvement issues
central venous catheters insertion, 
mandatory checklist for, 1329f
quality assurance measures, 
1327–1329
standardized checklists, benefi ts, 1327
strategies to performance errors 
reduction, 1326–1327
time out checklist, 1328f
Peribulbar/sub-Tenon’s (episcleral) 
block, 765
Pericardial disease, 474–476
cardiac tamponade in, 474–476
anesthetic considerations, 475–476
preoperative considerations, 
474–475
constrictive pericarditis in, 476
anesthetic considerations, 476
preoperative considerations, 476
Peripheral nerveblocks. See also Lower 
extremity peripheral nerve 
blocks; Upper extremity
Perineural local anesthetic infusion, 976
Perioperative β−blocker therapy, 
251–252
Perioperative fl uid therapy
intraoperative fl uid therapy, 1167
replacing blood loss, 1168
replacing redistributive/evaporative 
losses, 1168–1169
normal maintenance requirements, 
1166
preexisting defi cits, 1166
surgical fl uid losses
blood loss, 1166–1167
third-space fl uid loss, 1167
Perioperative pain management
adequate tissue oxygenation, 
maintenance, 1097
goal-directed fl uid/hemodynamic 
therapy, 1097–1098
intraoperative period, 1092
normothermia, maintenance of, 1097
postoperative nausea and vomiting 
(PONV) prophylaxis, 1097
surgical stress response, 1092–1096
use of
inhalational anesthetics, 1096
intravenous anesthetics, 1096
muscle relaxants, 1097
opioids, 1096
Perioperative stroke
risk of, 613
Perioperative vision loss (POVL), 608
Peripheral nerve
blocks, continuous, 980–981
block techniques, 978
continuous, 980–981
fi eld block technique, 978
nerve stimulation technique, 978–979
paresthesia technique, 978
ultrasound technique, 979–980
conduction, 1040
intercostal nerve block
anatomy and needle positioning, 
1019f
local anesthetic, choice of, 977
localization, ultrasound for, 979
lower extremity
ankle block, 1015–1017
femoral nerve block, 1001–1004
lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, 
1004–1005
lumbar/sacral plexus anatomy, 1001
obturator nerve block, 1006
posterior lumbar plexus block, 
1006–1009
saphenous nerve block, 1009–1010
sciatic nerve block, 1010–1015
patient selection, 976–977
percutaneous catheter adjacent to, 981f
preparation, 977
risks & contraindications, 977
stimulators, 140f, 228
Peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS), 
138–140, 1082
clinical considerations, 139–140
indications & contraindications, 138
techniques & complications, 138–139
Peritubular system, 639
Persistent postsurgical pain, 1089
Persistent pulmonary hypertension
pathophysiology of, 839f
pH
indicator dye, 38, 38t
sensitivity due to atracurium, 216
stat management, 460
Pharmacodynamics, 149–151. See also 
Specifi c agents
drug receptors, 151
exposure–response relationships, 
149–150
Pharmacokinetics, 143–149. See also 
Specifi c agents
absorption, 144
biotransformation, 146–147
compartment models, 147–149
defi nition, 143
distribution, 144–146
excretion, 147
1358 
INDEX
Pharmacological principles, 143–151
pharmacodynamics, 149–151
pharmacokinetics, 143–149
Pharynx, 310, 310f
Phenothiazines, 659
Phenylephrine, 245, 410, 782
clinical considerations, 245
dosing & packaging, 245
Phosphorus balance, disorders, 1133
hyperphosphatemia
anesthetic considerations, 1134
clinical manifestations, 1134
treatment of, 1134
hypophosphatemia, 1134
anesthetic considerations, 1135
clinical manifestations, 1134–1135
treatment of, 1135
normal plasma phosphorus 
concentration, 1134
Physostigmine, 230
clinical considerations, 230
dosage & packaging, 230
molecular structures, 228f
physical structure, 230
Piezoelectric analysis, 127
Pin index safety system, 51
in medical gas systems, 15f
“Pink puff ers,” 536
Piston ventilator
advantage, 77
Placenta, 831f
Placenta previa, 862
Plasma creatine kinase (CK) levels, 752
Plasma glucose, 732
Plasma osmolality, 1113
Platelet transfusions, 714
Plicamycin (Mithramycin), 737
Pneumoperitoneum, 947
Poiseuille’s law, 55
Polymethylmethacrylate, 790
Pop-off  valves. See Adjustable pressure-
limiting (APL) valves
Porphyrin, 179
Portopulmonary hypertension 
(POPH), 715
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 
32, 74, 499, 597, 717
Postanesthesia care, 1258
case studies, 1271–1274
circulatory complications
arrhythmias, 1271
hypertension, 1271
hypotension, 1270
design, 1259
discharge criteria
outpatients, 1266
PACU, 1265–1266
emergence from general anesthesia
delayed emergence, 1260–1261
operating room to PACU, 1261
equipment, 1259
respiratory complications, 
management of, 1266
airway obstruction, 1267
hypoventilation, 1267–1268
hypoxemia, 1268–1270
routine recovery
agitation, 1263
general anesthesia, 1261–1262
nausea & vomiting, 1263–1264
pain control, 1262–1263
regional anesthesia, 1262
shivering & hypothermia, 
1264–1265
staffi  ng, 1259–1260
Postanesthesia care units (PACUs), 304, 
896, 926t, 1185, 1258
Postanesthesia discharge scoring 
system (PADS)
for determining home-readiness, 927t
Post anesthesia recovery/discharge, 
925–926
Postdural puncture headache (PDPH), 
853, 969
Posterior descending artery (PDA), 362
Posterior fossa surgery, 597–600
complications of
brain stem injury, 598
obstructive hydrocephalus, 597–598
pneumocephalus, 598
positioning in, 598, 598f
venous air embolism, 598–600
for obstructive hydrocephalus, 
597–598
pneumocephalus in, 598
positioning in, 598, 598f
Posterior lumbar plexus, 1006–1009
block, 1009f
patient positioning and surface 
landmarks, 1009f
Posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS), 
1010
Posterior tibial artery, blood pressure 
monitoring via, 93
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
(POCD), 912
Postoperative hypothermia, 1185
Postoperative nausea and vomiting 
(PONV), 784, 1097, 1263
Postoperative pain management
acetaminophen (paracetamol), 1099
analgesia to facilitate functional 
recovery, 1102
epidural analgesia, 1099–1102
local anesthetic wound infusion, 1102
minimize postoperative ileus, 
1102–1103
multidisciplinary surgical care, 
organization, 1102
multimodal analgesia, 1098–1099
nonsteroidal antiinfl ammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), 1099
opioids, 1099
peripheral nerve block, 1102
PONV treatment, 1098
shivering minimization, strategies, 
1098
Postoperative residual curarization 
(PORC), 139
Postoperative strokes
pathophysiology of, 614
Postpartum tubal ligation
case discussion, 840–841
Postrenal azotemia, 1310
Postsynaptic membranes, 241
Potassium balance, disorders
extracellular potassium concentration, 
regulation, 1123
hyperkalemia
anesthetic considerations, 1130
causes of, 1127t
clinical manifestations, 1129
decreased renal excretion, 1128
electrocardiographic eff ects, 1129f
extracellular movement of, 
1127–1128
increased potassium intake, 
1128–1129
treatment of, 1129–1130
hypokalemia, 1124
anesthetic considerations, 1127
clinical manifestations, 1125–1126
decreased potassium intake, 1125
increased potassium losses, 1125
intracellular movement of, 1125
treatment of, 1126–1127
intercompartmental shift s, 
1123–1124
urinary potassium excretion, 1124
normal balance, 1123
Potassium, renal excretion of, 1123
Potassium-sparing diuretics, 
647–648
aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone 
& eplerenone), 648
noncompetitive potassium-sparing 
diuretics, 648
Precordial stethoscopes, 123–124
contraindications in, 123
indications in, 123
techniques & complications, 123–124
 
INDEX 
1359 
Predominantly left -to-right (simple) 
shunts, 424–426
Predominantly right-to-left  (complex) 
shunts, 426–428
Preeclampsia, complications, 865t
Pregnancy
average maximum physiological 
changes, 826f
Pregnancy, anesthesia
amniotic fl uid embolism, 867
antepartum hemorrhage, 862
abruptio placentae, 862
placenta previa, 862
uterine rupture, 863
case discussion, 875–876
chorioamnionitis, 863
dystocia/abnormal fetal presentations/
positions
abnormal vertex presentations, 
861–862
breech presentation, 861
primary dysfunctional labor, 861
heart disease, 866–867
hypertensive disorders, 864–866
anesthetic management, 865–866
pathophysiology/manifestations, 
865
treatment, 865
multiple gestations, 862
postpartum hemorrhage, 867–868
premature rupture of membranes 
(PROM), 863
preterm labor, 863–864
umbilical cord prolapse, 860
Pregnancy, physiological 
changes, 826t
cardiovascular eff ects, 827–828
central nervous system eff ects, 826
hematological eff ects, 828–829
hepatic eff ects, 828
metabolic eff ects, 829
musculoskeletal eff ects, 829
renal/gastrointestinal eff ects, 828
respiratory eff ects, 827
Prejunctional receptors, 203
Preload
in compensatory mechanisms, 367
in diastolic function and ventricular 
compliance, 354
ventricular, 353t
ventricular fi lling in, 353–354
Premature atrial/ventricular 
beats, 1271
Premature rupture of membranes 
(PROM), 863
Premedication, 300–301. See also Specifi c 
agents and surgeries
Preoperative evaluation, 296–300
cardiovascular issues, 297
coagulation issues, 298–299
endocrine and metabolic issues, 298
gastrointestinal issues, 299
laboratory evaluation in, 300
physical examination in, 299–300
preoperative history in, 297–299
pulmonary issues, 298
Preoxygenation, 316
Prerenal azotemia, 1309–1310
Pressure-broadening eff ect, 127
Pressure regulator, 52
Pressure-relief valves. See Adjustable 
pressure-limiting (APL) valves
Pressure transducers, 97
Pressurized oxygen, 75
Pressurize safety devices, 52
Prethoracotomy respiratory assessment
“three-legged” stool of, 557f
Primary brain injuries, 815
Principal electrophysiological 
mechanisms
posterior view of, 399f
Prinzmetal’s angina, 388
Prone jackknife position, 966
Propofol, 185–187, 584, 658, 1190
doses of, 183f
drug interactions, 187
eff ects on organ systems, 186–187
cardiovascular, 186
cerebral, 187
respiratory, 186
infusion syndrome, 186
mechanisms of action, 185
pharmacokinetics, 186
absorption, 186
biotransformation, 186
distribution, 186
excretion, 186
pharmacokinetics of, 186
structure–activity relationships, 185–186
structures of, 182f
Propranolol, 251
clinical considerations, 251
dosing & packaging, 251
Prostaglandins, 197
Prostate, transurethral resection of
intraoperative considerations, 674–677
anesthesia, choice of, 676–677
bladder perforation, 676
coagulopathy, 676
hypothermia, 676
monitoring, 677
septicemia, 676
TURP Syndrome, 675–676
preoperative considerations, 674
Protamine, 466
Protein channels, 161
Prothrombin time (PT), 700
Proton pump inhibitors
clinical uses, 283
dosage, 283
drug interactions, 283
mechanism of action, 283
side eff ects, 283
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), 283
Proximal saphenous nerve 
block, 1010f
Proximal sciatic nerve block
patient positioning, 1010f
Pseudocholinesterase, 204
activity, 207t
Psoas compartment block. See Posterior 
lumbar plexus
Psychiatric disorders, 624–627
bipolar disease, 625–626
case discussion on, 627–629
depression, 624–625
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 626
schizophrenia, 626
substance abuse, 626–627
Psychiatry unit or monitored area in the 
hospital (PACU), 932
Pudendal nerve block, 1071f
anatomy, 1071
complications, 1072
indications, 1071
technique, 1071–1072
Pudendal nerve blocks, 847
Pulmonary artery catheterization, 
104–109, 105f, 107f, 
108t, 109t
clinical considerations, 108–109
contraindications, 105
hemodynamic variables, 109f
incidence of, 108f
techniques & complications, 
105–108, 105f
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure 
(PAOP), 1163
waveform, 107
Pulmonary artery pressure (PAS), 418
Pulmonary capillary occlusion pressure 
(PCOP), 104
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 
(PCWP), 355
Pulmonary embolism, 539–541, 540t
diagnosis of, 540
intraoperative, 541
intraoperative management, 541
pathophysiology of, 540
preoperative management, 541
treatment and prevention, 540–541
1360 
INDEX
Pulmonary function tests (PFTs), 528
Pulmonary gas exchange, 715
Pulmonary perfusion, 506–507
distribution of, 506–507, 507f
ventilation/perfusion ratios, 507, 508f
Pulmonary receptors, 227
Pulmonary thermal volume (PTV), 110
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), 
355, 408
vessels, 714
Pulmonic stenosis, 424
Pulsatile blood fl ow, 439
Pulse contour devices, 113
Pulse oximeters, 124, 125
Pulse oximetry, 124–125, 717, 888
clinical considerations, 125
indications & contraindications, 124
techniques & complications, 124
Pumping eff ect, 63
Purkinje fi bers, 348
Pyridostigmine, 229
clinical considerations, 229
dosage & packaging, 229
molecular structures, 228f
physical structure, 229
Q
Quadriceps contraction, 1008
Quality of care, 1326–1329
R
Radial artery
blood pressure monitoring via, 
92–93
cannulation of, 93, 94f
Radial nerve block
at elbow, 998f
at wrist, 999f
Radial nerve course, 998f
Radical cystectomy, 683
Radical retropubic prostatectomy, 681
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA), 1077
Radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) 
technology
in operating rooms, 26–27
RAE tube, 903
Raman spectroscopy, 127
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
production, 162
Receptor occupancy, 151
Recovery, stages of, 926t
Rectal midazolam, 888
Recurrent laryngeal nerve, 310, 780f
Refl ex sympathetic dystrophy 
(RSD), 1048
Regional wall motion abnormalities
classifi cation of, 451f
Remifentanil. See also Opioids
ester structure, 193
history of, 5
plasma concentration of, 193f
Renal blood fl ow, 639, 911
hormonal regulation, 641
intrinsic regulation, 641
neuronal and paracrine 
regulation, 641
tubuloglomerular balance and 
feedback, 641
Renal blood fl ow (RBF), 639
Renal cell carcinoma, 684
Renal clearance, 639
Renal corpuscle, 632
Renal function, 642–645
blood urea nitrogen, 655–656
blood urea nitrogen:creatinine 
ratio, 657
creatinine clearance, 657
direct anesthetic eff ects, 643–644
drugs, 644
intravenous agents, 644
volatile agents, 643–644
direct surgical eff ects, 644–645
evaluation, 655–658
indirect eff ects, 643
cardiovascular, 643
endocrine, 643
neurologic, 643
serum creatinine, 656–657, 656f
urinalysis, 657–658
Renal impairment
drugs with potential for, 664t
fl uid therapy, 666
induction, 666
intraoperative considerations, 666
maintenance of anesthesia, 666
mild to moderate, 665–666
monitoring, 666
preoperative considerations, 665
Renal physiology, 631–650. See also 
Diuretics
anesthesia and surgery on, 642–645
case discussion on, 649–650
circulation in, 639–641
nephron in, 632–639 (See also 
Nephron)
Renal plasma fl ow (RPF), 639, 828
Renal replacement therapy (RRT), 661
Rendell–Baker–Soucek pediatric face 
mask, 315f
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, 
367, 381
Replicative senescence, 910
Rescuer’s exhaled air, 1237
Resectoscope, 674
Reservoir bag (breathing bag), 35, 35f
Resistance, 40
Respiratory acidosis, 1150
Respiratory alkalosis, 1156
Respiratory anatomy, functional, 
488–492
innervation, 492
pulmonary circulation and lymphatics, 
491–492
pulmonary capillaries, 492
pulmonary lymphatics, 492
rib cage and muscles of respiration, 
488–489
tracheobronchial tree, 489–491, 490f
alveoli, 490–491, 491f
Respiratory care, 1280
hypoxias, classifi cation of, 1281t
medical gas therapy, 1281
Respiratory disease, anesthesia with, 
527–544, 904
case discussion on, 542–544
obstructive pulmonary disease, 
530–537
asthma, 530–534 (See also Asthma)
chronic, 534–537
pulmonary embolism, 539–541
pulmonary risk factors and, 528–530, 
528t, 529t, 530f
restrictive pulmonary disease, 
538–539
acute intrinsic, 538
chronic intrinsic, 538–539
extrinsic, 539
Respiratory failure, 743
Respiratory gas exchange monitors, 
123–129
anesthetic gas analysis, 127–129
capnography, 125–127
esophageal stethoscopes, 
123–124, 124f
precordial stethoscopes, 123–124
pulse oximetry, 124–125
Respiratory muscle degeneration, 753
Respiratory physiology, 487–524
blood respiratory gases, transport of, 
514–520
carbon dioxide, 518–520
oxygen, 514–518
breathing in, mechanism of, 493
mechanical ventilation, 493
spontaneous ventilation, 493, 494f
carbon dioxide tension
alveolar tension, 513–514, 514f
arterial tension, 514
end-tidal tension, 514
mixed venous tension, 513
pulmonary end-capillary tension, 514
 
INDEX 
1361 
case discussion on, 523–524
control of breathing in, 520–522
central respiratory centers, 521
central sensors, 521, 521f
eff ects of anesthesia, 522, 523f
peripheral sensors, 521–522, 522f
lung receptors, 522
peripheral chemoreceptors, 
521–522
gas exchange, eff ects of anesthesia, 
509–510
lung, nonrespiratory functions of, 
522–523
fi ltration & reservoir function, 
522–523
metabolism, 523
oxygen tension
alveolar tension, 511
arterial tension, 512–513, 
512t, 513f
mixed venous tension, 513, 514t
pulmonary end-capillary tension, 
511–512
pulmonary perfusion, 506–507
distribution of, 506–507, 507f
ventilation/perfusion ratios, 
507, 508f
shunts, 507–509, 509f
venous admixture, 508–509, 510f
ventilation, 504–506, 504t
distribution of, 504–505, 505f
time constants of, 505–506
Respirometers. See Spirometers
Restrictive pulmonary disease, 
538–539
acute intrinsic, 538
chronic intrinsic, 538–539
extrinsic, 539
Resuscitation, 40–41, 41f
bags, 40
Resuscitation breathing systems, 
40–41, 41f
laerdal resuscitator, 41f
Resuscitator breathing systems
disadvantages to, 41
Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), 1288
Retrobulbar block, 765
Retrobulbar injection, 766
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection 
(RPLND), 683
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 795
systemic manifestations of, 795t
Right coronary artery (RCA), 362
Rigid bronchoscopy
apneic oxygenation, 567
conventional ventilation, 567
jet ventilation, 568
Ringer’s injection, 893
Ringer’s solution, 687
Robot-assisted radical prostatectomy, 
682
Rocuronium, 218–219, 659
dosage, 219
metabolism & excretion, 218–219
physical structure, 218
side eff ects & clinical considerations, 
219
Roentgen equivalent in man (REM), 16
Roller pumps, 438
Ropivacaine, 965, 980
Routine airway management, 312
S
Safety interlock technology
in operating rooms, 26
Safety-related clinical practice guidelines, 
1325
Saphenous nerve block
distal saphenous technique, 1010
proximal saphenous technique, 1010
trans-sartorial technique, 1010
Scavenging system, 81
Schimmelbusch mask, 31
Schizophrenia, 626
Sciatic nerve, 1013f
anatomy and sonoanatomy, 1014f
anatomy and surface, 1011f
in popliteal fossa
anatomy and sonoanatomy, 1014f
subgluteal, 1012f
into tibial and peroneal branches, 
1013f
Sciatic nerve block, 1010
anterior
anatomy and surface, 1011f
anterior approach, 1011–1012
popliteal approach, 1013–1015
posterior/classic/labat approach, 
1010–1011
subgluteal approach, 1012
Scopolamine
clinical considerations, 236
dosage & packaging, 236
physical structure, 236
Sedation/analgesia/anesthesia
complications, 931t
continuum of death, 930t
pediatric patients, goals of, 933t
Segmental neurological process, 622
Seizure disorders, 616–618
classifi cation of, 616f
intraoperative management, 617–618
preoperative considerations, 616
preoperative management, 616–617
Seldinger’s technique, of right internal 
jugular cannulation, 100, 
106, 102f
Selective nerve root block (SNRB), 1077
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), 624
Sellick’s maneuver, 278
Sensory innervation
of fi ngers, 999f
Septic shock, 1318
Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs), 1055
Serotonin syndrome, 1190
Serum calcium, 737
Serum creatinine, 656–657, 656f
Serum potassium concentration, 755
Sevofl urane
biotransformation & toxicity, 172
clinical pharmacology of, 171–173
contraindications, 172
drug interactions, 173
eff ects on organ systems
cardiovascular, 171–172
cerebral, 172
hepatic, 172
neuromuscular, 172
renal, 172
respiratory, 172
physical properties of, 171
Shivering, 1185, 1264
Short-acting anesthetic agents, 
use of, 920
Shorter acting medications, 920
Shunts, 507–509, 509f
venous admixture, 508–509, 510f
Shy–Drager syndrome, 622
Sickle cell anemia, manifestations, 1178t
Simple/oxygen mask, 1283–1284
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 347
Situational awareness
crew resource management (CRM), 25
Sleeve pneumonectomy, 556
Soda lime, 37, 37t
Sodium balance, disorders, 1120–1121
extracellular fl uid volume, regulation
anesthetic implications, 1122–1123
control mechanisms, 1121–1122
osmoregulation vs. volume 
regulation, 1122
Sodium channel
schematic of, 202f
Sodium nitroprusside, 257–259
clinical uses, 257–258
eff ects on organ systems, 258–259
mechanism of action, 257
metabolism, 258, 258f
Somatic nociceptors, 1033
1362 
INDEX
Somatosensory-evoked potentials 
(SEPs), 134
neuroanatomic pathways, 135f
Speech disorders
spectrum of, 312, 312t
Spinal anesthesia (intrathecal), 967
specifi c technique for, 955
spinal anesthetic agents, 957–958
spinal block, factors infl uencing level, 
955–957
spinal catheters, 955
spinal needles, 955
Spinal anesthetic agents, 958t
Spinal canal, 1044
position, 957
Spinal column, 941
Spinal cord, 943
Spinal cord injury, 818–819, 1221
anesthetic considerations, 623
acute transection, 623
chronic transection, 623–624
encephalitis, 624
preoperative considerations, 623
Spinal cord stimulation (SCS), 
1081, 1082f
Spinal cord stimulator
patient positioning for insertion, 1081f
Spinal epidural abscess (EA), 
971–972
Spinal/epidural anesthesia, 945
Spinal/epidural blocks
clinical considerations, 947
contraindications, 947–948
neuraxial blockade, 948
antiplatelet drugs, 949
fi brinolytic/thrombolytic 
therapy, 949
low-molecular-weight heparin 
(LMWH), 949
oral anticoagulants, 948
standard/unfractionated 
heparin, 949
Spinal needles, 955, 955f
Spine surgery, 608–609
intraoperative management in, 
608–609
monitoring in, 609
positioning in, 608–609
preoperative management in, 608
Spinothalamic tract, 1028
Spinous processes, 950
Spiral wire-reinforced catheters, 960
Spirometers, 67–68
designs, 69f
Spirometric loops, 129
Spirometry, 129
Spironolactone, 648
Splanchnic nerve block, 1073
Spondylosis, 1046
Spontaneous ventilations, 35
Starling’s law, 353f
α-stat management, 460
Stellate block, 1073f. See Cervicothoracic 
block
Stellate ganglion blocks, 1080
Stenotic aortic valve, 414f
Stereotactic surgery, 600–601
drugs used, advantages and 
disadvantages, 601t
Steroid injection
fl uoroscopic image, 1078f
Stiff  person syndrome, 751
Strain gauge pressure transducers, 97
Stroke volume (SV), 104, 351–356
aft erload in, 354–355
cardiac, 352t
contractility in, 355
preload in, 352–354
diastolic function and ventricular 
compliance, 354
ventricular fi lling in, 353–354
valvular dysfunction in, 356
wall motion abnormalities in, 355
Strong ion diff erence (SID), 1142, 1143f
Subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(SAH), 605
Hunt and Hess grading scale 
for, 605t
neurological surgeons grading scale 
for, 605t
Subgluteal sciatic block, 1012f
Substance abuse, 626–627
acute and chronic, 626t
Succinylcholine, 203, 205–211, 
659, 761
dosage, 208–209
drug interactions, 207–208
cholinesterase inhibitors, 207–208
nondepolarizing relaxants, 208
history of, 4
metabolism & excretion, 205–207
physical structure, 205
side eff ects & clinical considerations, 
209–211
cardiovascular, 209
fasciculations, 209
generalized contractions, 210
histamine release, 211
hyperkalemia, 209–210
intracranial pressure, 211
intragastric pressure elevation, 210
intraocular pressure elevation, 210
malignant hyperthermia, 210
masseter muscle rigidity, 210
muscle pains, 210
prolonged paralysis, 211
Succinylcholine-induced 
hyperkalemia, 210t
Sudden cardiac death (SCD), 400
Sufentanil, 4. See also Opioids
Sugammadex, 204, 231
clinical considerations, 231
physical structure, 231
Sulfobromophthalein (BSP) dye, 168
Sulfur hexafl uoride, 762
Superfi cial cervical plexus
distribution of, 1018f
Superfi cial cervical plexus, distribution 
of, 1018f
Superior hypogastric plexus block
anatomy, 1075
complications, 1075
indications, 1075
technique, 1075
Supraclavicular block
ultrasound probe placement, 988f
supraclavicular block, 987f
Supraglottic airway devices (SADs), 
317–320
Suprascapular nerve block, 1066, 1066f
anatomy, 1066
complications, 1066
technique, 1066
Supraventricular tachycardias 
(SVTs), 397
Surgical airway techniques, 332–333
Surgical cricothyrotomy, 332
Surgical stress response, 1092–1096
β blockers, 1096
intravenous α2-agonist therapy, 1096
lidocaine infusion, intravenous, 1096
minimally invasive surgery, 1093
multimodal interventions, 1090f
regional anesthesia/analgesia 
techniques, 1093–1096
Suxamethonium. See Succinylcholine
Sympathetic-induced 
vasoconstriction, 360
Sympathetic nerve blocks, 1072
Sympathetic nervous system, 224
Sympathetic tone, in heart failure, 367
Sympathoadrenal activation, 829
Synchronized intermittent mandatory 
ventilation (SIMV), 75
Syncope
causes of, 429t
Synergistic interaction, 181
Syringomyelia, 622–623
 
INDEX 
1363 
Systemic circulation, 358–365. See also 
Circulation, systemic
Systemic infl ammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS), 1313
Systemic vascular resistance index 
(SVRI), 355
Systemic vascular resistances (SVRs), 
355, 381, 439
Systolic arterial blood pressure (SBP), 87
Systolic function, assessment of, 
356–358
T
Tachycardia
due to atracurium, 216
due to pancuronium, 217
overview algorithm, 1253f
Tachyphylaxis, 269
Tapentadol, 1058
Temperature
in noncardiovascular monitoring, 
136–137
indications & contraindications, 
136–137
techniques & complications, 137
in operating rooms, 15
sensitivity due to atracurium, 216
Temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ) 
injuries, 1211
Tensilon test, 750
Terminal nerves, blocks, 994–1000
digital nerve blocks, 999–1000
intravenous regional anesthesia, 
1000–1001
median nerve block, 994–996
musculocutaneous nerve block, 
998–999
radial nerve block, 997–998
ulnar nerve block, 996
Testicular tumors, 683
Tetralogy of fallot, 426–427
Th erapeutic Intervention Scoring System 
(TISS), 1278
Th erapeutic window, 150
Th ermodilution, 110–112
curve, 110, 110f, 112f
Th ermoregulation, 1184–1185
anesthetic agents, 1184
Th iocyanate, 258
Th iopental, 1190
Th oracic bioimpedance, 114
Th oracic paravertebral nerve block
anatomy, 1067
complication, 1068
indications, 1067
technique, 1067–1068
Th oracic surgery, 545–543. See also 
Specifi c surgeries
case discussion on, 571–573
diagnostic thoracic procedures, 
567–568
bronchoscopy for, 567–568
mediastinoscopy, 568
esophageal surgery, 570–571
lung resection, 555–564 (See also Lung 
resection)
lung transplantation, 567–570
one-lung ventilation in, 
548–555
anatomic considerations in, 
550–551
double-lumen bronchial tubes in, 
549–554
double-lumen tubes, complications 
of, 554
double-lumen tubes, placement of, 
551–554
single-lumen tracheal tubes with 
bronchial blocker in, 554–555
physiologic considerations in 
anesthesia for, 546–549
lateral decubitus position in, 
546–547, 546f, 547f
open pneumothorax in, 547–548
tracheal resection, 564–566 (See also 
Tracheal resection)
video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery 
(VATS), 566–567
Th oracic sympathetic chain block, 1073
Th oracotomy, 1242
Th ree-limb lead placement, rearranged, 
98, 98f
Th rombocytopenia, 849
Th romboelastography (TEG), 446, 813f
Th romboembolism, 925
Th rombomodulin (TM), 810
Th yroid
hyperthyroidism, 733–735
hypothyroidism, 735–736
physiology, 733
Th yroidectomy, 734
Th yroid hormone, 733
Th yrotoxicosis, 734, 756
Th yrotropin-releasing factor (TRF), 733
Th yrotropin-releasing hormone 
(TRH), 733
Tibial/common peroneal nerve 
courses, 1016f
Tibial nerve, 1016f
Time-cycled ventilators, 73
cycle, 1289
Time-velocity interval (TVI), 118
Time-weighted average (TWA), 16
Timolol, 763
Tissue Doppler, 359f
Tissue group composition, 144t
Tissue hypoperfusion
hyperfi brionolysis, mechanism 
of, 811f
Tissue necrosis, 144
T lymphocytes, 686
Tonometry, for arterial blood pressuring 
monitoring, 90–92
Total hip arthroplasty, 797f
uncemented, 794f
Total hip replacement (THR), 795
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 
technique, 175, 184, 454–455, 
597, 920, 925
Total knee replacement
intraoperative management, 
799–800
preoperative considerations, 799
Total lung capacity (TLC), 530
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 
1195–1196
infusions, 1197
Total serum calcium, 737
Tracheal lumen
view of carina, 553f
Tracheal resection, 564–566, 
566f, 567f
anesthetic considerations, 564–566
preoperative considerations, 564
Tracheal tube (TT), 326f, 1232
disadvantages of wrapping, 776t
Tracheobronchial tree
anatomy of, 550f
Tracheotomy, 1237
Tranexamic acid
bleeding, preventing death, 811f
Transcardiopulmonary thermodilution
global end-diastolic volume (GEDV) 
assessment, 113f
Transcranial Doppler (TCD), 453
Transcutaneous cardiac pacing 
(TCP), 1249
Transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation (TENS), 1081
therapy, 1049
Transducer system
natural frequency, 96f
Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) 
probes, 1211
Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE), 103, 103f, 114, 357, 
396, 437, 446f–448f, 446f–449f, 
686, 715
1364 
INDEX
Transfusion. See also Blood transfusion, 
complications
blood bank practices, 1170–1171
blood groups, 1169
ABO system, 1169
red blood cell antigen systems, 1169
Rh system, 1169
compatibility testing
ABO–Rh testing, 1169
antibody screen, 1169–1170
crossmatch, 1170
crossmatching, 1170
emergency, 1170
intraoperative transfusion 
practices, 1171
fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 1171
granulocyte transfusions, 1171–1172
packed red blood cells, 1171
platelet transfusions, 1171
procoagulant transfusions, 
indications for, 1172
Transfusionrelated acute lung injury 
(TRALI), 812
Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), 613
Transient neurological symptoms 
(TNS), 972
Transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 
(TRPV1), 265–266
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt (TIPS), 713, 932
Transmittance oximetry, 124
Transplanted heart
anesthetic management, 428–429
patient with, 428–429
preoperative considerations, 428
Transpulmonary thermodilution, 110
Trans-sacral nerve block
anatomy, 1070
complications, 1071
indications, 1070
technique, 1070–1071
Transthoracic echocardiography 
(TTE), 114, 357, 396
Transurethral bladder resection, 682–683
Transurethral resection of the prostate 
(TURP), 674
absorption of, 675
bladder perforation, 676
manifestations of, 675t
surgical complications, 675t
treatment of, 676
Transversus abdominis plane (TAP), 895
Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) 
block, 1021–1022, 1081, 1095
anatomy, 1021f
ultrasound image, 1022f
ultrasound image of, 1022f
Trauma anesthesia, 806
Trauma/emergency surgery, anesthesia
airway, 806–808
breathing, 808
circulation, 808
defi nitive trauma interventions
anesthetic induction/maintenance, 
814–815
damage control surgery, 815
injury assessment, 808–809
minimizing risks of exposure, 808–809
neurological function, 808
resuscitation
hemorrhage, 809
hemostatic resuscitation, 810–812
massive transfusion protocols, 
812–814
trauma-induced coagulopathy, 
809–810
Trauma-induced coagulopathy
mechanism of, 810f
Trauma patient
airway management of, 807
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 815
diff use neuronal injury, 816
Glasgow Coma Scale for, 602t
intracranial pressure, 816–817
intraparenchymal injuries, 816
multiple trauma, 817–818
primary brain injuries, 815
secondary brain injuries, 816
Trendelenburg positions, 672
Tricuspid atresia, 427
Tricuspid regurgitation, 418–419
anesthetic management
choice of agents, 419
monitoring, 419
objectives, 419
pathophysiology, 418
preoperative considerations, 418
pulmonary artery pressure (PAS) 
calculation, 418–419
treatment, 419
Trigeminal nerve block
anatomy, 1061
complications, 1064
gasserian ganglion block, 1061
indications, 1061
mandibular nerve, 1063–1064
maxillary nerve, 1063–1064
ophthalmic nerve, 1061
Tromethamine, 442
Truncus arteriosus, 427
Trunk, peripheral nerve blocks
intercostal block, 1018
paravertebral block, 1019–1020
superfi cial cervical plexus block, 1017
transversus abdominis plane 
(TAP) block, 1021–1022
ultrasound image of, 1022f
Tubless lithotripsy unit
schematic representation of, 678
Tubuloglomerular feedback, 641
Tumors, 1047
venous supply, 741
Two-compartment model, 147, 148f
U
Ulnar artery
blood pressure monitoring via, 93
Ulnar nerve
course, 996f
stimulation, 138
Ulnar nerve block, 996
at elbow, 997f
at wrist, 997f
Ultrafi ltration, 440
Ultrasonic fl ow sensors, 68
Ultrasound-guided interscalene 
block, 986f
Ultrasound-guided procedures, 1061
Unanticipated hospital admission, 
following ambulatory 
surgery, 927
Unidirectional valves, 39, 39f
Unstable angina
defi nition of, 388
Upper extremities, surgery
distal upper extremity surgery, 801
shoulder surgery, 800–801
Upper extremity
axillary block, 989–994
brachial plexus anatomy, 981–982
infraclavicular block, 989
interscalene block, 982–986
intravenous regional anesthesia, 
1000–1001
peripheral nerve blocks, 981–1001
supraclavicular block, 986–989
terminal nerves, blocks, 994–1000
Upper respiratory tract infection 
(URI), 887
Uremia, 661
Urinary bladder catheterization, 968
Urinary diversion, 683
Urinary excretion, 1134
Urinary output
clinical considerations, 138
indications & contraindications, 137
in noncardiovascular monitoring, 
137–138
techniques & complications, 137
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 83, 179, 285
 
INDEX 
1365 
Uterine activity
anesthetic agents, 835
Uterine atony, 836
Uterine muscle, 835
Uteroplacental circulation, 829, 830f
anesthetic agents, placental transfer of, 
832–833
placental function, 830
physiological anatomy, 830
placental exchange, 830–831
respiratory gas exchange, 831–832
uterine blood fl ow, 829–830
uteroplacental blood fl ow, anesthetic 
agents eff ect, 833
Uteroplacental insuffi  ciency, 829
V
Vacuum system
in medical gas systems, 13
Vaginal birth aft er cesarean (VBAC), 849
Vaginal delivery, general anesthesia, 855t
Vagus nerve, 780f
Valvular aortic stenosis, 414
Valvular heart disease, 405–422
anticoagulation, 421–422
aortic regurgitation, 416–418
aortic stenosis, 414–415
aortic valve area & transvalvular 
gradient, calculation of, 
415–416
endocarditis prophylaxis, 419–421
general evaluation of patients, 
405–408
history of, 406
laboratory evaluation, 406
mitral regurgitation, 410–413
mitral stenosis, 408–410
mitral valve prolapse, 413–414
physical examination, 406
special studies, 406–408
specifi c valvular disorders, 408–422
tricuspid regurgitation, 418–419
Vaporization, physics of, 60
Vaporizers, 60–64
copper kettle vaporizer, 60–61
electronic vaporizers, 63–64
modern conventional vaporizer, 
61–63
vaporization, physics of, 60
Vaporizing chamber, 61
Vapor-phase humidifi er, 71
Vascular age, 255
Vascular surgery, 476–483
anesthetic management of, 478–481
postoperative considerations, 481
surgery involving aortic arch, 
478–479
surgery involving descending 
thoracic aorta, 479–480
kidney failure, 480
paraplegia, 479–480
surgery on abdominal aorta, 480–481
surgery on ascending aorta, 478
carotid artery surgery, 481–483
general anesthesia, 482–483
monitoring cerebral function, 483
preoperative anesthetic evaluation 
& management, 482
preoperative considerations, 
481–482
regional anesthesia, 483
lesions of aorta, 477–478
aneurysms in, 477
coarctation of, 478
dissection of, 477
occlusive disease of, 478
trauma in, 478
surgery on aorta, 476–477
preoperative considerations, 
476–477
Vasoconstriction, 1270
Vasodepressor, 360
Vasodilating drugs, 88
Vasodilators, 466t, 585–586
Vasopressin, 713
Vasopressors, 414, 465t, 584–585
Vasospasm
algorithm for management, 606f
Vecuronium, 218, 659
dosage, 218
metabolism & excretion, 218
physical structure, 218
side eff ects & clinical considerations
cardiovascular, 218
liver failure, 218
Venous air embolism, 598–600
central venous catheterization, 599
monitoring for, 599–600
treatment of, 600
Ventilation, 504–506, 504t
artifi cial support of, 1280
distribution of, 504–505, 505f
mechanical (See Mechanical 
ventilation)
in operating rooms, 16
spontaneous (See Spontaneous 
ventilation)
time constants of, 505–506
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) 
scintigraphy, 556
Ventilators, 72–81
alarms, 78–79
anesthesia ventilators, problems 
associated with, 79–81
circuit design, 75–77
double-circuit system ventilators, 
76–77
piston ventilators, 77
spill valve, 77
expiratory phase, 74
function, 72
inspiratory phase, 73
overview, 72–75
pressure & volume monitoring, 77–78
transition phase from expiration to 
inspiration, 74–75
transition phase from inspiration to 
expiration, 73–74
ventilator alarms, 78–79
ventilator circuit design, 75–77
double-circuit system ventilators, 
76–77
piston ventilators, 77
spill valve, 77
Ventricular arrhythmias, 400
classifi cation of, 401t–402t
Ventricular compliance
normal and abnormal, 354f
Ventricular function curves, 356, 356f
Ventricular hypertrophy, 368
Ventricular pressure-volume 
diagrams, 357f
Ventricular pressure–volume 
relationships, 366f
Ventricular septal defect (VSD), 425
Ventricular systolic function, 351
Ventricular tachycardia (VT), 392, 1241
Venturi device, 77
Vertebrae, 941
Vessel-rich group, 144
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery 
(VATS), 556, 566–567, 1098
Video laryngoscopes, 322–325
Viral DNA, 1224
Vitamin D, 1131
Vitamin E, 897
Volatile anesthetics, 60, 162, 533, 582–
583, 742. See also Desfl urane; 
Enfl urane; Halothane; 
Isofl urane; Sevofl urane
cerebral autoregulation, dose-
dependent depression of, 582f
on cerebral blood fl ow & volume, 582
on cerebral metabolic rate, 582
cerebral metabolic rate & blood fl ow, 
altered coupling of, 582
on cerebrospinal fl uid dynamics, 
582–583
on intracranial pressure, 583
Volume-controlled ventilation, 77
Volume-cycled ventilators, 74
1366 
INDEX
W
Waste anesthetic gas disposal (WAGD), 
10, 13, 16
Waste-gas scavengers, 81–83
Wenger chestpiece. See Precordial 
stethoscope
Wheatstone bridge circuit, 97, 97f
Wick humidifi er, 71
Wide dynamic range (WDR) neurons, 
1030
Widened pulse pressures, 256
Widespread Pain Index (WPI), 1042
Wong-Baker FACES rating scale, 1039
World Health Organization (WHO), 10
Wright respirometer, 67, 67f
X
Xenon
advantages and disadvantages of, 164t
clinical pharmacology of, 173
Y
Y-connection, 68
Y-connector, 66, 67
Z
Ziconotide, 1052
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, 280
Zygapophyseal, 1046
This page intentionally left blank 
= Iliohypogastric
= Ilioinguinal
= Genitofemoral
   Dorsal nerve 
 
*
†
X
Nerve root
Peripheral nerve
Trigeminal
Anterior cutaneous nerve of neck
Supraclavicular nerves
Axillary nerve
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm 
Lateral cutaneous nerve of arm 
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm 
Lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm 
Radial
Median
Ulnar
Lateral femoral cutaneous
Obturator
Medial femoral cutaneous
Anterior femoral cutaneous
Lateral cutaneous nerve of calf
Saphenous
Superficial peroneal
Sural
Lateral and medial plantar 
Deep peroneal 
Ophthalmic branch
Maxillary branch
Mandibular branch
of penis
  Perineal
*
†
X
Lateral thoracic rami
P
o
st
.
Mid
. Ant
Anterior thoracic rami
C3
C4
C5
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1 L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
T1
C8
C6
C6
C7
T2
