Rose Campise-Luther, MD, FAAP
Assistant Professor
Pediatric Anesthesiology
Medical College of Wisconsin
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Thomas Cutter, MD, MAEd
Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Christina D. Diaz, MD
Assistant Professor
Pediatric Anesthesiology
Medical College of Wisconsin
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Karen B. Domino, MD, MPH
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine
University of Washington School of Medicine
Seattle, Washington
Richard E. Galgon, MD, MS
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health
Madison, Wisconsin
Esther D. Garazi, MD
Department of Anesthesia
Perioperative and Pain Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California
Gregory G. Ginsberg
Professor of Medicine
Director of Endoscopy
Gastroenterology Division
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Basavana G. Goudra, MD, FRCA, FCARCSI
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Caitlin J. Guo, MD, MBA
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia
New York University Medical Center
New York, New York
Anil Gupta, MD, FRCA, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care
Institution for Medicine and Health
Örebro, Sweden
Manon Hache, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
Columbia University Medical Center
New York, New York
Eric A. Harris, MD, MBA
Associate Professor of Clinical Anesthesiology
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Medicine, 
and Pain Management
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine
Miami, Florida
Jennifer E. Hofer, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
E. Heidi Jerome, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Pediatrics
Columbia University Medical Center
New York, New York
Max Kanevsky, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Anesthesia
Division of Cardiovascular Anesthesia
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California
Meghan Lane-Fall, MD, MSHP
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Kelly Lebak, MD
Anesthesiologist
MetroHealth Medical Center
University of Wisconsin—Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
Jeffrey Lee, MS, MD
Assistant Professor
Anesthesiology
University of Wisconsin—Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
Contributors
viii
Mark A. Leibel, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health
Madison, Wisconsin
Larry Lindenbaum, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine
Medical College of Wisconsin
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Alex Macario, MD, MBA
Professor
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain 
Medicine
Vice-Chair for Education
Program Director, Anesthesia Residency
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California
Jeff E. Mandel, MD, MS
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Perelman School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Ramon Martin, MD, PhD
Staff Anesthesiologist
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain 
Medicine
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Assistant Professor
Anesthesia
Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts
Julia I. Metzner, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
Roger A. Moore, MD
Clinical Associate Professor of Anesthesiology and Critical 
Care
Chair Emeritus, Deborah Heart and Lung Center
Perelman School of Medicine
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Melissa L. Pant, MD
Clinical Associate
Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Mark C. Phillips, MD
Assistant Professor and Medical Director, Advanced GI 
Endoscopy Anesthesia
Department of Anesthesiology
University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine
Birmingham, Alabama
Christopher D. Press, MD
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative 
and Pain Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California
Johan Raeder, MD, PhD
Professor
Faculty of Medicine
NOR Consultant
Department of Anaesthesiology
Oslo University Hospital
Oslo, Norway
W. Kirke Rogers, MD
Associate
Department of Anesthesiology
The University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College 
of Medicine
Iowa City, Iowa
Daniel Rubin, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
John P. Scott, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Pediatrics
Medical College of Wisconsin
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Jack S. Shanewise, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology
Columbia University Medical Center
New York, New York
Preet Mohinder Singh, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research
Chandigarh, India
Scott Springman, MD
Professor
Anesthesiology
University of Wisconsin—Madison
Madison, Wisconsin
Lena S. Sun, MD
E.M. Papper Professor of Pediatric Anesthesiology
Department of Anesthesiology and Pediatrics
Columbia University Medical Center
New York, New York
Contributors
ix
BobbieJean Sweitzer, MD
Professor of Anesthesia and Critical Care
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
University of Chicago
Director
Anesthesia Perioperative Medicine Clinic
Professor of Medicine
Department of Medicine
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Pedro P. Tanaka, MD, PhD
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and 
Pain Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California
Jonathan W. Tanner, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Anesthesiology and Critical 
Care
Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Perelman School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
John M. Trummel, MD MPH
Assistant Professor
Department of Anesthesiology
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center
Lebanon, New Hampshire
Sophia van Hoff, MD
Resident
Department of Anesthesiology
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center
Lebanon, New Hampshire
Lindsay L. Warner, BS
Mayo Medical School
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
Mary Ellen Warner, MD
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
Nafisseh S. Warner, MD
Mayo School of Graduate Medical Education
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
Mark S. Weiss, MD
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology and Critical Care
Director of Inpatient Anesthesia Endoscopy Services
Perelman School of Medicine
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
 x
Foreword
Anesthesiology has witnessed incredible advances over the 
past 3 decades. Improved patient safety has been a driving 
force for our advancements in medical technology, in the 
expansion of our pharmacological armamentarium, and in 
the development of innovative anesthetic techniques. The 
reward for these improvements is better patient outcomes 
and the ability to provide complex surgical interventions 
to patients that would have been impossible to perform 
without the anesthetic advancements. There has never 
been a better time for anesthesiologists to take the sickest 
and most debilitated of patents of all ages through the most 
highly invasive and stressful procedures in such a safe and 
effective manner. In the 21st century, and significantly 
due to advances in anesthetic care, surgery has also had 
an increased focus on out-of-operating room procedures, 
necessitating continued anesthesia innovation for the envi­
ronment outside the operating room. Just a few decades 
ago, it was rare that anesthesiologists were called to provide 
care outside the typical operating room setting; when doing 
so, it was usually limited to emergent or highly unusual cir­
cumstances. Indeed, training programs primarily focused 
on providing the highest quality and safest care under the 
controlled environment of an operating room arena, where 
supplies, equipment, and personnel were readily available 
to support most medical complications. The “comfort zone” 
for nearly all anesthesiologists did not extend far past the 
sterile corridors of the operating room.
Once the acknowledgment is made that out-of-operating 
room anesthetic care has to be provided, guidelines for the 
delivery of that care must be established. As previously 
stated, providing anesthesia out of the operating room 
typically falls outside the training and comfort zone of most 
anesthesiologists. There are few comprehensive guidelines, 
protocols, or educational materials tailored to the specific 
needs of these types of anesthetics. Also, the environment 
and the techniques are unfamiliar to many anesthesiolo­
gists. Education and information are critical for both reduc­
ing physician anxiety and for standardizing the procedures 
and practices for care outside the operating room.
Recent reports filed with the Anesthesia Quality Institute 
indicate that many of the anesthetics today are delivered 
outside of traditional operating room locations. At the 
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, the increase in 
anesthetics delivered outside the operating room has grown 
over the past decade from a minimal number of cases yearly 
to a time today when over 30% of the anesthetics are given 
in nontraditional locations. Many anesthesia departments 
are unprepared psychologically and educationally to meet 
the increasing demand for out-of–operating room care. 
There are significant manpower, economic, educational, 
and patient safety factors that need to be explored in order 
to operationalize an effective out-of–operating room care 
plan. However, if an anesthesia department is to continue 
to be viable in this changing surgical and procedural envi­
ronment, it is imperative that the departments and anes­
thesia groups take a cooperative approach, rather than an 
obstructive attitude, in partnering with those physicians 
performing the procedures.
In this book, Drs. Mark Weiss and Lee Fleisher have pro­
vided an important tool to address both the challenges and 
opportunities for anesthesiologists in providing non–operat­
ing room anesthesia (NORA) care. As NORA continues to con­
sume more of the time and effort of anesthesia departments, 
NORA training should become an integral part of anesthe­
sia residency programs. However, until anesthesiologists do 
receive formal education in NORA, I believe this book will go 
a long way in expanding the comfort zone of anesthesiologists 
to out-of–operating room locations. As minimally invasive 
procedures rapidly increase, it is certain that the practice of 
anesthesia will significantly expand in nontraditional envi­
ronments and that our services will be vital for the smooth 
flow of patient care in all out-of–operating room settings.
Roger A. Moore, MD
Clinical Associate Professor of 
Anesthesiology and Critical Care, 
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Past President, Society of Cardiovascular 
Anesthesiologists
Past President, American Society 
of Anesthesiologists
xi
Preface
The past several years have seen advances in medical tech­
nology that allow physicians to treat a patient with mini­
mally invasive procedures. With increasing frequency, 
these procedures are being performed outside the tradi­
tional operating room environment. Non–operating room 
anesthesia (NORA) cases now comprise as many as 70% of 
the cases being reported to the Anesthesia Quality Institute. 
In spite of the exponential increase in NORA caseloads, very 
little attention has been paid to this subspecialty area and 
even less with regard to developing guidelines, protocols, 
and educational materials tailored to the specific needs of 
providing anesthesia in these settings.
This book is meant to serve as an educational resource 
in regard to issues of setup, quality control, patient care 
and safety, and economic viability that are specific to 
NORA. The contributing authors are all outstanding clini­
cians who have developed expertise that relates to NORA. 
It is hoped that the information presented will facilitate 
improved patient care and provide a resource for the inclu­
sion of NORA training within residency training programs.
This is, in many ways, an important part of the future of 
anesthesia.
There are many people who have worked hard to make 
this project possible. We would first like to thank the profes­
sionals at Elsevier who have been so wonderful to work with: 
Lisa Barnes, William Schmitt, Clay Broeker, and the entire 
staff. We would like to thank Amy Meros, Administrative 
Coordinator in the department, who has been patient and 
tireless in helping to bring this manuscript together. Finally, 
we would like to thank the authors and contributors to this 
book for the many hours it takes to write a chapter.
Mark S. Weiss, MD
Lee A. Fleisher, MD
xv
Downloadable File Contents
CHAPTER 1
Table 1-1: Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Safety Checklist
Box 1-1: Sample Protocol for Cardioversion with Non–Oper­
ating Room Anesthesia
CHAPTER 2
Table 2-1: Minimum Size of Non–Operating Room Anesthe­
sia Site
Table 2-2: Minimum Number of Outlets Recommended in 
Various Hospital Locations
Table 2-3: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Suite Zones
Table 2-4: Timeline for Design and Implementation of a 
Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Site
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3-1: American Society of Anesthesiologists State­
ment on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing Locations.
Table 3-1: Magnetic Resonance Suite Zones
Box 3-2: Airway Supplies Checklist
Box 3-3: Safety Considerations in Non– Operating Room 
Anesthetizing Locations
Box 3-4: Treatment of Anaphylaxis and Anaphylactoid Reac­
tions
CHAPTER 5
Table 5-1: Quality Improvement Checklist for Locations 
Other Than the Operating Room
Figure 5-1: Continuous quality improvement (CQI) process 
uses a plan-do-study-act approach.
Table 5-2: Anesthesia Quality Institute Recommended Qual­
ity Indicators
Figure 5-2: Postanesthesia care patient satisfaction survey.
CHAPTER 6
Table 6-1: Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of 
General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation and Analgesia
Table 6-2: American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical 
Status Classification
CHAPTER 7
Table 7-1: American Society of Anesthesiologists Definitions 
of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation and Anal­
gesia
Table 7-2: Ramsay Sedation Scale
Table 7-3: Modified Observer’s Assessment of Alertness/ 
Sedation Scale
Table 7-4: Propofol and/or Remifentanil Sedation Doses
Table 7-5: Modified Aldrete Scoring System
Table 7-6: Post-Anesthetic Discharge Scoring System
CHAPTER 9
Table 9-1: American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical 
Status Classification
Figure 9-1: Patient medical history
Table 9-2: Metabolic Equivalents of Functional Capacity 
Measured 1 Through 12
Box 9-1: Elements of the Airway Examination
Figure 9-2: Cardiac evaluation algorithm.
Box 9-2: Cardiac Conditions for Which Endocarditis Prophy­
laxis Is Indicated
Box 9-3: Endocarditis Prophylaxis Indications
Box 9-4: Summary of Recommendations from the 2007 Sci­
ence Advisory and the 2007 American College of Cardiol­
ogy and American Heart Association
Box 9-5: Potential Problems with Cardiovascular Implant­
able Electronic Devices During Surgical Procedures
Table 9-3: Preoperative Testing Guidelines for Procedures 
Performed Outside the Operating Room
Figure 9-3: STOP BANG questionnaire.
Box 9-6: Preoperative Medication Management
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10-4: Key anesthesia elements for transcatheter aor­
tic valve replacement.
CHAPTER 11
Table 11-1: Common Electrophysiology Cases and Esti­
mated Anesthesia Times
Box 11-1: Air Bubble Precautions With Right-to-Left Shunt­
ing of Blood
Table 11-2: Drugs Commonly Used in Electrophysiology 
Procedures
Box 11-2: Common Bradyarrhythmias and Tachyarrhythmias
Protocol for Anesthesia for Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation
Table 11-3: Potential Complications of Catheter Ablation of 
Atrial Fibrillation
Protocol for Anesthesia for Defibrillator Implantation
Protocol for Anesthesia for Lead Extraction
Protocol for Anesthesia for Noninvasive Programmed Stim­
ulations
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13-8: Axial dispersion of gas in an airway.
Figure 13-9: When two adjacent lung units are ventilated at 
high rates, flow is dominated by resistance.
Figure 13-10: The Venturi effect
Figure 13-11: Entrainment
Figure 13-12: Thoracic volume measured by respiratory 
inductance plethysmography under high-frequency jet 
ventilation.
Downloadable File Contents
xvi
CHAPTER 14
Table 14-1: Comparison of Drugs for Anesthesia for Upper 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Box 14-1: Common Indications for Upper Gastrointestinal 
Endoscopy Procedures
Box 14-2: Complications Related to Sedation for Upper Gas­
trointestinal Endoscopy
CHAPTER 15
Box 15-1: Guidelines for Anesthesiology Assistance During 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Table 15-1: Continuum of Depth of Sedation
Box 15-2: Predictors of Difficult Mask Ventilation and Diffi­
cult Intubation
Table 15-2: Favorable Sedative Effect Profile of Common 
Sedative Agents
CHAPTER 16
Table 16-1: Anesthesia for Interventional Bronchoscopic 
Techniques
Box 16-1: Desirable Qualities for Supraglottic Airways To Be 
Used During Flexible Bronchoscopy
Box 16-2: Undesirable Qualities for Supraglottic Airways To 
Be Used During Flexible Bronchoscopy
Table 16-2: Characteristics of Common Supraglottic Airways 
Deemed Adequate for Use During Diagnostic and Thera­
peutic Flexible Bronchoscopy
Box 16-3: Emergency Cricothyroidotomy
CHAPTER 17
Box 17-1: Classification of Severity of Reactions to Contrast 
Media
Figure 17-1: Distribution of scatter radiation from a lateral 
C-arm with the radiation source on the same side as the 
anesthesiologist.
CHAPTER 18
Table 18-1: Normal Range of Vital Signs in the Pediatric 
Patient
Table 18-2: Endotracheal Tube Sizes
Table 18-3: American Society of Anesthesiologists Nil Per Os 
Guidelines
Table 18-4: Common Hypnotic Drugs, Dosages, Duration, 
and Properties
Box 18-1: Pediatric Anesthesia Preoperative Checklist for 
Outside the Operating Room
Box 18-2: Joint Commission Sentinel Event Alert: Preventing 
Accidents and Injuries in the MRI Suite
Box 18-3: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Checklist
Box 18-4: Computed Tomography Checklist
Box 18-5: Radiation Therapy Checklist
Box 18-6: Interventional Radiology Checklist
Box 18-7: Nuclear Medicine Checklist
Box 18-8: Magnetoencephalography Scan Checklist
CHAPTER 19
Table 19-1: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Zones
Table 19-2: Degrees of Deflection and Force for Commonly 
Used Devices
CHAPTER 20
Table 20-1: Daily Schedule of Coverage for Outside the 
Operating Room
Figure 20-1: Anesthesia services agreement for outside the 
operating room.
CHAPTER 21
Figure 21-1: Chart of population 65 years of age and over by 
age: 1900 to 2050.
Table 21-1: Predicted Anesthesia Professional Participation 
Rates (%) for Colonoscopy and Esophagogastroduode­
noscopy by Year
Figure 21-2: Total cost as a function of volume, including 
fixed and variable costs.
Figure 21-3: Cost volume profit analysis.
Figure 21-4: Cost volume analysis for variable coverage.
Figure 21-5: Underused hours reflect how early the room 
finishes.
Table 21-2: Sample Weekly Schedule for Procedures Out­
side the Operating Room
CHAPTER 22
Table 22-1: Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of 
General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation and Analgesia
CHAPTER 24
Box 24-1: Agreements and Arrangements Necessary for Pro­
cedures and Anesthesia Services Outside the Operating 
Room
Box 24-2: Potential Triage Criteria in a Gastroenterological 
Endoscopy Center Using a Nurse Sedation Model   
2
The past two decades have seen advances in medical technol-
ogy that now allow physicians to treat a patient with nonin-
vasive or minimally invasive procedures. Patients who would 
have been subjected to sternotomy, thoracotomy, major vas-
cular surgery, or laparotomy just a few years ago may now 
be treated more effectively, more economically, and more 
comfortably by nonsurgical intervention in specialized areas 
outside of the operating room. These procedures are chang-
ing medicine, and the specialty is learning to change with it. 
Anesthesia cases occurring in non–operating room locations 
make up approximately 30% of all cases in the Department of 
Anesthesiology and Critical Care at the University of Penn-
sylvania, following a nationwide trend.1
Indeed, we are witnessing the development of a new 
subspecialty: Non–Operating Room Anesthesia (NORA). 
NORA cases are frequently challenging procedures that 
involve compromised patients deemed poor candidates for 
more invasive procedures. NORA cases may additionally 
involve sharing, or sometimes ceding, the airway to the pro-
ceduralist, as in interventional pulmonology. In the NORA 
procedure room, both people and the airway are managed. 
NORA practitioners are ideally able to manage a high vol-
ume of rapid-turnover cases and attend to the needs of 
patients, proceduralists, and staff.
In NORA settings, the room, the procedure, and the staff are 
all highly specialized to perform a specific task. The locations 
where these procedures are done are often designed for a spe-
cific subspecialty, such as gastroenterology or electrophysi-
ology; anesthesia services are sometimes an afterthought, 
although incorporating plans for anesthesia services is occur-
ring more frequently as new space is developed. In contrast, 
operating rooms are generally designed to accommodate a 
variety of case types, with interchangeable staff. Staff roles 
such as the circulating nurse or scrub technician are usually 
quite structured. Such standardization leads to a consistency 
that produces an acceptable level of care at minimum and a 
standard of excellence at best. The same standardization is 
not necessarily present in the NORA room, which may com-
promise the provided quality of care.
If NORA rooms are not held to the same set of standards as 
the operating room, how do you provide consistently supe-
rior care? Consistent success in NORA, as in the operating 
room, may be achieved by adhering to the structural and 
organizational standards addressed in this and other chap-
ters. This chapter will focus on the organizational aspects 
of designing—or engineering—excellence in NORA. Such 
aspects include protocols, checklists, communication during 
the procedure and during transfer of patient care, quality 
improvement methods, and continuing education. The fol-
lowing chapters will discuss structural aspects of engineering 
safety in the physical plant, where seemingly mundane 
questions such as “Where does the anesthesia machine 
go?” or “How many electrical outlets are needed?” become 
very important when designing a NORA area.
The deliberate pursuit of excellence in NORA is important 
because this venue represents the future of anesthesia. Com-
plex procedures on sicker patients, many of which would 
be canceled or postponed in a traditional operating room 
setting, will become more common. It is important to hold 
remote NORA locations to the same high standards of quality 
as those of the operating room. Engineering a high standard 
of excellence will lead to the ultimate goal—improvements in 
both quality and safety for the patient receiving NORA.
Achieving Excellence in  
Health Care
The seminal report in 2000 by the Institute of Medicine 
(IOM) titled To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System 
sparked the modern movement to improve patient safety 
and increase health care quality.2 One year later, the IOM 
published Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for 
the 21st Century, in which six aims for health care improve-
ment are advanced. According to the report, care should be 
safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, efficient, and equi-
table.3 Cases in NORA settings are well poised to meet these 
goals, because shorter, less-invasive procedures may enable 
more rapid discharge and return to preprocedure function.
Nevertheless, it is important to consider how NORA sys-
tems may be engineered to optimize the likelihood of desir-
able patient outcomes. This chapter explores proactive and 
reactive approaches to operating in high-stress, high-stakes 
environments. To explore proactive systems design, we 
draw examples from medical and nonmedical settings. As 
part of this discussion, we consider organizational structures 
that promote safe care and effective communication among 
teams. Next, we present several protocols that have been 
useful in guiding NORA care at our institution.
Even though effective organizations take steps to pre-
vent adverse incidents, problematic events still occur. It is 
therefore vital that organizations have a defined approach 
to reacting to adverse events, including errors and near-
misses. We consider how anesthesia and perioperative pro-
viders respond to these events within NORA settings and 
describe how to use these opportunities to improve care.
Engineering Excellence 
in Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesia Care
MEGHAN LANE-FALL and MARK S. WEISS
1
1  •  Engineering Excellence in Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Care
3
Proactive Versus Reactive 
Approach to Problems
It is imperative that individuals and organizations engaged 
in high-risk activities develop an approach to dealing 
with problems, including errors, near-misses, and adverse 
events. Health care has historically taken a reactive stance 
to problems by waiting to enact fixes until a pattern of 
adverse events such as wrong-side surgeries, medication 
errors, and health care–associated infections emerges. 
Health care organizations are learning how to anticipate 
reasonably expected problems, which allows them to engineer 
systems to avoid a bad outcome before it can happen. We 
first describe the discipline of human factors engineering, 
explaining how principles from this field can inform periopera-
tive systems design. Next, we explore the rise of protocols and 
checklists in perioperative medicine and discuss how these 
tools can prevent adverse events.
Proactive Approaches: 
Anticipating Problems
HUMAN FACTORS ENGINEERING
Human factors engineering (HFE; also known as human fac-
tors and ergonomics) is a discipline that considers individuals’ 
physical and mental/cognitive limitations in task development 
and evaluation. The use of color-coding, such as yellow-
striped epidural infusion tubing, and pin-index safety 
systems are two examples of HFE applied to the respective 
problems of inadvertent medication administration and 
medical gas mix-ups.
HFE is especially important in the selection of devices 
employed in clinical care. Undesirable device features may 
prompt users to create workarounds that compromise safety 
features. Poorly designed user interfaces can predispose to 
malfunction or error. Lin et  al4 showed patient-controlled 
analgesia pumps with cumbersome interfaces contributed 
to adverse events, including overdose. In NORA settings, 
devices are used by practitioners from multiple disciplines. 
The training, needs, and expectations of these users should be 
considered in the selection of monitors, drug-dispensing sys-
tems, airway support equipment, and other shared devices.
PROTOCOLS AND CHECKLISTS
Despite concerns about diminishing clinical autonomy and 
the rise of “cookbook medicine,” robust evidence demon-
strates that the use of protocols and checklists in certain 
clinical settings decreases error and improves clinical out-
comes. Perhaps the most well-known recent example is the 
work done by Atul Gawande and the Safe Surgery Saves Lives 
study group that used presurgical checklists to standardize 
care and serve as a safety check (an example is provided in 
Table 1-1).5 This group demonstrated that use of checklists 
was associated with decreased morbidity and mortality in 
eight international hospitals. Peter Pronovost’s work6 has 
similarly demonstrated a decrease in complications—specifi-
cally, central line–associated bloodstream infections—when 
checklists are used before central line insertion. Use of a daily 
goals sheet in the intensive care unit improved health care 
team communication and decreased length of stay.7
Table 1-1  Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Safety Checklist
Before Induction of Anesthesia
Before Procedure Start
Before Patient Leaves Procedure Room
Has the patient confirmed his or her identity,  
site (if applicable), procedure, and consent?
  ☐ Yes
Confirm all team members have introduced  
themselves by name and role.
Nurse verbally confirms:
  The name of the procedure
  Completion of instrument counts (if applicable)
  Specimen labeling (read specimen labels aloud, 
including patient name)
  Whether any equipment problems need to be 
addressed
Is the site marked?
  ☐ Yes
  ☐ Not applicable
Confirm the patient’s name and procedure
Is the anesthesia machine and medication  
check complete?
  ☐ Yes
Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given  
within the last 60 minutes?
  ☐ Yes
  ☐ Not applicable
To the proceduralist, anesthetist and nurse:
  What are the key concerns for recovery and 
management for this patient?
Does the patient have a:
Known allergy?
  ☐ No
  ☐ Yes
Difficult airway or aspiration risk?
  ☐ No
  ☐ Yes, and equipment and assistance  
are available
Risk for >500 mL blood loss  
(7 mL/kg in children)?
  ☐ No
  ☐ Yes, and two intravenous lines or  
central access and fluids planned
Anticipated critical events:
To proceduralist:
  What are the critical or nonroutine steps?
  How long will the case take?
  What is the anticipated blood loss?
To anesthetist:
  Are there any patient-specific concerns?
To nursing team:
  Has sterility (including indicator results)  
been confirmed?
  Are there any equipment issues  
or concerns?
Is the pulse oximeter on the patient  
and functioning?
  ☐ Yes
Is essential imaging displayed?
  ☐ Yes
  ☐ Not applicable
Modified from World Health Organization Safe Surgery Saves Lives Surgical Safety Checklist. http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/en/.
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
4
Protocols and guidelines can be especially helpful in 
infrequently encountered situations. In our institution, a 
core group of anesthesiologists provides care for patients 
receiving NORA. However, it is common for NORA loca-
tions to be staffed by someone who is not in this core group 
during evenings and weekends. Guidelines for particular 
NORA settings, such as for endoscopy and electrophysiol-
ogy, were designed to ensure uniformity of care (Box 1-1). 
Ideally, protocols provide guidance without unnecessarily 
constricting providers’ ability to customize care plans for 
individual patients.
It is important to note that safety gains seen with check-
list or protocol implementation are not always uniform. In 
any organization, cultural interactions (e.g., the relation-
ship and reporting structures of the various providers) are 
present that determine how effectively any intervention 
is executed. Identifying champions of and potential barriers 
to implementation are important first steps in adopting 
changes in practice, including protocols.8
HEALTH CARE FAILURE MODE AND  
EFFECT ANALYSIS
In engineering, failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) is 
used to examine error-prone processes, allowing identifi-
cation and prioritization of “failure modes”—situations in 
which errors can be expected to occur. FMEA was adapted 
by the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs for application to 
health care, which resulted in the creation of health care 
FMEA (HFMEA).9 Medication administration and blood 
transfusion are two processes that have been deconstructed 
using the HFMEA approach.
HFMEA is a rigorous multistep process, as follows:
   
	1.	 Define the topic
	2.	 Assemble a multidisciplinary team
	3.	 Graphically describe (map) the process
	4.	 Define failure modes
	5.	 Analyze hazards (including assignment of severity and 
probability scores)
	6.	 Make recommendations, define action steps, and deter-
mine outcome measures
   
The HFMEA process as originally described requires sig-
nificant time and engagement from all involved partici-
pants. At least eight meetings are suggested in the original 
paper,9 with five of them devoted to the definition of failure 
modes and analysis of hazards.
In 2010, Nagpal et  al10 published a report of HFMEA 
applied to communication during the perioperative period. 
Excluding the intraoperative phase, the team found four 
major steps subject to information transfer and communi-
cation errors:
   
	1.	 Preoperative assessment and optimization
	2.	 Transfer and preprocedural teamwork
	3.	 Postoperative handoff
	4.	 Daily ward care
   
Each of these steps was divided into subprocesses, and each 
subprocess had one or more failure modes, specific manners 
in which failure occurs. For example, preoperative assessment 
Box 1-1  Sample Protocol for Cardioversion with Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
	 1.	 Evaluate the patient for anesthesia (airway, cardiac function, 
allergies, etc.) and fill out the anesthesia assessment form.
	 2.	 Verify patient identity and procedure.
	 3.	 Make sure consent for the procedure and anesthesia have been 
obtained.
	 4.	 Check NPO status (solids 6 hours, clear liquids 2 hours). If not 
NPO, discuss with the cardiologist whether the risk for aspiration 
is outweighed by the risk for postponing the cardioversion. If not, 
postpone until patient status is NPO; if so, proceed with the head 
of the bed elevated and apply cricoid pressure while the patient 
is unconscious and consider succinylcholine and intubation.
	 5.	 Place routine monitors.
	
a.	 Electrocardiogram: If sinus rhythm is observed, cancel the 
procedure.
	
b.	 Pulse oximeter: Make it audible.
	
c.	 Blood pressure: Place cuff on limb that does not have intra-
venous line or pulse oximeter and start automatic measure-
ment every minute.
	 6.	 Make sure patient has a free-flowing intravenous line.
	 7.	 Make sure necessary supplies are available.
	
a.	 Yankauer suction
	
b.	 Airway supplies (bring a “tackle box” from the electrophysi-
ology anesthesia workroom; a list of suggested contents is 
taped inside the lid).
	
c.	 Emergency medications (including epinephrine, atropine, 
succinylcholine, phenylephrine, and ephedrine)
	 8.	 Denitrogenate the patient with 100% oxygen mask and bag.
	 9.	 If using a non–central venous line, pretreat the vein with 1 mg/
kg IV lidocaine* unless the patient is allergic to it.
	10.	 If the patient is allergic to propofol, soybeans, or eggs or has a 
left ventricular ejection fraction <25%, induce with etomidate 
0.1 mg/kg IV; otherwise, use propofol 1 mg/kg IV.
	11.	 If the patient becomes hypotensive, notify the cardiologist, 
consider intravenous fluid and phenylephrine, and use etomi-
date rather than further propofol.
	12.	 If the patient responds to tapping his or her forehead or shout-
ing his or her name, tell the patient to take deep breaths, then 
give propofol 0.4 mg/kg or etomidate 0.04 mg/kg and reassess.
	13.	 Check for loss of eyelash reflex; if not, give propofol 0.4 mg/kg 
or etomidate 0.04 mg/kg and reassess.
	14.	 Support the patient’s airway as needed.
	15.	 Tell the cardiologist that he or she may proceed.
	16.	 Check for pulse and check blood pressure.
	17.	 If the patient is bradycardic, ask the cardiologist if he or she 
wants you to administer atropine.
	18.	 If cardioversion is unsuccessful, ask the cardiologist if he/she 
will attempt again. If so, go back to step 11.
	19.	 Check that the patient moves all extremities on command 
when awake.
	20.	 Give report to the cardiology nurse.
	21.	 Be sure that the front pages of the anesthesia record and of the 
anesthesia assessment form get on the patient’s chart.
	22.	 Return the “tackle box” to the EP anesthesia workroom, and do 
not leave medications, syringes, or needles lying around.
*See also Davis, MF. Lidocaine for the prevention of pain due to injection of propofol. Anesth Analg 74:246-249, 1992; based on 2013 protocol at the 
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
IV, Intravenously; NPO, nil per os (nothing by mouth).
1  •  Engineering Excellence in Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Care
5
and optimization had 12 subprocesses, including “request and 
check radiological investigations” (five failure modes) and 
“prescribe medications and bowel preparation” (nine fail-
ure modes). Assigning severity and probability scores to the 
132 failure modes within the four steps and 29 subprocesses 
enabled the team to prioritize 41 of the failure modes as high 
risk. For example, two high-risk failure modes within the sub-
process “check special investigation results” (e.g., echocar-
diography or pulmonary function test) were noted as “checked 
investigation results but action not taken” and “checked inves-
tigation results but action delayed.” High-risk failure modes 
were further evaluated by using decision trees to determine 
each mode’s criticality and deciding whether adequate control 
measures were in place. Those modes deemed critical that “did 
not have effective control measures in place and [were] not 
easily detectable were prioritized for further action.”10
The use of the full HFMEA approach has been called into 
question because it is so time-consuming.11 However, time 
invested in process mapping and exploring failure modes 
before incidents occur may ultimately save time and money 
and prevent harm to patients in the long run.
THE DAILY HUDDLE
Throughout the day in the NORA room, rapidly changing 
short cases with challenging patients are seen. This requires 
clear communication among the staff to facilitate the room 
order, tend to the needs of individual procedures, and address 
patient care issues. A proactive preoperative measure incor-
porating both human factors principles and protocols is the 
preoperative briefing, also known as a “huddle.” The hud-
dle may take place before the day’s schedule begins, before 
individual cases, or after induction of anesthesia.12 Patient 
cases are reviewed by the attending anesthesia staff, proce-
duralists, and nursing staff. At any time during the huddle, 
a team member may inform the group about special needs 
or concerns, such as transportation, specialized equipment, 
or staffing issues that may require advance arrangements to 
maintain the efficiency of room flow.
The daily huddle is a scheduled meeting, but it is also 
important to meet periodically and review progress or prob-
lem areas of mutual concern to the health care team. Such 
meetings are appropriate at regularly scheduled intervals to 
review issues that arise, such as staffing, continuing educa-
tion, scheduling, or supply logistics. It is also appropriate to 
meet after a particularly difficult patient or unsatisfactory 
outcome to review process and procedures, in a construc-
tive and nonthreatening manner, so that the actions that 
led to a particular outcome can be analyzed and lessons can 
be learned from these situations. The goal of these meetings 
is the same—to freely share information that will enable 
NORA team members to perform their jobs better, which 
ultimately leads to improved care of the patient.
Reactive Approaches: What 
Happens When Something  
Goes Wrong
Adverse events may still occur despite health care organi-
zations designing systems to anticipate and prevent them. 
In this circumstance, it is also important to have a system 
capable of responding to adverse events, understanding 
why they occurred, and trying to prevent them from recur-
ring. In this section, we describe various approaches to 
dealing with adverse events.
BACKUP CLINICAL SUPPORT
Poor outcomes from unrecognized clinical deterioration 
prompted hospitals to develop rapid response teams (RRTs; 
also known as medical emergency teams). These teams are 
meant to respond to patients experiencing some form of phys-
iological compromise, such as respiratory distress or hemo-
dynamic instability. Use of RRTs has been shown to decrease 
rates of cardiac arrest and improve patient outcomes.15
What is the role of RRTs in NORA settings? NORA 
locations commonly have both anesthetist-staffed cases 
and those in which moderate, or “conscious,” sedation is 
administered. Patients receiving moderate sedation at times 
become deeply sedated or transition into general anesthesia 
with subsequent ineffective respiration or hemodynamic 
compromise. Anesthetists may be available for rescue, but 
RRTs may serve as a backup system if an anesthesia practi-
tioner is not immediately available.
PROVISION FOR UNPLANNED ADMISSION
Many patients receiving NORA are undergoing outpatient 
procedures, but procedural findings or complications occa-
sionally necessitate hospital admission. Different consider-
ations apply when NORA is administered in free-standing 
nonhospital facilities versus in a hospital, but provisions 
must be made in either case for dealing with unplanned 
admissions. Proceduralists and NORA staff should develop 
protocols or guidelines for dealing with unplanned admis-
sions, accounting for transport and monitoring needs.
EVENT REPORTING SYSTEMS
Requirements differ across states on adverse events in 
health care that may be subject to mandatory reporting. In 
addition to mandatory reporting, many health care organi-
zations have voluntary reporting systems that allow them 
to collect information about adverse events, near-misses, 
problems with professionalism, or other issues of interest 
to facility administrators. These reporting systems may 
be anonymous or confidential. Although staff should be 
encouraged to discuss adverse events with their supervi-
sors, event report systems allow staff to report systems prob-
lems they may not want to discuss. Staff sometimes fear 
retaliation for a real or perceived error, and these reporting 
systems may allow the capture of events that would other-
wise go undetected. Underreporting may occur even when 
event reporting systems are in place, because of lack of staff 
familiarity with the systems or fear of retaliation.
ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS
Root cause analysis (RCA) is a tool used to examine why a 
particular adverse event occurred. A fundamental principle 
underlying RCA is that every adverse event has multiple 
causes. In James Reason’s “Swiss Cheese” model of error, 
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
6
each health care provider, department, or system serves as 
a barrier protecting patients from harm. Each barrier has 
its own inherent weaknesses, but systematic redundan-
cies often prevent harm from reaching the patient. When 
harm does occur, it is commonly because several different 
weaknesses or lapses have aligned, allowing harm to reach 
a patient.13 The RCA attempts to identify these lapses to 
prevent them from happening again. RCA is ideally held 
after sufficient time has elapsed to collect relevant infor-
mation but before memories about the event begin to fade. 
Depending on an institution’s safety culture, RCA may 
be welcomed or feared. RCA should ideally be a blameless 
environment geared toward uncovering systemic contribu-
tions to adverse events.
Moving from “Good to Great”: 
Organizational Approaches to 
Excellence
In 2012, Driver and Wachter14 published a narrative review 
of studies about organizational excellence in health care. 
They addressed the question of whether health care could 
use methods described in the bestselling business book Good 
to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap . . . and Others 
Don’t by Jim Collins to improve quality. Several studies have 
attempted to compare the performance of hospitals and other 
health care providers, but the absence of a gold standard 
for quality presents a methodological challenge. Neverthe-
less, several characteristics of consistently high-performing 
organizations emerged. Patient-centeredness, commitment 
to measuring performance, and clear accountability struc-
tures were attributes common to high-performing healthcare 
organizations. We consider how each of these attributes 
could be addressed in NORA settings.
PATIENT-CENTEREDNESS
Patient-centered care is one of the IOM’s six aims for quality 
health care, as described earlier. Although the minimally inva-
sive nature and rapid turnover of procedures employing NORA 
are conducive to a good patient experience, it is also easy to 
see how the confluence of different specialties could lead to a 
confusing, fragmented experience of care. Preprocedure plan-
ning should include an assessment of which patients require 
monitored anesthesia care or general anesthesia. A small 
subset of these patients may require anesthetic evaluation 
before the day of the scheduled procedure; identifying these 
patients may minimize case cancellation. Patients should also 
receive consistent messaging from the anesthesia and proce-
dure teams with regard to preprocedure fasting requirements, 
because this is sometimes a source of confusion.
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
Both process measures and outcome measures may be used 
to assess the performance of NORA systems and teams. As 
discussed in Chapter 5, significant shortcomings exist to the 
measures, also called indicators, currently in use. Concerns 
about the adequacy of risk adjustment complicate compari-
sons across institutions or service lines.
Nationally endorsed quality measures are available for 
use by clinicians and health care organizations, but most 
of these measures were not designed with NORA in mind. 
The measures advanced because part of the Surgical Care 
Improvement Program has enabled improvements in 
perioperative care, but do not, for the most part, apply to 
procedures using NORA. In contrast, many of the quality 
indicators recommended for measurement by the Anesthesia 
Quality Institute (AQI; see Chapter 5, Table 5-2) do apply to 
NORA anesthesia. Examples of the AQI quality indicators 
applicable to NORA include on-time first case starts, can-
cellation rate, use of flumazenil or naloxone, cardiac arrest, 
unplanned admission, and patient satisfaction.
CLEAR ACCOUNTABILITY STRUCTURES
Accountability for parameters measured may be more com-
plicated than the measurement itself. In health care systems 
that tend to assign blame or praise to individual practitio-
ners or departments, the idea of shared accountability can 
be difficult to operationalize. If a patient undergoing endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography becomes 
septic and experiences cardiac arrest, is the endoscopist at 
fault for performing the procedure? Is the anesthesiologist 
at fault for not being able to rescue the patient? In such situ-
ations, it does not make sense to assign blame, but mecha-
nisms such as RCA should be implemented to examine the 
adverse event to ensure that teams function optimally and 
that the potential for error is minimized.
The issue of accountability in the NORA room is similar 
to that of the traditional operating room, but important dif-
ferences exist. The operating room staff, from surgeon to 
anesthesiologist to nursing personnel, have clearly defined 
roles that have developed over time. If a weak link develops 
in the performance of any individual role, this weakness can 
be identified, remediated, or rectified. The lines of responsi-
bility in the NORA room often are blurred. Obtaining timely 
patient consent, ensuring efficiency in room scheduling 
and turnover, and preparation for individual patient and 
procedural needs are duties shared by the anesthesiologist, 
nursing staff, and proceduralist. In cases involving the air-
way, the anesthesiologist and proceduralist share responsi-
bility for maintaining airway integrity. For these reasons, 
accountability must also be shared; weaknesses may there-
fore be more difficult to pinpoint and remedy. Ultimately, 
success in the NORA room is dependent on a unified team of 
health care professionals that work together to benefit the 
patient.
Conclusion
Excellence and quality in NORA care is not achieved acci-
dentally but rather as a result of deliberate engineering of 
care processes. Consideration should be given to how con-
sistency of care can be achieved in this setting characterized 
by high volume, rapid turnover, and sometimes frequent 
changes in staffing. Human factors and ergonomics should 
inform selection of technology used in the NORA room, 
and protocols and checklists can help ensure uniformity 
of care. Adverse events can serve as learning opportunities, 
helping to uncover systems issues that may compromise 
1  •  Engineering Excellence in Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Care
7
care quality. Finally, high-performing organizations provide 
care that is patient-centered and continuously measured 
and have accountability structures that are clear to people 
both within and outside of the organization.
References
	 1.	 Souter KJ, Davies JM. Diversification and specialization in anesthesia out-
side the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2012;25(4):450–452.
	 2.	 Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, Institute of Medicine. To err 
is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2000.
	 3.	 Institute of Medicine. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for 
the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2001.
	 4.	 Lin L, Vicente KJ, Doyle DJ. Patient safety, potential adverse drug 
events, and medical device design: a human factors engineering 
approach. J Biomed Inform. 2001;34(4):274–284.
	 5.	 Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety checklist to 
reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360(5):491–499.
	 6.	 Pronovost P, Needham D, Berenholtz S, et  al. An intervention to 
decrease catheter-related bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J 
Med. 2006;355(26):2725–2732.
	 7.	 Pronovost P, Berenholtz S, Dorman T, et al. Improving communica-
tion in the ICU using daily goals. J Crit Care. 2003;18(2):71–75.
	 8.	 Pronovost PJ, Berenholtz SM, Needham DM. Translating evidence 
into practice: a model for large scale knowledge translation. BMJ. 
2008;337:a7214.
	 9.	 DeRosier J, Stalhandske E, Bagian JP, Nudell T. Using health care 
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis: the VA National Center for Patient 
Safety’s prospective risk analysis system. Joint Comm J Qual Improv. 
2002;28(5):248–267, 209.
	10.	 Nagpal K, Vats S, Ahmed K, et al. A systematic quantitative assess-
ment of risks associated with poor communication in surgical care. 
Arch Surg. 2010;145(6):582–588.
	11.	 Franklin BD, Shebl NA, Barber N. Failure mode and effects analysis: 
too little for too much? BMJ Qual Saf. 2012;21(7):607–611.
	12.	 Makary MA, Holzmueller CG, Thompson D, et  al. Operating room 
briefings: working on the same page. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 
2006;32(6):351–355.
	13.	 Reason J. Human error: models and management. B Med J. 
2000;320(7237):768–770.
	14.	 Driver TH, Wachter RM. Can healthcare go from good to great? J Hosp 
Med. 2012;7(1):60–65.
	15.	 Jones DA, DeVita MA, Bellomo R. Rapid-response teams. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365(2):139–146.
8
Non–operating room anesthesia (NORA) services are being 
increasingly requested as the number of procedures and their 
complexity increase. These services are requested in diagnos-
tic and interventional radiology, interventional cardiology, 
gastroenterology, nuclear medicine, interventional urology 
rooms, electroconvulsive treatment rooms, and hyperbaric 
oxygen therapy areas. Locations outside of the operating 
room pose greater challenges for anesthesiologists because of 
lack of easy access to the patient because of necessary imag-
ing equipment, radiation fields, and magnetic fields. Work-
ing with personnel unfamiliar with anesthesiology needs, 
remote locations, and unfamiliarity with the location of sup-
plies are other complicating factors. Often room designs are 
not optimal for the provision of anesthesia services. The most 
difficult aspect of providing anesthesia services in NORAs 
may be that access to the patient is often limited because of 
radiographic equipment in the space that would normally be 
occupied by anesthesia equipment and personnel.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) requires 
that the same high standard of anesthetic care be provided in 
the NORA suite as in the traditional operating room. In NORA 
sites, anesthesia services are seemingly an afterthought, 
resulting in anesthesia equipment and personnel often being 
pushed to a small corner of the room. To prevent this when 
planning for new construction or renovation of NORA sites, 
an anesthesiologist should be present and actively partici-
pating in room design from the initial stages to maximize a 
safe and efficient working area. A requirements analysis is a 
detailed business process that determines the requirements 
related to a specific goal, such as the construction of a NORA 
site. It entails identifying all players and stakeholders in the 
project and their goals to determine the time and financial 
needs for the project. A good requirements analysis should be 
detailed and precise to save time and money in the long run. 
This chapter will address principles of designing a NORA site.
Initial Planning
The following ASA guidelines when providing anesthesiol-
ogy services in NORA sites need to be considered during the 
design process1:
   
	 1.	 A source of oxygen for the duration of the procedure, 
preferably piped from a central source
	 2.	 A source of suction, preferably one that meets operating 
room standards
	 3.	 A scavenging system if inhalational gases are used
	 4.	 A self-inflating hand resuscitator bag, anesthesia drugs 
and equipment, monitoring equipment, and an anesthe-
sia machine maintained to operating room standards
	 5.	 An adequate number of electrical outlets for anesthe-
sia equipment with isolated electric power or electric 
circuits with ground fault circuit interrupters if needed 
(i.e., in “wet areas” such as birthing rooms or cystos-
copy rooms)
	 6.	 Adequate lighting of the patient and anesthesia 
equipment
	 7.	 Sufficient space for necessary imaging and anesthesia 
equipment and all personnel that allows easy access to 
the patient
	 8.	 An emergency cart with a defibrillator, emergency 
drugs, and rescue equipment
	 9.	 Adequate staff to support the anesthesiologist and reli-
able two-way communication to request assistance
	10.	 Observation of all applicable building and safety codes 
and facility standards
	11.	 Appropriate postanesthesia care, including personnel 
and equipment
   
The Guidelines for Design and Construction of Health 
Care Facilities by the Facility Guidelines Institute, popularly 
known as The Guidelines, is a useful guide to the design 
and construction of health care facilities. It contains recom-
mendations for minimum space, patient handling, infection 
control, equipment needs, surface and furnishing needs, 
and criteria for plumbing, electrical, and heating, ventila-
tion, and air-conditioning systems for a variety of health 
care facilities. The Joint Commission (TJC), many federal 
agencies, and most states use The Guidelines as their build-
ing code when approving and licensing newly constructed 
health care facilities.2
When designing a NORA site within a larger facility, 
imaging areas should be located on a ground floor because 
equipment, ceiling height requirements, electrical services, 
and future expansion are most easily accommodated there.2 
The best building level on which to keep radiographic imag-
ing equipment, with the exception of magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) equipment, is on a floor that can be easily 
accessed from above and below for the myriad of cables 
required to run it. NORA locations also should be easily 
accessible for patients coming from an emergency room, 
surgical suites, cystoscopy, and outpatient clinics.2 Innter-
ventionalists, anesthesiologists, nurses, engineers, and 
Designing Safety and 
Engineering Standards for 
the Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesia Procedure Site
KELLY LEBAK, SCOTT SPRINGMAN, and JEFFREY LEE
2
2  •  Designing Safety and Engineering Standards for the Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Procedure Site
9
administrators, as well as technicians, all need to work with 
medical architects to design the non–operating room space 
that best meets the budgeted needs of the space.3
Postanesthesia care units (PACU) are dictated by seda-
tion and anesthesia. If general anesthesia is given to a 
patient, he or she needs to recover in a fully equipped PACU. 
Because many procedures are remotely performed from the 
main operating suites, transport of recovering patients may 
be over long distances unless a separate PACU is available 
for patients undergoing these procedures. Care needs to be 
taken when planning for patient recovery, because regulat-
ing agencies such as the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services and TJC have specific guidelines on where patient 
recovery can be done. Remote PACUs must be of the same 
high standard as traditional PACUs.
The amount of space required for a NORA site depends 
on the services performed in the area (Table 2-1).2 For 
example, a general radiography room needs to be only 
180 square feet according to The Guidelines, but a car-
diac catheterization room needs to be a minimum of 400 
square feet. For comparison, a traditional operating room 
is a minimum of 400 square feet. Anesthesiologists need 
a minimum of 64 square feet for personnel, an anesthesia 
machine, and a supply cart. A NORA site needs to have a 
minimum of 3 to 4 feet on three sides of the scanning table 
to allow for easy access to the patient. Additionally, doors 
in the room should not violate this space, the equipment, 
or ease of patient movement and transfer. All diagnostic 
imaging areas require a radiation protection area with view 
windows with at least 42 inches between the exposure 
control and the outside partition edge.2
Medical equipment dictates the layout of a room. Once the 
medical equipment vendor is selected, the area layout can 
be planned. Selection of exact equipment must be the first 
step in the design process because each manufacturer and 
system is engineered based on specific power requirements, 
cable diameters, and cable lengths. For example, each 
manufacturer has its own specifications for the maxi-
mum distance of cables between the x-ray generator and 
the imaging equipment.
After the specific imaging equipment is chosen, the inter-
ventionalist determines its relation to the control room. The 
parallel orientation is often chosen in academic institutions; 
it allows for teaching, with almost everything to be seen 
from this positioning. According to The Guidelines, whichever 
orientation is chosen, the control operator should always 
have full view of the patient, including the head, through 
a window.2
Ergonomics
When planning a NORA site, consideration of ergonom-
ics is integral to the process. Ergonomics is the science of 
the relationship of humans to their tools and work envi-
ronment. The ASA has guidelines for proper ergonomics 
and workflow in the operating room.4 Although the ASA 
has no specific statement on standards in the NORA sites, 
it is prudent to recommend that these same standards of 
ergonomics and workflow for the operating room be incor-
porated in NORAs. Proper ergonomics allows for maximal 
efficiency and safety with minimal stress on users. The 
following questions should be addressed in the planning 
phase of NORA design:
   
	1.	 How will patients, supplies, and equipment move 
through the facility?
	2.	 Which tasks will be performed in the facility?
	3.	 Does adequate communication occur within the facility 
and to the outside?
	4.	 Is the lighting adequate for the procedures that will be 
performed in the facility?
Table 2-1  Minimum Size of Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Site
Location
Size (square feet)
Notes
Diagnostic x-ray
180
Less if used only for chest radiography
Tomography, radiography,  
fluoroscopy
250
Clear dimension of 3 feet on three sides of the  
procedure table; also requires control room
Ultrasound
120
Clear dimension of 3 feet on three sides of the  
procedure table
Interventional imaging (cardiac  
catheterization, electrophysiology,  
interventional angiography, etc.)
400
Control room: “Large enough to contain and  
provide for the efficient functioning of the  
x-ray and image-recording equipment”
Electrical equipment room: “Large enough to  
contain x-ray transformers, power modules, and 
associated electronics and electrical gear”
Magnetic resonance imaging
Varies according to recommendations by  
manufacturer
Control room: 100 square feet
Computer room: 150 square feet
Cryogen storage: 50 square feet
Nuclear medicine (positron emission  
tomography, radiotherapy)
“Shall be adequate to permit entry of  
stretchers and beds and to accommodate  
imaging equipment, electronic consoles,  
and computer terminals” (varies according  
to manufacturer recommendations)
Radiotherapy suite: 260 for simulator room,  
680 for maze and accelerator rooms, 450  
for cobalt rooms
Radiopharmacy area (if onsite preparation): 
“Adequate space for storage, preparation, dose 
calibrators, record-keeping”
Radiotherapy room: Clear dimension of 4 feet around 
three sides of the procedure table
Modified from Facility Guidelines Institute. Guidelines for design and construction of health care facilities, 2010 edition. Chicago: The Facility Guidelines Institute. 
American Society for Healthcare Engineering of the American Hospital Association
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
10
	5.	 Is adequate environmental pollution control provided?
	6.	 Is provision made for different temperature zones?
	7.	 Is control adequate for electrical power and compressed 
gases?
Movement
When considering the flow of patients into and out of a 
facility and, more specifically, a NORA site, simulation 
should occur in the design phase of planning.4 The flow of 
the areas should minimize effort for both patients and staff. 
For example, a changing room located near an induction 
room that is close to the MRI scanner is the best layout for 
patient privacy and flow. A staff entrance that is separate 
and out of sight from a public waiting area is optimal for 
workplace efficiency.3 Actual supplies, instruments, stor-
age areas, and work surfaces should be in their proposed 
layout when possible to ensure easy access to them.4 Dur-
ing this phase of planning, pharmaceutical management 
should be considered; will a satellite pharmacy be near the 
NORA site, or will an automated dispensing system be used 
in the NORA site? Movement in the NORA site could differ 
with each of these setups.
Finally, a clear and sensible evacuation route for all 
people in the facility should be planned, in case of an 
emergency.16 Devising this route can be a greater chal-
lenge in NORA sites because of their often remote loca-
tions within a facility.
Tasks
The tasks performed in the NORA site guide optimal room 
design. NORA suites are designed to be task-specific, unlike 
a general-use operating room. Forethought on how the 
area might be used in the future also can guide design. For 
example, if a large number of pediatric radiation oncol-
ogy procedures are planned in a radiotherapy suite, space 
should be allocated for anesthesia personnel and equip-
ment, the proper number of electrical outlets, and medical 
gases.12 Consideration should be given as to whether the 
area would be for ambulatory patients only or for hospital 
patients. If there is a possibility that the area could someday 
be used as a hybrid operating suite, additional space and gas 
outlets should be added to the design.
Communication
Adequate communication potential is imperative for safe 
patient care in the NORA. A strong communication system 
to outside of the NORA site is potentially more important 
than communication within the NORA location because 
these areas are often located in more remote areas of the 
hospital and medical response could take longer than usual. 
Once additional assistance from medical response personnel 
is available, it is important that they have easy access to 
personal safety equipment; having these items at the point 
of entry is essential.5 Easy access to anesthesia personnel, 
supplies, and equipment is imperative, so the best room 
design necessitates the anesthesia working area being close 
to the entry door to eliminate the need to climb around 
large imaging equipment, instrument tables, and cables.5
A well-designed communication and information techno­
logy system will result in efficiency.3 The number and 
locations of network outlets, telephones, intercoms, com-
puters (wired versus wireless, portable versus fixed), infor-
mation boards, cameras, monitors, and code buttons should 
be carefully planned.3 It is most convenient for anesthesio­
logists to have a separate computer and phone in their 
allocated work area to avoid crossing through or around 
the interventional work area and to allow for timely access 
for help in an emergency.4 Easy access to information rele-
vant to patient care by the internet and electronic records is 
also important in the NORA setting.3
Lighting
NORA areas often have dimmed lights. This makes inter-
pretation of diagnostic images easier, but working is more 
difficult for everyone else in the room. Adequate bright light 
is a necessity for anesthesiology and nursing-related tasks.4 
Separate lights that have a dimmer switch or lamps where 
nurses and anesthesiologists work may be helpful because 
the rest of the room could be dimmed for the intervention-
alists.3 Attention must be paid to ceiling-mounted light 
booms so that they do not interfere with other equipment in 
the room such as video monitors, intravenous poles, scan-
ning equipment, and medical gas lines.4 Budgets should 
allow for consideration of light-emitting diode (LED) lights, 
because fluorescent lights are becoming obsolete.
Noise Control
Like a traditional operating room, NORA sites can be full 
of noise from personnel conversation, imaging equipment, 
instrument clatter, suction devices, music, and more.4 
Noise pollution can interfere with adequate communica-
tion and alarm detection. The ASA requires that the pulse 
oximeter tone needs to be above all background noise.4 
NORA sites should be designed to decrease noise pollution 
because of the difficulties of maintaining proper communi-
cation and monitoring alarms, as well as the danger to the 
staff associated with long-term exposure to high-decibel 
areas. A wireless headset and microphone system between 
the interventionalist, NORA personnel, and the control 
room is technology to consider.
Temperature Control
Room temperatures that are comfortable for personnel 
increase efficiency and safety.4 Unfortunately, these tem-
peratures are not always the same for the interventionalists, 
nurses, and anesthesiologists. Room temperatures should 
be maintained between 68° and 73° F (20° and 22.8° C) 
during surgery and procedures.6 Cooling and warm-
ing devices should be considered during room design for 
staff and patients. Forced-air warmers should be used for 
patients; thus planning for adequately placed electrical 
outlets is needed. As in traditional operating rooms, the 
2  •  Designing Safety and Engineering Standards for the Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Procedure Site
11
temperature of NORA sites should be able to be changed 
quickly to accommodate patient and surgeon comfort.3,4 
Reheat coils in individual NORA sites can result in tempera-
ture modification without large overshoots or undershoots 
in set temperatures.3,6 The special coils are positioned in 
the terminal location of the system and control tempera-
ture by heating air.7 The interventionalist is often more 
comfortable with a lower room temperature because the 
surgical lights emit a significant amount of heat. LED surgical 
lights may be considered because they emit significantly 
less heat.6
Power Management
Power management includes control of electrical power 
and compressed gases. Electrical and gas outlets should be 
in locations easily accessible to users. Because nurses, inter-
ventionists, and anesthesiologists all need to have unen-
cumbered access to gas, multiple outlets should be placed 
throughout the room.4 Suction canisters and controls 
should be located within reach of both anesthesia personnel 
and interventionalists; these dual needs may necessitate 
two separate systems. Because these devices can involve 
numerous cables, planning must be done to minimize the 
placement of cables across floors in areas of high traffic to 
prevent tripping hazards and obstacles to wheeled equip-
ment.4 Electrical outlets should be placed on every wall to 
limit tripping hazards. Gas and electric from the wall, ceiling, 
or columns can be used; each has positive and negative 
aspects.4,8 Suspended hoses should not interfere with easy 
movement of personnel throughout the room or access 
to supplies, monitors, and doors.8 A variety of outlets and 
jacks can be incorporated in NORA sites depending on user 
preference. The minimum number of electrical outlets in 
an operating room is eight, but this number is not enough 
with the exponential increase of technology use.9 It is best 
to overestimate the number of needed outlets.
ELECTRICAL POWER
Electrical power should be either isolated power or ground 
fault circuit interrupters (GFIs), because NORA sites should 
be considered “wet locations” (i.e., areas where liquids can 
be spilled).9 If an area is not considered “wet,” grounded 
power can be used. The ASA Committee on Equipment and 
Facilities considers all operating rooms “wet locations.” 
GFIs cost considerably less than isolated power (hundreds 
versus thousands of dollars per operating room).9 They pro-
vide safety from faulty equipment by stopping power to it, 
but they also stop power to anything else plugged into the 
same outlet.9 An emergency power source is required for 
this reason, usually a generator that can provide energy for 
at least 24 hours.9
Isolated power provides safety by alarming personnel 
when faulty equipment is plugged in without stopping 
power to it or anything else that is plugged into the same 
outlet. One problem with isolated power is that alarms 
sound when the total leakage current is surpassed; thus 
one piece of equipment alone can be within its safe leakage 
current, but the total current of all pieces together may be 
greater than the limit.9
MEDICAL GASES
The locations and number of piped gas outlets should be 
carefully planned with the guidance of anesthesia personnel. 
Operating room–grade air should be provided in NORA sites 
where larger interventional procedures will be performed. 
Interventionalists and anesthesia personnel should have 
separate gas supplies and outlets close to their individual 
working areas.8 As an aside, if gas cylinder storage is needed, 
the location should be determined in the initial room layout.
The Guidelines recommends a variable number of oxygen, 
suction, medical air, and waste anesthesia gas disposal 
(WAGD) system outlets for different types of hospital facility 
locations (Table 2-2).2 Medical air is free of debris, toxins, 
particulates, and contaminants. Health care facilities often 
manufacture it onsite by processing outside air with a medi-
cal air compressor.10
When inhalational anesthetics are used in NORA sites, 
separate ventilation, suction, and WAGD systems should 
direct exhaust outside.8 The two types of WAGD systems 
are active and passive. In an active system, waste gas 
is removed by suction versus a passive system in which 
waste gas is removed by slight positive pressure from the 
anesthesia machine adjustable pressure-limiting valve.16 
For new construction, it is best to have a completely sep-
arate active WAGD system.6 If a passive WAGD system is 
installed in conjunction with a recirculating ventilation 
system, waste merely goes from the anesthesia machine 
to the room ventilation return duct, where it will mix with 
fresh air and will be returned to the room.6
As previously mentioned, piped gases can source from 
wall outlets, fixed columns, ceiling hose drops, retractable 
hoses or columns, or multiservice articulated arms.8 Room 
users should choose the best gas configuration for their 
Table 2-2  Minimum Number of Outlets Recommended 
in Various Hospital Locations
Location
Oxygen
Vacuum  
(Suction)
Medical 
Air
Waste  
Anesthesia  
Gas Disposal 
System 
(WAGDS)
Traditional  
operating room
2/room
4/room
1/room
1/room
Surgical  
cystoscopy, 
endourological 
room
2/room
3/room
1/room
1/room
Magnetic  
resonance 
imaging suite
1/room
1/room
1/room
N/A
Cardiac  
catheterization 
laboratory
2/bed
2/bed
1/bed
N/A*
Postanesthesia 
care unit
2/bed
3/bed
1/bed
N/A
Modified from Facility Guidelines Institute. Guidelines for design and construc-
tion of health care facilities, 2010 edition. Chicago: The Facility Guidelines 
Institute. American Society for Healthcare Engineering of the American 
Hospital Association; 2010:88.
*The current trend is to install WAGD outlets if there is a possibility of general 
anesthesia being administered.
N/A, Not applicable.
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
12
needs and preferences. One aspect to consider is a second 
set of outlets in addition to the set for the interventionalist 
for different room setups and future needs, because adding 
or changing outlet locations in the future is costly.8 The gas 
delivery method should be chosen as early as possible in the 
design process because the locations of outlets can be dic-
tated by room infrastructure and ventilation equipment.8
In addition to the ASA identified ergonomic considera­
tions, infrastructure, including ventilation and materials 
management, should be addressed in the planning phase of 
NORA room design.
Ventilation
Along with temperature control, which has already been 
discussed, room ventilation also includes control of humid-
ity, anesthetic gases, and physical and microbiological pol-
lutants that need to be adequately regulated.6 Development 
and organization of ventilation should be guided by specifica-
tions from multiple institutions, including the National Insti-
tute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), ASHRAE 
(American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Condi-
tioning Engineers), Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), and American Institute of Architects (AIA).6 The 
ASA has specific guidelines on these topics in design of a tra-
ditional operating room, but not specifically in NORA sites. 
A conservative design should maintain operating room stan-
dards in NORA sites. The design team should refer to local 
and regional standards for specific requirements.
NORA sites can be ventilated via a recirculating or nonrecir-
culating system or a combination of the two.6 Inside air is recir-
culated back into the NORA site in a recirculating system. If all 
air brought to the inside of a NORA site is outside air, then it is 
a non-recirculating system. If a recirculating system is used, 
a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter should be built 
into the air return duct6; it can remove 99.97% of all particles 
larger than 0.3 μm from the air that passes through.15 To limit 
exposure of NORA site personnel to waste anesthetic gases and 
leaks from anesthesia delivery or scavenging systems, NIOSH 
and the CDC recommend that the ventilation system change 
air in the operating room at least 15 times, with a minimum of 
three fresh air changes per hour.8
Careful humidity control in NORA sites is important. 
Too much humidity results in uncomfortable conditions 
for both the patient and staff, and too little humidity leads 
to increased evaporation from the body, potential loss of 
body heat, and damage to the respiratory tract.6 ASHRAE 
states operating room humidity should be between 30% 
and 60%.2 To have precise control over temperature and 
humidity, the ASA recommends that a facility have a heat-
ing and cooling system with a single-point control system 
specifically designed and made for operating rooms and that 
is routinely calibrated.6
Proper infection control depends on appropriate room 
ventilation, because flora from the patient and staff are dis-
tributed as airborne particles.6 The particles dilute as air 
flows through the room, but this turbulent flow increases 
the spread of the particles throughout the room; thus low-
velocity, positive-pressure flow with a HEPA filtration 
system minimizes airborne particles throughout the room.6
The AIA operating room standard for air flow is use of a 
nonaspirating diffuser, also known as a unidirectional flow 
diffuser, in which air flows with very low velocity unidirec-
tionally downward from the ceiling, with minimal entrain-
ment of room air, over the patient and the interventional 
team.2 The air is then returned through low sidewall grills 
approximately 8 inches above the room floor.2 The goal is 
to provide for steady flow of clean air throughout the room.2
Materials Management
Thought should be given to the materials chosen for NORA 
sites in the beginning stages of planning and budgeting 
because they can affect space needs (e.g., use of rolling 
carts versus equipment booms, a compact mobile anesthe-
sia machine versus one that remains in the NORA site, an 
interventional table or bed that is fixed to the floor versus 
a mobile one). High-quality equipment may be initially 
expensive, but it may be more efficient over the long term.3 
As much storage space as possible should be incorporated 
in the NORA site because efficiency is lost if personnel 
constantly have to leave the area to get supplies. Built-in 
storage space is preferred, but it should be determined on 
individual needs and budget.
As in operating rooms, the floors, walls, and ceilings 
in NORA sites should be seamless because maintaining 
an easily cleanable environment demands hard surfaces 
throughout. Operating room walls with tiles are now 
becoming obsolete; the trend is to have stainless-steel sheets 
extending up 42 to 48 inches from the floor to protect the 
wall from impact from rolling equipment, although this can 
be difficult in MRI locations. Unlike in private dwellings, the 
floor and walls should not meet at right angles because this 
is difficult to clean; instead, the floor material should extend 
up the wall for 4 to 6 inches.3 Openings for ventilation, 
medical gases, and lighting in a ceiling must be gasketed.2 
TJC and individual state departments of health should be 
consulted on regional requirements.
Individual Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesia Sites
The specific NORA sites of radiation therapy, MRI, and 
hybrid operating rooms will be discussed because these 
areas have specific attributes that affect room design.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy areas are often very far from the main 
operating room because of the use of strong radiation; 
therefore a dedicated area for preparation and recovery of 
patients requiring anesthesia services should be available.12 
Fixed equipment and rotating treatment arms may impede 
on ease of management of ventilator tubing, lines, and 
cords, and a slightly larger area may be considered to allow 
for easy turning of beds and patient access. High-dose radia-
tion precludes the continual presence of anesthesia person-
nel at bedside; thus a clear view and monitoring capabilities 
from the control room needs to be implemented in design 
of this area.12 Noise may interfere with audio moni­toring 
2  •  Designing Safety and Engineering Standards for the Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Procedure Site
13
of pulse and saturation monitors, and thus remote moni-
toring may be needed. A clear path to the patient, free of 
equipment and cables, is recommended in the event of an 
emergency. Radiation protection is needed in these areas, 
and room designs should prevent the escape of radioactive 
photons and neutrons to other areas of the facility. This 
is ensured by baffling all openings into the room such as 
doors, ducts, and other penetrations.2
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
The MRI suite poses significant challenges for the anesthesi-
ologist because of the presence of the strong magnetic field. 
Patient access and adequate monitoring may be severely 
limited by noise from the magnet and the shape and struc-
ture of the magnet.13 The ASA has guidelines for anesthetic 
care in MRI that can help direct room design13:
   
	1.	 The line of sight must be clear to the patient and moni-
tors (direct observation or a video camera), in either 
zone III or zone IV.
	2.	 Anesthetic delivery equipment should be located in a 
place where there is easy control of anesthesia depth. If 
an MRI-safe anesthesia machine is not available, inhala-
tional anesthetics may be admini­stered from an anesthe-
sia machine located in zone III using an elongated circuit 
through a wave guide, or if a total intravenous anesthetic 
is used, it can be admini­stered by using an MRI-safe pump 
located in zone IV or an MRI-unsafe pump in zone III with 
the tubing passed through a wave guide. Finally, inter-
mittent intravenous anesthetic bolus injections from zone 
III or zone IV can be administered.
	3.	 Easy access to hospital information systems should be 
available.
	4.	 Access to emergency communication (phone or code 
button) should be readily available.
	5.	 An evacuation plan should be in place in the event of 
a quench or medical emergency, with a designated loca-
tion outside zone IV with accessible monitors, oxygen, 
suction, and resuscitation equipment.
	6.	 Complex airway management should be performed out-
side of zone IV in a controlled environment.
	7.	 Alternative airway devices should be available in the 
MRI suite.
	8.	 Suction should be immediately available.
	9.	 A recovery area should be available for patients who 
received anesthesia services.
   
When planning and designing an MRI suite, the anes-
thesiologist should confer with the facility biomedical 
engineer to determine the best location of anesthesia 
equipment in terms of safety and accessibility in relation to 
gauss lines within the MRI suite.12 Locations of gauss lines 
indicating the magnitude of the magnetic field in zone IV 
that are clearly marked throughout the room are an extra 
visual safety cue for personnel (Figure 2-1). These lines 
aid in safely positioning essential patient equipment when 
in use and also can help early in the design process in 
planning where to place medical gas, vacuum, and WAGD 
outlets.12
The MRI suite should be organized into four zones with 
each zone designed for different functions: patient interviews, 
physical examinations and changing areas, ferromagnetic 
detection systems, access control, and site-specific clinical 
Figure 2-1  The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner area of an intraoperative MRI suite. Colored floor markings are used to indicate gauss lines in an intraop-
erative MRI. (Photograph courtesy of Mike Rebholz; caption courtesy of eppstein uhen architects, Milwaukee, WI.)
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
14
and operational needs.2 As the zones increase in number, 
the potential hazards increase (Table 2-3).13
The Guidelines state that the MRI suite needs to be 
designed to ensure that unscreened individuals are unable 
to freely enter the area within 5 gauss around the MRI 
scanner.2 An anteroom, visible from the control room, is an 
area for people to pass through before actually entering the 
scanning or control room.2 A separate self-contained air-
conditioning unit and other specialty support equipment 
may be required depending on the manufacturer require-
ments.2 When anesthesia services are used in the MRI suite, 
induction and recovery areas should have medical gases 
and be monitored.2 This area may be in the patient hold-
ing area for convenience. An area where emergency care 
can be provided outside of the MRI room (zone IV) should 
be available.2
The MRI suite is generally on the bottom floor of the 
hospital because of the weight of the magnet, but this 
location is not absolute as a result of the current lower 
weight of magnets. The floor needs to be able to support 
the weight of the scanner equipment and prevent envi-
ronmental vibrations.2 A knock-out panel in the ceiling 
should be installed to easily access and change the magnet 
when needed.2 A lay-in ceiling is recommended by The 
Guidelines because of its easy installation, service, and 
remodeling.2 Other design considerations for the MRI suite 
include installation of radiofrequency shielding; a lighted 
sign and a red light to indicate when the magnet is on; fin-
ishes, fixtures, and equipment that decrease the need for 
maintenance because the magnetic fields in the area can 
be hazardous; a cryogen quench exhaust pipe and room 
exhaust with pressure equalization in case a cryogen 
breach should occur; and various finishes or markings to 
easily identify the critical field strength zones surrounding 
the MRI scanner.2
HYBRID OPERATING ROOMS
As technology increases and radiographic services are 
increasingly being used during surgical procedures, 
hybrid spaces are becoming more common. Examples 
of these include, but are not limited to, a cardiac cath-
eterization laboratory or cardiac operating room where 
cardiac valves can be replaced minimally invasively, an 
MRI or neurosurgical operating suite where intracranial 
tumor resections or deep brain stimulator insertions can 
be performed, an intraoperative angiography room where 
embolectomies and abdominal aortic aneurysm repairs 
can be done, and an intraoperative radiotherapy room 
where tumor isolation and radiation can be performed. 
When combining radiographic technology with an oper-
ating room, these components each supply their own set 
of challenges and concerns that need to be considered. 
The logistics of two hybrid spaces, an intraoperative MRI 
suite and an intraoperative angiography suite, will be 
addressed here.
Intraoperative Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The advantages of an intraoperative MRI (IMRI) suite are 
especially evident for delicate intracranial neurosurgical 
procedures because the neurosurgeon can have timely 
feedback of progress or confirmation of completeness of 
tumor resections. In the design of an IMRI suite, all opera­
ting room personnel need to be especially aware of gauss 
lines, ferromagnetic objects, and fixed and mobile anes-
thesia equipment, all of which can be overlooked during 
critical moments intraoperatively. A complete operating 
room is adjacent to a fully functional MRI scanner with its 
strong magnetic field; thus the operating area needs to be 
far enough away for safe operating conditions using ferro­
magnetic items and the ability to adequately maintain a 
sterile environment, yet close enough to limit unnecessary 
distance for personnel to have to move within the area to 
accomplish tasks.5
To maximize the use of the expensive MRI scanner 
from a business standpoint, consideration could be given 
to position the MRI scanner in a location in which both 
ambulatory patients and intraoperative patients can 
access it.5 Either way, the scanner itself should be sepa-
rated from the opera­tive suite by large shielded partition 
doors. See Figure 2-2 for a suggested design and rendition 
of an IMRI suite.
In one IMRI design the patient is moved from the oper-
ating area to the MRI scanner on a MRI-compatible trans-
port table with a fixed anesthesia monitor. The other design 
is to have the MRI scanner itself move to and around the 
patient.5 Because of technical challenges with both of these 
designs, all parties need to be involved in design planning 
from the start. Note that the latter design costs significantly 
more than the former.
Because of the advanced physics challenges that exist in 
constructing an IMRI room, medical physicists should be 
involved in the design of the area from its beginning stages. 
Outside radiofrequency can interfere with images, so a 
Faraday cage, made of aluminum or copper, needs to be 
built around the entire IMRI to block outside electric fields 
from interfering with MRI scans.5 Additionally, because of 
the close vicinity of the strong magnetic field, bars attached 
to the walls to anchor moveable items with cords should be 
considered.5 Color-coded lines on the floor indicating gauss 
lines are even more important to have in an IMRI suite than 
in a normal MRI suite, especially if a movable MRI magnet 
design is chosen.
Anesthesia equipment should be MRI-safe if using 
the same equipment in the IMRI operating area and the 
Table 2-3  Magnetic Resonance Imaging Suite Zones
Zone
Activity
Zone I
This area is freely accessible to the public.
Zone II
This area is where patients are interviewed and screened. 
They should be supervised by MRI personnel and 
should not have free movement throughout this zone.
Zone III*
This area is where the MRI scanner’s magnetic fields are 
strong enough that ferromagnetic objects can cause 
serious injury or death. Anesthesia personnel can 
monitor the patient from here if needed.
Zone IV*
This area is where the MRI scanner itself is located.
Modified from American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Anesthetic Care for Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Practice advisory 
on anesthetic care for magnetic resonance imaging. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110:459-479.
*All access to zones III and IV is to be strictly restricted and controlled by MRI 
personnel.
2  •  Designing Safety and Engineering Standards for the Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Procedure Site
15
MRI scanner. Alternatively, if the design setup is that in 
which the patient is moved to the scanner, portable MRI-
safe equipment can be used during the scanning phase 
and standard equipment can be used in the operating 
area; however, because of the numerous lines, tubes, and 
wires, this option can be time-consuming when trans-
porting the patient back and forth. Anesthesia person-
nel should be responsible for ensuring that all anesthesia 
equipment is nonferromagnetic, including overlooked 
items such as flashlights, stethoscopes, intravenous poles, 
laryngoscopes and blades, scissors, clamps, timers, and 
vaporizers.
A final inspection and examination should be made to 
check for ferromagnetic items before a scan.5 This inspec-
tion could be similar to the preoperative time-out adapted 
for the MRI scan. A defined protocol indicating which team 
member is responsible for what can be helpful.
Because communication with the outside world is impera­
tive, especially during a medical emergency, yet the high 
magnetic field prohibits the use of pagers, telephones, and 
computers. IMRI team members should develop a detailed 
protocol defining what is to be done in a medical emer-
gency, including how and where to call for a medical code, 
where the patient is to be taken for resuscitation, and loca-
tion of emergency equipment.12
Intraoperative Angiography
Intraoperative angiography (IA) is becoming increas-
ingly prevalent because it allows the surgeon to see vas-
cular structures in real time during procedures. Designers 
and users of IA face the task of combining the separate 
chall­enges of radiation exposure from radiography and a 
traditional operating room environment. IA requires lead 
lining of all walls, floors, ceiling, windows, and doors.5 
The minimum required lead thickness is determined by 
medical physicists based on the NORA site’s weekly work-
load, occupancy of the NORA site and adjacent areas, and 
the distance from the source of radiation to the nearest 
occupied area on the opposite side of the radiation bar-
rier.14 The Guidelines states that a certified physicist or 
other expert should recommend the type, location, and 
amount of radiation protection that needs to be installed 
according to the final room layout and imaging equip-
ment selected.2
In a traditional operating room, anesthesia machines are 
generally located to the right of the head of the operating 
room table, with the breathing circuits to the left side of the 
machine,4 but this arrangement may have to be altered to 
accommodate large x-ray machines. Anesthesia equipment 
and personnel should be as close to the head of the inter-
ventional table as possible to maintain vigilance, and x-ray 
machines can be stationed at the other end of the table. 
Because the x-ray machine needs to be able to spiral 360 
degrees around the patient, all anesthesia equipment must 
have extra length to avoid tangling in the imaging equip-
ment (Figure 2-3). Careful planning must be done because 
the imposing x-ray equipment will also compete for ceil-
ing and air space with surgical lights, booms, intravenous 
poles, and viewing screens.5
Angiography and fluoroscopy emit an immense amount of 
radiation through scatter; thus anesthesia personnel are at 
great risk because they are very close to the patient.5 Por-
table lead screens are helpful but do not protect well against 
scatter. To maximally protect themselves, personnel should 
wear front and back lead aprons and a lead thyroid shield, 
be greater than 36 inches from the ionizing source, and stay 
behind a portable lead screen when possible.5
Conclusion
When designing a NORA site, all personnel who will actu-
ally be working in the area, such as interventionalists, 
anesthesiologists, nursing staff, and technicians, should 
be involved in the design process. Whether building in 
a new location or retrofitting into an existing area, each 
NORA site has unique challenges. To save time and money, 
it is worth the time and effort to research needs and then 
seek information from others who have designed a simi-
lar NORA site on what works and what does not work for 
each phase of the design process. An architect, specifically a 
medical architect, should be chosen who is familiar with the 
Figure 2-2  A three-dimensional rendition (A) and sketch (B) of an intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging (IMRI) suite done by architects. C, The actual 
intraoperative MRI suite. Photo is taken from the operative area looking toward shielded partition doors that open to the MRI scanner area. (Photograph, three-
dimensional rendition, and sketch courtesy of eppstein uhen architects, Milwaukee, WI; intraoperative MRI photograph courtesy of Mike Rebholz.)
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
16
location of the space. The American College of Healthcare 
Architects is a good place to begin when searching for medi-
cal architects. Additionally, local contractors are generally 
recommended, particularly ones with experience working 
in the existing facility, because they are most familiar with 
local standards and the building infrastructure. The AIA, 
TJC, and individual state departments of health should be 
consulted on specific building requirements.
When planning the actual layout of a room, NORA sup-
ply cabinets should not be located in the anesthesia work 
area if possible. If this is unavoidable, gas lines should not 
obstruct access to cabinets.3 If anesthesiology requires 
storage space in the NORA site, it should be immediately 
adjacent to the anesthesia work area. Because visualiza-
tion of the actual working space is difficult for many, even 
when looking at detailed design development documents, 
the medical architect can aid by showing a computer-gen-
erated three-dimensional model with the design and lay-
out of the area, including actual locations of gas outlets, 
electrical outlets, door swing radii, and imaging equipment 
rotation radii. Also helpful is a mock-up of the NORA site 
in which actual equipment is brought into the NORA space 
to easily visualize workflow and locations of outlets and 
lights.3
Practice runs simulating as much as possible the time 
a patient arrives at the front door until the patient leaves 
again, with all personnel and equipment, should be done 
before the go-live date, to identify potential areas for 
improvement. This practice can be done at various intervals 
throughout the design process to aid progress4, such as 
after the first design development is completed by the medi-
cal architect and then again after construction.
The number of radiographic and surgical procedures is 
increasing. Imaging equipment is getting smaller, but its 
capabilities are growing. Technology that was new 10 years 
ago is now obsolete; a “normal” MRI scanner was 1.5 tesla 
10 years ago, and now the “normal” scanner is 3 tesla. This 
increase in imaging strength is also associated with a need 
for more generators, cooling systems, and related equipment. 
To grow with technology, it is most convenient to start with 
a room with the largest square footage possible. Because bud-
gets are often limited, the best way to plan for current and 
future NORA sites is to have soft spaces around the NORA 
locations. This means having nursing lounges, locker rooms, 
and storage closets nearby that can be easily renovated into 
areas to accommodate an expanding NORA site and its asso-
ciated needs. The biggest concerns and costs when expand-
ing an existing area are those associated with medical gases 
and electricity; careful planning with consideration for future 
needs of these two systems is required. The only way to plan 
now is to budget for construction in the future.
Implementing a NORA design can be an arduous pro-
cess whether building new or retrofitting into an existing 
area. See Table 2-4 for an approximate timeline. Note that 
many variables contribute to deviations from this estimate, 
including departmental personnel availability, contrac-
tor availability, hospital rules and regulations, and, often, 
unforeseen factors.
Providing anesthesia services outside the traditional oper-
ating room is very challenging for multiple reasons, not the 
least of which is a cramped or illogical room design from the 
point of view of the anesthesiologist. Anesthesiology should 
work closely with room design teams from the very begin-
ning to create a safe and efficient NORA site for patients.
Figure 2-3  Intraoperative angiography.
2  •  Designing Safety and Engineering Standards for the Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Procedure Site
17
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Kurt Smith and eppstein 
uhen architects in Madison and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, for 
their generous donation of time and expertise to the compo-
sition of this chapter.
References
	 1.	 Committee of Origin. Standards and Practice Parameters: statement 
on nonoperating room anesthetizing locations. Approved by the ASA 
House of Delegates on October 15, 2003, and amended on October 22, 
2008. http://www.asahq.org/For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and- 
Statements.aspx.
	 2.	 Facility Guidelines Institute. Guidelines for design and construction of 
health care facilities: 2010. Chicago: American Society for Healthcare 
Engineering of the American Hospital Association; 2010.
	 3.	 Ehrenwerth J. The anesthesiologist’s overview of the operating room. 
In: 2012 operating room design manual. Park Ridge, IL: American Soci-
ety of Anesthesiologists; 2012. https://www.asahq.org/for-members/
practice-management/asa-practice-management-resources/operat-
ing-room-design-manual.aspx.
	 4.	 Loeb R. Ergonomics and workflow. In: 2012 operating room design man-
ual. Park Ridge, IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 2012. https://
www.asahq.org/for-members/practice-management/asa-practice-
management-resources/operating-room-design-manual.aspx.
	 5.	 Rogoski J. Hybrid operating rooms. In: 2012 operating room design 
manual. Park Ridge, IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 2012. 
https://www.asahq.org/for-members/practice-management/asa-
practice-management-resources/operating-room-design-manual.
aspx.
	 6.	 Maheshwari K. Room ventilation systems. https://www.asahq.org/
for-members/practice-management/asa-practice-management-
resources/operating-room-design-manual.aspx
	 7.	 Functional testing and design guides: from the fundamentals to the 
field. Portland, OR, peci. http://www.peci.org/ftguide/ftg/System-
Modules/AirHandlers/AHU_ReferenceGuide/FTG_Chapters/Chap-
ter_8_Reheat.
	 8.	 Helfman S. Gas and vacuum supplies. In: 2012 operating room design 
manual. Park Ridge, IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 2012. 
https://www.asahq.org/for-members/practice-management/asa-
practice-management-resources/operating-room-design-manual.
aspx.
	 9.	 Helfman S. Electrical service. In: 2012 operating room design manual. 
Park Ridge, IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 2012. https://
www.asahq.org/for-members/practice-management/asa-practice-
management-resources/operating-room-design-manual.aspx.
	10.	 Moss E, Nagle T. Medical air. Indianapolis, IN: Anesthesia Patient Safety 
Foundation.http://www.apsf.org/newsletters/html/1996/summer/ 
apsfmedair.html.
	11.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Waste anesthetic gases: 
occupational hazards in hospitals. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Insti-
tute for Occupational Safety and Health. Publication number 2007-
151. September 2007. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2007-151/
pdfs/2007-151.pdf.
	12.	 Rogoski J. Remote and hazardous locations. In: 2012 operating room 
design manual. Park Ridge, IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 
2012. 
https://www.asahq.org/for-members/practice-management/
asa-practice-management-resources/operating-room-design-manual. 
aspx.
	13.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Anesthetic Care for 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Practice advisory on anesthetic care for 
magnetic resonance imaging. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(3):459–479.
	14.	 National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements. Struc-
tural shielding design for medical x-ray imaging facilities, report 147. 
Washington, DC: National Council on Radiation Protection and Mea-
surements; 2005.
	15.	 United States Department of Energy. DOE technical standard: specifica-
tion for HEPA filters. DOE-STD-3020-2005. Washington, DC; 2005.
	16.	 U.S. Department of Labor. Anesthetic gases: guidelines for workplace 
exposures. Occupational Safety & Health Administration. 2000. 
https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/anestheticgases/index.html.
Table 2-4  Timeline for Design and Implementation of a 
Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Site
Activity
Time (wk)
Choose equipment and vendor,  
schematic room design and design 
development by medical architect 
(locations of gas outlets, lighting, etc.)
6-8
Prepare construction documents (i.e., 
guides for the contractors on how to 
build the area)
6
Design approval by the state
6
Construction
10 (including ∼2 wk at the 
end for the equipment 
vendors to guide  
installation)
Medical personnel training
2
“Go live”: area open to patients
Total time: 32 wk
18
An increasingly large number of anesthetic cases are 
performed outside the traditional operating room envi­
ronment. Procedures performed in areas such as the elec­
trophysiology laboratory and interventional radiology 
department are becoming more complicated and often take 
longer. Patients are presenting with more complicated 
histories and comorbidities. Because of the complexity of 
the procedures and patients’ conditions, anesthesiologists 
are requested to provide services in these remote locations 
with increasing frequency. Non–operating room anesthesia 
(NORA) sites pose challenges. This chapter will address 
room setup, supply, and medication issues in these off-site 
locations. Unlike in the main operating room, each NORA 
site has equipment unique to that area that can pose 
challenges for the anesthesia care team.
Room Setup
NORA procedures occur in a wide array of locations 
(Box 3-1). These sites range from a designated area in the 
postanesthesia care unit (PACU) where electroconvulsive 
therapy is performed to specially designed multiroom suites 
for gastrointestinal endoscopy. The equipment, supplies, 
and medications needed in each area will depend on the 
planned anesthetics and the frequency of their occurrence. 
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) issued a 
Statement on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing Locations 
(Figure 3-1)1 that provides minimal guidelines applicable to 
all anesthesia care in locations outside the operating room.
One challenge for anesthesia practitioners in remote 
locations is space. Procedural areas are often planned 
and built without considering that anesthesia care might 
be needed in that area. As a result, the anesthesia team 
is often given inadequate space and not always near the 
patient. The anesthesia team often works around C-arms in 
interventional radiology and an endless array of monitors 
and C-arms in the cardiac electrophysiology laboratory. 
These spaces become very crowded areas with the intro­
duction of anesthesia equipment and monitors (Figure 3-2).
Before providing anesthesia services in a NORA location, 
it is important to evaluate the area to ensure that the guide­
lines as put forth in the ASA Statement on Non–Operating 
Room Anesthetizing Locations are followed, along with 
institutional policies. If the proper equipment and systems 
are not in place to ensure patient safety, the area should not 
be used to provide anesthesia services until such changes 
are made.
The anesthesia department sometimes sends older equip­
ment to the remote anesthesia areas. Remote areas are 
perceived as not needing the newest equipment because 
these areas are often not used to the same extent as rooms 
in the main operating room. It is an unwise practice to 
send older equipment to remote areas. Using older equip­
ment in a remote area raises the possibility of unfamiliarity 
with the equipment and machine malfunction. If a prob­
lem arises with the equipment, the practitioner may not 
be able to troubleshoot the problem. Assistance may take 
much longer to arrive than it would in the main operating 
room. The ASA Committee on Equipment and Facilities 
published Guidelines for Determining Anesthesia Machine 
Obsolescence.2 This document has not been approved as a 
practice parameter or policy statement by the ASA House 
of Delegates, but it does provide practical advice regarding 
essential features needed in an anesthesia machine to 
provide a safe anesthetic for patients. Equipment and sup­
plies should match as closely as possible the equipment in 
the main operating room. Having uniformity of equipment 
and supplies in all locations provides familiarity for the 
anesthesia providers who rotate through these areas.
Anesthesia machine check in NORA locations is just 
as important as in the main operating room. Anesthesia 
machines in remote locations may not be used every day, so 
it is important to do a complete machine check at the start 
of the day. It is important to ensure that the soda lime is 
fresh in an anesthesia machine that might not have been 
used recently. In NORA procedure areas, the anesthesia 
team shares the space with the procedure team. Anesthesia 
care may not be provided for each case in the room during 
the day. During nonanesthetic procedures, the procedure 
nurses may use monitors on the anesthesia workstation. 
This raises the possibility, for example, that the anesthe­
sia machine may be moved, connections unplugged, or 
breathing circuits dislodged. If nonanesthesia cases were 
performed between anesthesia cases, the machine needs 
to be thoroughly checked before the next anesthesia 
procedure. Anesthesia machines and equipment in NORA 
Room Setup, Critical 
Supplies, and Medications
MARK C. PHILLIPS
3
Box 3-1  Non–Operating Room Locations 
Commonly Requiring Anesthesia Services
Gastrointestinal endoscopy suite
Cardiac catheterization laboratory
Cardiac electrophysiology laboratory
Pulmonary bronchoscopy laboratory
Interventional radiology department
Interventional neuroangiography department
Computed tomography suite
Magnetic resonance imaging suite
Radiation therapy suite
Electroconvulsive therapy suite
3  •  Room Setup, Critical Supplies, and Medications
19
locations need to have regular preventive maintenance, as 
do machines in the main operating room.3
At times an anesthesia machine is transported to a location 
where anesthesia service is infrequently provided. In these 
situations, the machine needs to be checked very carefully 
because transportation of the machine can potentially dam­
age the machine or loosen connections. It is essential to ensure 
that the anesthesia machine, monitors, and equipment are all 
in good working order before beginning anesthetic care.
In certain locations where sedation is the only planned 
action, a compact monitor with the capability of monitoring 
electrocardiography, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, 
and end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) is very useful and 
does not take up much space (Figure 3-3). ETCO2 monitor­
ing should be included in the monitoring for procedural 
sedation or general anesthesia in any NORA location.
In areas where anesthesia care is provided, even if seda­
tion is the only planned action, the anesthesia provider 
STATEMENT ON NONOPERATING ROOM ANESTHETIZING LOCATIONS
Committee of Origin: Standards and Practice Parameters
(Approved by the ASA House of Delegates on October 15, 2003 and amended on October 22, 2008)
These guidelines apply to all anesthesia care involving anesthesiology personnel for procedures intended to be performed in 
locations outside an operating room. These are minimal guidelines which may be exceeded at any time based on the judgment of 
the involved anesthesia personnel. These guidelines encourage quality patient care but observing them cannot guarantee any 
specific patient outcome. These guidelines are subject to revision from time to time, as warranted by the evolution of technology 
and practice. ASA Standards, Guidelines and Policies should be adhered to in all nonoperating room settings except where they 
are not applicable to the individual patient or care setting.
1. 
There should be in each location a reliable source of oxygen adequate for the length of the procedure. There should also be 
a backup supply. Prior to administering any anesthetic, the anesthesiologist should consider the capabilities, limitations and 
accessibility of both the primary and backup oxygen sources. Oxygen piped from a central source, meeting applicable codes, 
is strongly encouraged. The backup system should include the equivalent of at least a full E cylinder.
2. 
There should be in each location an adequate and reliable source of suction. Suction apparatus that meets operating room 
standards is strongly encouraged.
3. 
In any location in which inhalation anesthetics are administered, there should be an adequate and reliable system for 
scavenging waste anesthetic gases.
4. 
There should be in each location: (a) a self-inflating hand resuscitator bag capable of administering at least 90 percent oxygen 
as a means to deliver positive pressure ventilation; (b) adequate anesthesia drugs, supplies and equipment for the intended 
anesthesia care; and (c) adequate monitoring equipment to allow adherence to the “Standards for Basic Anesthetic 
Monitoring.” In any location in which inhalation anesthesia is to be administered, there should be an anesthesia machine 
equivalent in function to that employed in operating rooms and maintained to current operating room standards.
5. 
There should be in each location, sufficient electrical outlets to satisfy anesthesia machine and monitoring equipment 
requirements, including clearly labeled outlets connected to an emergency power supply. In any anesthetizing location 
determined by the health care facility to be a “wet location” (e.g., for cystoscopy or arthroscopy or a birthing room in labor and 
delivery), either isolated electric power or electric circuits with ground fault circuit interrupters should be provided.*
6. 
There should be in each location, provision for adequate illumination of the patient, anesthesia machine (when present) and 
monitoring equipment. In addition, a form of battery-powered illumination other than a laryngoscope should be immediately 
available.
7. 
There should be in each location, sufficient space to accommodate necessary equipment and personnel and to allow 
expeditious access to the patient, anesthesia machine (when present) and monitoring equipment.
8. 
There should be immediately available in each location, an emergency cart with a defibrillator, emergency drugs and other 
equipment adequate to provide cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
9. 
There should be in each location adequate staff trained to support the anesthesiologist. There should be immediately 
available in each location, a reliable means of two-way communication to request assistance.
10. 
For each location, all applicable building and safety codes and facility standards, where they exist, should be observed.
 11. 
Appropriate postanesthesia management should be provided (see Standards for Postanesthesia Care). In addition to the 
anesthesiologist, adequate numbers of trained staff and appropriate equipment should be available to safely transport the 
patient to a postanesthesia care unit.
*See National Fire Protection Association. Health Care Facilities Code 99; Quincy, MA: NFPA, 1993.
With hjhjhj American Society of Anesthesiologists
Figure 3-1  American Society of Anesthesiologists Statement on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing Locations.
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
20
should be able to administer general anesthesia and manage 
the airway. A defibrillator and emergency resuscitation 
cart should be immediately available to the anesthetist.
The NORA location ideally should have oxygen, air, and 
nitrous oxide available via a central supply. It is essential 
to ensure an adequate supply of oxygen is available for the 
duration of the case. If central supply oxygen is available, 
a full E-type tank of oxygen should be present as a backup. 
If oxygen tanks are to be used for the case, it is important 
to ensure adequate supplies for the case are available, as 
well as a backup tank. The tank key must be present before 
beginning anesthetic care.
Central suction may not be available in NORA locations. 
It is important to ensure suction is available via a suction 
machine if central suction is not available.
The procedure tables in NORA locations often do not 
move into the variety of positions available with the main 
operating room tables. It may be advisable to induce 
and emerge from anesthesia on the stretcher on which 
the patient is brought to the procedure room. Using the 
stretcher will allow heads-up, Trendelenburg, and reverse 
Trendelenburg positioning if needed. Certain procedures, 
such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, 
are commonly done in the prone position. The procedure 
staff must keep the stretcher next to the procedure room 
in case the patient needs to be immediately turned to the 
supine position.
Monitoring standards in NORA locations should be the 
same as in the main operating room. Electrocardiography, 
pulse oximetry, blood pressure, and ETCO2 are minimal 
requirements. Gas analysis is also advised if use of volatile 
anesthetics is planned.
Postprocedure recovery should be the same standard as 
that of the main operating room. Ideally, the patient should 
recover in a monitored environment close to the procedural 
area. If this is not possible, the patient should be transported 
to the main PACU for recovery from anesthesia. The patient 
should be transported with supplemental oxygen, a transport 
monitor, an Ambu bag, and emergency medications in case 
of an emergency during transport.
Other pieces of equipment are needed in NORA locations. 
Many procedures done in NORA locations are done under 
sedation or with total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). 
Using an intravenous infusion pump for medications such 
as propofol is very helpful in achieving an adequate level 
of sedation or anesthesia. A forced-air warming system is 
needed to ensure patients do not develop hypothermia. 
Certain NORA locations such as magnetic resonance imag­
ing (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) suites are kept 
cool to help protect equipment, thus placing patients at risk 
for hypothermia. An intravenous fluid warmer is needed if 
there is the possibility of blood transfusion or the need for 
large amounts of intravenous fluids. Transducers to measure 
arterial blood pressure and central venous pressure should 
be readily available. A bispectral index monitor or other 
depth of anesthesia monitor is also a useful device to have 
available.
It is beneficial to have point-of-care laboratory testing 
available in NORA locations. NORA locations may be far 
from the operating room or main hospital laboratories; having 
point-of-care testing will improve efficiency. This availability 
will allow laboratory tests such as blood glucose, potassium 
level, and hematocrit to be quickly checked.
In any area where anesthesia care is to be provided, the 
anesthesia provider should know the location of oxygen 
shutoff valves and fire extinguishers. Safety and emergency 
evacuation procedures in NORA spaces should be reviewed 
with the personnel in those areas. The anesthesia provider 
should also ensure the presence of a defibrillator and resus­
citation cart in any location where anesthesia care is to be 
provided.
In the main operating room, personnel are accustomed 
to assisting and being attentive during the movement of 
the patient into the room, during anesthetic induction, 
and during emergence from anesthesia. This is not the case 
in many NORA locations. Personnel in these locations are 
used to their routines and are unaware of the concerns of 
the anesthesia team. Time spent familiarizing these personnel 
with the issues and concerns of the anesthesia team regard­
ing care of the patient before service is begun will be very 
helpful to the anesthesia team.
The anesthesia and procedural teams should collaborate 
to create a quiet environment during anesthetic induction 
Figure 3-2  Crowded environment in the cardiac electrophysiology 
laboratory. Anesthesia workstation is behind the lead glass shield.
Figure 3-3  Compact monitor with end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor­
ing capability.
3  •  Room Setup, Critical Supplies, and Medications
21
and emergence. This hushed setting benefits the patient and 
allows the anesthesia care team to effectively communicate. 
The importance of safety straps on the patient needs to be 
stressed, especially during emergence from anesthesia. The 
procedural team should be instructed on the importance of 
being attentive and nearby during emergence from anesthe­
sia. Spending time familiarizing the team with the anesthe­
sia machine and airway devices such as Eschmann stylets is 
very helpful. If assistance is needed with bag-mask ventila­
tion or with airway supplies, prior familiarity is much bet­
ter than trying to instruct in the middle of a stressful event. 
Anticipation of and planning for problems that might arise 
in these locations is important, because help from the main 
operating room may take an extended time to arrive.
In many NORA locations, the setup is similar to that of 
the main operating room once space issues are negotiated. 
Setup differs significantly in two locations—radiation 
therapy and MRI suites.
ROOM SETUP IN RADIATION THERAPY
Providing anesthesia care for patients undergoing radia­
tion therapy poses challenges for the anesthesia provider. 
Radiation therapy can consist of traditional external beam 
radiation therapy or can be delivered in a targeted fashion 
via a Gamma Knife or CyberKnife. The CyberKnife delivers 
gamma-ray beams via a robot arm that moves around the 
patient and delivers radiation from different directions. In 
this situation, the anesthesia provider must make sure all 
hoses and tubing, the anesthesia machine, and the cart are 
away from the area traveled by the robot arm. Because of 
the high levels of scatter radiation during radiation ther­
apy treatment, the anesthesia provider cannot remain in 
the room during treatment. The anesthesia monitors and 
patient must be viewed via video surveillance. It takes 20 to 
30 seconds to stop treatment and open the heavy lead door 
if immediate access to the patient is required.
ROOM SETUP IN MAGNETIC 
RESONANCE IMAGING
Providing anesthesia services in the MRI suite poses prob­
lems not encountered in other anesthetizing locations. If 
proper precautions are not taken, the MRI suite can be a 
hazardous environment for both the anesthesia provider 
and the patient. Descriptions of the science and techni­
cal aspects of MRI have been published elsewhere and are 
beyond the scope of this chapter.4,5 MRI has advantages 
in that this imaging modality does not expose the patient 
to ionizing radiation and thus does not have cumulative 
effects when serial examinations are required. The number 
of MRI scans done each year continues to grow, and the 
need for anesthesia services in the MRI suite continues to 
grow as well.
In 2007 the American College of Radiology published a 
Guidance Document for Safe MR Practices.6 In 2009 the 
ASA Task Force on Anesthetic Care for Magnetic Reso­
nance Imaging published a practice advisory on anesthetic 
care for MRI.7 These documents provide detailed informa­
tion about safe practices within the MRI environment.
The major concern in providing anesthesia care in the 
MRI suite is the strong magnetic field present around the 
scanner at all times. It takes several days to generate the 
magnetic field used in MRI. Therefore the magnetic field is 
always on, even when there is not a patient in the scanner. 
The magnetic field is measured in tesla units (T); 1 T equals 
10,000 gauss. The earth’s magnetic field is approximately 
0.5 gauss. MRI scanners used for clinical purposes are 
gener­ally 1- to 3-T machines. Thus the MRI scanner gener­
ates a magnetic field thousands of times stronger than the 
earth’s magnetic field. Any item of equipment that contains 
ferromagnetic material will be attracted to the magnet. 
In addition to the static magnetic field that is always pres­
ent, during image acquisition, radiofrequency pulses are 
applied. Both the static magnetic field and the intermittent 
radiofrequency pulses create the safety issues associated 
with MRI.
Four zones have been identified in the MRI environment, 
with increasing danger from the magnetic field with each 
increase in zone (Table 3-1).6 Signs should be posted to 
indicate each zone in the MRI suite.
In an area in the MRI suite known as the 5-gauss exclu­
sion zone, ferromagnetic items become very significant 
risks because of abnormal operation and being drawn to 
the magnet. This area is generally demarcated by a red line. 
The distance of the 5-gauss line from the scanner bore varies 
depending on the strength of the MRI and the shielding of 
each device.
Multiple incidents have been reported of ferrous-containing 
objects, hospital beds, anesthesia carts, intravenous poles, 
oxygen tanks, and other items being drawn to the magnet 
(Figures 3-4 and 3-5). Serious injury or death can occur 
in these situations. A paper clip has a terminal velocity of 
40 miles per hour in a 1.5-T magnetic field.8 Larger objects 
have greater velocity and force. These items can become 
high-speed projectiles when they enter the magnetic field 
of the scanner It is imperative that all personnel, patients, 
and objects be screened for the presence of ferrous-con­
taining materials before being allowed in zone III or zone IV 
areas.
If an employee or patient is trapped by an object drawn to 
the magnet, such as an anesthesia cart, the MRI has to be 
shut down emergently. This very expensive and potentially 
hazardous procedure is called a quench. The MRI scanner 
is super-cooled with inert gases such as liquid helium. In a 
Table 3-1  Magnetic Resonance Suite Zones
Zone
Activity
Zone I
All areas freely accessible to the general public. This is 
the area through which personnel and patients access 
the MRI area.
Zone II
The area between the uncontrolled zone I and the 
strictly controlled zone III. This is the area where 
patients are greeted, histories obtained, and ques­
tions answered. Movement by non-MRI personnel and 
patients is under the supervision of MRI personnel.
Zone III
This is a restricted area. Movement in this area is strictly 
controlled by MRI personnel. Access to this area is 
only after screening for the presence of ferromagnetic 
material. Ferromagnetic objects may produce a seri­
ous hazard if brought into this area.
Zone IV
This is the MRI scanner room itself. By definition it is 
within zone III.
MRI, Magnetic resonance imaging.
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
22
quench, these gases are suddenly released to shut down the 
magnetic field. They usually escape by a pressure valve to the 
outside. If these gases do not exit outside but rather empty 
into the scanner room, hypoxia may occur as hundreds of 
thousands of liters of helium is released into the scanner 
room, displacing oxygen. This gas can also pressurize the 
room, making it impossible to open doors. The room can 
then become a fire hazard because flammable liquid oxygen 
can form as a result of the rapid drop in room temperature.6
A quench is very expensive in terms of the cost of getting 
the scanner back on line. An emergency quench can dam­
age the coils of the magnet as a result of the rapid change 
in temperature as the cryogenic material is released. The 
scanner has to be checked very carefully to ensure it is 
not damaged. Refilling the cryogen materials is also very 
expensive. A significant economic impact occurs from lost 
revenue during the time the scanner is down. An emer­
gency quench should be initiated by MRI personnel only in 
life-threatening emergencies.
The MRI does not need to be quenched if a piece of equip­
ment is attached to the magnet but no life is in jeopardy. The 
MRI and engineering personnel can lessen the magnetic field 
so that the object can be safely removed from the magnet.
The best way to avoid an emergency quench is to ensure 
that proper MRI procedures are followed at all times and to 
follow the instructions of the MRI personnel. Some institu­
tions require personnel going into the MRI environment 
to complete an educational program and training before 
being allowed in the MRI area. It is also important to ensure 
that anesthesia personnel are screened for the presence of 
foreign bodies or implanted devices containing ferromag­
netic material before being allowed to work in the MRI 
environment.7
The American Society of Testing and Materials developed 
terminology regarding equipment and devices in the MRI 
environment. Equipment and devices are given the designa­
tions MRI safe, MRI conditional, and MRI unsafe. MRI safe 
equipment is identified as having no ferromagnetic parts 
or radiofrequency interference. MRI unsafe equipment is 
identified as having ferromagnetic parts or being affected 
by radiofrequency interference. MRI conditional equipment 
may be safe in certain areas of the MRI suite but cannot be 
identified as having no ferromagnetic parts.7
Many manufacturers make MRI safe and MRI condi­
tional anesthesia machines. It is preferable to have these 
machines in the MRI suite (Figure 3-6). If an MRI safe or 
MRI conditional anesthesia machine is not available, it is 
important that the anesthesia machine be kept at a safe dis­
tance and that a long anesthesia circuit be used.
Figure 3-4  Intravenous pole attached to magnetic resonance imaging 
magnet bore. (Courtesy Simply Physics. http://www.simplyphysics.com.)
Figure 3-5  Hospital bed drawn to magnetic resonance imaging mag­
net bore. (Courtesy Simply Physics. http://www.simplyphysics.com.)
Figure 3-6  Anesthesia machine for use in magnetic resonance imag­
ing environment.
3  •  Room Setup, Critical Supplies, and Medications
23
If an infusion pump is going to be used, it should be MRI 
safe or MRI conditional (Figure 3-7). If it is not, it should 
be kept outside the scanning room and the tubing threaded 
through a waveguide to the patient in the scanner.
As mentioned earlier, radiofrequency pulses are emitted 
during MRI scanning. The radiofrequency pulses can interfere 
with monitors and equipment because they can heat up 
monitor wires and leads. The risk for patient burn exists if 
these leads are looped or coiled. To lessen the risk for burns, 
monitoring wires should be examined to ensure that 
insulation is intact. Leads and cables should be straight 
and in line with the body. Leads and cables should not be in 
direct contact with the skin. It is now common to have spe­
cially shielded pulse oximeters for use in MRI with wireless 
communication to the monitor. MRI safe electrocardiogra­
phy electrodes are available. The electrocardiogram (ECG) 
can be transmitted via telemetry and eliminate a wire to the 
monitor.
In addition to the risk for patient burns related to radio­
frequency pulses, risk to the hearing of patients and personnel 
is also an issue. The radiofrequency pulses make noise up to 
90 decibels. The 3-T machines are much louder than 1.5-T 
machines. The patient as well as any personnel or visitors 
present in the scanner room should wear hearing protec­
tion provided during the procedure.
In the event of cardiac or respiratory arrest while the 
patient is in the scanner, basic life support measures 
should be started while the patient is emergently removed 
from the magnet room to a magnetically safe location for 
full resuscitation measures to take place. If resuscitation 
is done in the magnet room, it raises the possibility of dan­
ger from ferromagnetic objects used in the resuscitation. If 
the hospital resuscitation team is called to the MRI room, 
team members must follow MRI safety protocols. In 
responding to the emergency, the hospital resuscitation 
team may not realize the significant hazards associated 
with the magnetic field and thus inadvertently take a ferrous 
object into the magnet room, creating a serious hazard. 
This underscores the importance of removing the patient 
to a magnetically safe place for resuscitation. In addition, it 
is often difficult to interpret ECG data while in the magnet 
room, which could hamper resuscitation efforts.
In many institutions, the patient is anesthetized in an 
area outside the scanner room, then moved onto the MRI 
gantry and taken into the scanner room (Figure 3-8). This 
process allows the anesthesia provider to use any equip­
ment needed during the anesthetic induction. If induction 
is to take place in the scanner room, care must be taken to 
ensure that nonferrous equipment and supplies are used. It 
is important to ensure that the anesthesia circuit and intra­
venous lines are long enough to allow for movement of the 
MRI gantry during scanning.
Before being brought into the scanner, the patient is 
questioned carefully regarding the presence of any ferro­
magnetic devices such as pacemakers, implantable car­
dioverter-defibrillators, prosthetic heart valves, aneurysm 
clips, bullets, or shrapnel. If the patient is unable to answer, 
family members are questioned. Other means such as look­
ing for scars or using plain films can be employed to deter­
mine if the patient has a device. If it cannot be determined 
the patient is safe to have the procedure, it should not be 
done.
The anesthesia provider will in most circumstances not 
be in the scanner room during the scan. The anesthesia 
provider needs to have visualization of the patient through 
a window and also by video cameras. The anesthesia 
Figure 3-7  Infusion pump for use in magnetic resonance imaging 
environment.
Figure 3-8  Anesthesia induction for magnetic resonance imaging can 
take place outside the scanner room, with the patient then moved to 
the scanner.
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
24
monitors also must be visible. This can be achieved using 
a video camera focused on the monitors. Ideally this should 
be by means of a slave display at the MRI control desk.
Pregnant personnel can work throughout their preg­
nancies in the MRI environment. However, it is recom­
mended that they move away from the magnet bore during 
actual scanning.
Cooperation and consultation between the MRI person­
nel and anesthesia staff are very important in the MRI envi­
ronment. A good working relationship and understanding 
of the concerns of both the MRI personnel and the anesthe­
sia staff will ensure a safe experience for the patient.
Critical Supplies
NORA locations need to be supplied even better than the 
main operating rooms. Because of the remoteness of some 
locations, supply support from the main operating room is 
often infrequent. It is important to make sure that adequate 
supplies are present before beginning anesthetic care. If 
additional supplies are needed in the middle of a procedure, 
it may take some time for them to arrive.
NORA locations where services are provided multiple 
times per week should have well-supplied anesthesia carts. 
These carts should remain in place. In locations where service 
is very infrequent, an anesthesia cart with supplies can be 
taken to that location on the day of a procedure. In an area 
where service is provided daily it is recommended to have 
an anesthesia supply storage area nearby, just as in the case 
of the main operating room. This will allow for easy stock­
ing of anesthesia carts between cases. It is sometimes dif­
ficult to obtain space for an anesthesia supply storage area; 
however, the argument that efficiency will be improved and 
room turnaround faster will go a long way toward acquiring 
space. Having a dedicated anesthesia technician assist with 
room turnover in busy multiroom areas such as the gastro­
intestinal endoscopy or cardiac electrophysiology suites 
also improves efficiency.
The supplies needed in NORA locations are often the same 
as those in the main operating room, with a few exceptions. 
Because of the distance from the anesthesia machine to the 
patient in many of these locations, a longer anesthetic circuit 
is often needed than those used in the main operating room. 
Likewise, longer intravenous tubing is also necessary. A 
flashlight other than a laryngoscope provides illumination 
in darkened rooms, assisting in finding and drawing up 
medications and observing the patient.
A list of important phone numbers should be posted in 
a clearly visible place in the procedure room. This list of 
numbers should include the main operating room anes­
thesia board to request additional anesthesia assistance, 
the operating room pharmacy if additional medications or 
malignant hyperthermia supplies are needed, the number 
to call for anesthesia supplies, and the number to call for the 
difficult airway cart. Trying to remember phone numbers 
in the middle of an emergency is difficult. Having the team 
in the room make needed phone calls allows the anesthesia 
provider to concentrate on the emergency.
The ability to manage an airway is needed in any area 
where anesthesia care is provided. Sufficient airway sup­
plies to manage an airway should be immediately available 
(Box 3-2). It is helpful to have a video laryngoscope in 
NORA locations. An argument also can be made for having 
a difficult airway cart with a fiberoptic endoscope in NORA 
locations. Practical and economic concerns, however, 
would advocate having the cart permanently available only 
in busy NORA locations such as a multiroom gastrointestinal 
endoscopy suite. If it is necessary to call for the difficult 
airway cart, the personnel responsible for bringing it to the 
remote site need to be familiar with the remote location and 
the fastest route to deliver the equipment.
In circumstances in which the patient has a known difficult 
airway, the difficult airway cart can be called for and 
additional anesthesia personnel can be arranged to assist. 
An alternative for patients with a known difficult airway 
is to perform the intubation in the main operating room, 
where additional resources and equipment are readily 
available, and then transport the patient to the NORA loca­
tion for the procedure. Transporting an intubated patient 
poses the risk for inadvertent extubation if the endotracheal 
tube or breathing circuit gets snagged during transport. If 
the patient has to be transported a considerable distance, it 
is recommended a transport ventilator be used rather than 
hand ventilating the patient with an Ambu bag. The deci­
sion to intubate a patient with a known difficult airway in 
the main operating room or in the NORA location should be 
made weighing patient and institutional factors and arriving 
at the best decision for the particular case.
Safety Issues in Non–Operating 
Room Anesthesia Locations
Safety issues for anesthesia personnel are often magnified in 
the NORA environment (Box 3-3).
RISK FOR TRIPS AND FALLS
NORA locations have various monitors, equipment, and 
cables not seen with such frequency in the main operating 
room. In areas not initially designed for the provision of 
anesthesia services, power outlets may be poorly positioned, 
thus leaving power cords across walking pathways. Cables 
Box 3-2  Airway Supplies Checklist
Ambu bag and various size face masks
Various sizes of endotracheal tubes
Endotracheal tube stylet
Tongue blades
Oral airways of various sizes
Nasal airways of various sizes
Lubricating gel
Laryngoscope (with extra batteries)
Miller and Macintosh laryngoscope blades
Laryngeal mask airways of various sizes
Eschmann intubating stylet
Cook airway exchange catheter
Magill forceps
Videolaryngoscope
Nasal cannula with carbon dioxide sampling capability
Syringe
Tape
3  •  Room Setup, Critical Supplies, and Medications
25
and infusion lines are often suspended across walking 
paths. The lights in the room are often dimmed to improve 
visualization of imaging for the proceduralist. These factors, 
coupled with the remote location in the room that the anes­
thesia team is often provided, are a recipe for a trip and a fall. 
Likewise, C-arm beams and video monitors often are posi­
tioned close overhead, posing a hazard for a head injury. 
Caution must be taken to avoid head injury. The risks for 
contaminating the field, pulling out intravenous infusion 
lines or catheters, and disrupting the procedure also exist. 
Situational awareness of the location of cords, cables, and 
equipment is necessary at all times.
EXPOSURE TO TRACE ANESTHETIC GASES
Studies have raised the issue of possible dangers involved 
in repeated exposure to trace concentrations of waste anes­
thetic gases.9,10 Later analysis of these studies found flaws 
in the study design.11,12 A later prospective study found no 
causal relationship between exposure to trace anesthetic 
gases and adverse health events.13 The National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health has established standards 
for allowable trace gases, as follows14:
   
	•	 Volatile anesthetic alone: 2 parts per million (PPM) over 
1 hour
	•	 Nitrous oxide alone: 25 PPM for an 8-hour time-weighted 
average
	•	 Volatile gas with 25 PPM nitrous oxide: 0.5 PPM over 1 hour
   
One of the means of lowering trace gases in the OR is fre­
quent air exchanges. The current requirement is 15 to 21 
air exchanges per hour, of which 3 must be with fresh out­
side air. NORA locations adapted for the presence of anes­
thesia may not have as robust an air exchange system and 
thus have higher trace gas measurement. If volatile gases 
are to be used, a gas scavenging system should be in place. If 
no gas scavenging system is available, TIVA should be used 
for general anesthesia cases. Other means of minimizing 
trace gas levels include using low gas flows, being vigilant 
regarding circuit leaks and disconnects, and not turning on 
gases until the anesthesia circuit is connected to the patient.
RADIATION EXPOSURE
Exposure to ionizing radiation is another safety concern 
for anesthesia personnel providing anesthesia in NORA 
locations such as the cardiac electrophysiology labora­
tory, interventional radiology department, and gastroin­
testinal endoscopy suite. Radiological imaging, especially 
fluoroscopy, is used routinely in many of these procedures. 
It is important that anesthesia staff be educated about the 
hazards of radiation exposure, the importance of wearing 
personal protective equipment, and limiting exposure as 
much as possible.
Exposure to ionizing radiation is potentially harmful for 
several reasons, including development of leukemia and 
fetal abnormalities resulting from genetic injury.15
Radiation exposure is measured in terms of roentgen 
equivalent man (rem) units. The rem is a unit used to 
derive a quantity termed the equivalent dose. It relates the 
absorbed radiation dose in human tissue to the effective bio­
logical damage of the radiation. The rem is often expressed 
in terms of thousandths of a rem, or mrem. The unit of 
measurement for a biological radiation dose outside the 
United States is the Sievert (Sv); 1 Sv equals 100 rem. The 
maximum annual occupational exposure is to be no more 
than 5000 mrem per year or 50 mSv. For pregnant per­
sonnel, the total dose allowed during the pregnancy is 500 
mrem. The exposure from a chest x-ray is approximately 
25 mrem. The exposure from whole-body CT is 1100 
mrem. The exposure from a C-arm fluoroscopy unit is 1200 
to 1400 mrem/min. Exposure during fluoroscopy is much 
higher than from CT or regular x-rays.
In 2005 a study by Katz16 demonstrated that the 
radiation exposure to an anesthesia department doubled 
after the department began providing anesthesia services 
in a cardiac electrophysiology laboratory. Although the 
annualized limits were still well below the occupational 
exposure limits, the study did show a significant increase 
when providing services in an area where fluoroscopy is 
heavily used.
Radiation exposure may occur from primary exposure 
from the source collimator, as leakage from the device, 
or from scatter radiation. Scatter radiation is radiation 
reflected from the patient or other surfaces. Scatter radia­
tion is responsible for the majority of occupational exposure 
and is the largest danger for the anesthesia provider. Scatter 
radiation increases when the power output of the beam and 
the size of the imaged field increases. Fluoroscopy has more 
scatter radiation than a CT machine with a focused beam.
Anesthesia personnel should use the ALARA principle: 
always attempt to keep radiation exposure As Low As Rea­
sonably Achievable. ALARA is founded on the following 
three concepts of limiting exposure to radiation:
   
	1.	 Reducing radiation time
	2.	 Increasing distance from the source of radiation
	3.	 Barriers to radiation
   
Limiting radiation time is under the control of the proce­
duralist. Distance and barriers are under the control of the 
anesthesia provider.
Exposure to radiation decreases with the inverse square 
of the distance from the radiation source. Anesthesia team 
members should remain at least 3 to 6 feet from the radia­
tion source if possible. Exposure is minimal beyond 3 feet. 
Six feet of air provides the equivalent protection of 9 inches 
of concrete or 2.5 mm of lead.17 Being 6 feet away from the 
beam decreases scatter exposure to the same level as wear­
ing five lead aprons. Lead aprons attenuate 97% to 98% of 
scatter.
Full wraparound lead vests and skirts are recommended. 
Full-wrap lead will lessen radiation exposure if the anes­
thesia practitioner has his or her back turned during imag­
ing. Full-wrap lead is heavy, and it is important that it is 
Box 3-3  Safety Considerations in Non–
Operating Room Anesthetizing Locations
Trips and falls
Exposure to trace anesthetic gases
Radiation exposure
Magnetic resonance imaging safety
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
26
appropriately sized and fits correctly. Thyroid shields are 
also recommended. Lead skirts and vests are often removed 
from areas where needed and end up in a locker or lounge. 
The anesthesia service should have dedicated personal pro­
tective equipment identified as belonging to the anesthesia 
service to prevent its misappropriation. Lead glasses are rec­
ommended to protect the corneas from radiation exposure.
A movable lead glass shield between the anesthesia practi­
tioner and the radiation source affords additional protection 
(Figure 3-9). The lead glass shields can be difficult to maneu­
ver into position in an already crowded space and can make 
access to the patient difficult. Communication from the 
procedural team regarding the initiation of imaging allows 
the anesthesia team to take appropriate precautions, such 
as moving farther away during imaging if possible.
It is important that anesthesia team members wear 
appropriate lead protection when entering the room during 
a procedure. Entering the room without appropriate protec­
tion is distracting to the proceduralist and may interrupt 
the procedure if imaging has to be stopped to avoid exposing 
an unprotected person. If imaging is not stopped, the indi­
vidual is exposed to an unnecessary risk.
It is recommended that dosimeters be worn by any anes­
thesia personnel working on a routine basis in an area 
where radiation exposure is a concern. Pregnant personnel 
should not work in areas where radiation exposure occurs.
Medications
Medications needed in NORA areas are the same as those 
used in the main operating room. Remote areas, however, 
pose special concerns regarding medications. Most operating 
rooms have a pharmacy located in the immediate vicinity; 
NORA rooms usually do not. It is thus important to have an 
adequate supply of all anticipated medications. It may take 
some time to obtain a medication if the anesthesia team has 
not brought it with them. The significant morbidities and 
coexisting diseases of patients undergoing procedures in 
NORA locations necessitate having a wide range of medi­
cations available.
Another concern in NORA areas is medication error 
resulting from the low lighting in the procedure rooms. 
Often the procedure rooms have the lights dimmed or 
turned off to improve visualization of images on the moni­
tors. This low-light environment raises the possibility of the 
wrong medication being administered. A flashlight should 
be on the anesthesia cart in remote areas.
In areas where anesthesia is given infrequently and pro­
cedural sedation only is planned, drugs may be transported 
in a tackle box (Figure 3-10). More often, an anesthesia 
cart with anesthesia medications and supplies is used. Stan­
dardization of medication trays between NORA locations 
and the main operating room is recommended. This will 
provide familiarity with the location of medications on the 
drug tray, and anesthesia providers will know what drugs 
are available. It is important to check that medications and 
supplies are not expired. This is especially true in an area 
where anesthesia service is infrequently provided.
An emergency cart with a defibrillator, emergency drugs, 
and equipment needed to provide cardiopulmonary resus­
citation should be in any NORA location. The anesthesia 
provider should know the location of this cart and how to 
operate the defibrillator.
Medications used in NORA locations run the spectrum 
from benzodiazepines and opioids used for sedation to 
agents used for general anesthesia. Sedation is used more 
frequently in NORA locations than in the main operating 
room. Sedation can range from minimal to moderate to 
deep sedation. Medications and supplies must be available 
to rescue a patient whose level of sedation becomes deeper 
than originally planned.
Several medications are of particular use in NORA loca­
tions where procedural sedation is commonly used. These 
medications include midazolam, propofol, dexmedetomi­
dine, and ketamine.
MIDAZOLAM
Midazolam is a mainstay of therapy for procedural sedation 
as well as an adjunct for general anesthesia. Midazolam 
is a benzodiazepine. Benzodiazepines produce sedation, 
anxioly­sis, and anterograde amnesia. Midazolam does 
Figure 3-9  Lead glass shield between the anesthesia workstation and 
fluoroscopy unit makes access to the patient difficult.
Figure 3-10  Tackle box containing medications
3  •  Room Setup, Critical Supplies, and Medications
27
not provide significant analgesia. Midazolam was the first 
benzo­diazepine developed primarily for use in anesthesia.18 
After intravenous administration, onset of action is within 
2 to 3 minutes. Termination of effect is from redistribution, 
and metabolism occurs in the liver.
In the cardiovascular system, midazolam causes mild 
systemic vasodilation and decrease in cardiac output. Heart 
rate is not usually affected. Cardiovascular effects may be 
pronounced in hemodynamically compromised individuals 
and the elderly, especially if given in a large dose or in con­
junction with opioids.
Midazolam causes a mild decrease in respiratory rate and 
tidal volume. Respiratory depression may be significant if 
midazolam is given in conjunction with an opioid.19 Respi­
ratory effects may be magnified in the elderly and those 
with respiratory disease.
Midazolam has amnestic, anticonvulsant, muscle relaxant, 
and sedative hypnotic properties in the central nervous 
system. It causes a decrease in cerebral blood flow and 
cerebral metabolic rate.20
Midazolam 0.1 to 0.4 mg/kg can be given to induce general 
anesthesia. Sedation can be achieved with dosages of 0.01 
to 0.1 mg/kg. Most commonly during procedural sedation, 
midazolam is used as part of a multidrug therapy in com­
bination with opioids, propofol, or ketamine, depending on 
the patient’s condition, procedure, and clinical goals.
Midazolam has an antagonist, unlike other intravenous 
agents such as propofol and ketamine, which do not. Flu­
mazenil is a competitive antagonist at the benzodiazepine 
binding site on γ-aminobutyric acid receptors in the central 
nervous system. It acts within 2 minutes, with peak effect 
in 10 minutes. The half-life of flumazenil is short, and thus 
this agent may require repeat administration. Patients who 
have received flumazenil should be observed for signs of 
resedation.21 Dosage of flumazenil begins with 0.2 mg/min 
intravenously. Total dose is usually 0.6 to 1 mg.
PROPOFOL
Propofol is an ultra–short-acting hypnotic agent that has 
sedative, amnestic, and hypnotic effects but no analgesic 
properties. Onset of action is within 30 to 60 seconds, and 
duration of effect is 4 to 8 minutes.21
Propofol is used for induction of general anesthesia, as an 
infusion during total intravenous anesthesia, and for pro­
cedural sedation. It is very useful in areas where inhaled 
anesthetic agents cannot be used because of the lack of a 
scavenging system.
Propofol is the most commonly used agent for induction 
of general anesthesia. The usual induction dose is 1 to 2.5 
mg/kg. Patients of advanced age and those with signifi­
cant comorbidities will need a reduced dose. Premedication 
with benzodiazepines or opioids will lessen the induction 
requirement.21
Propofol causes significant vasodilation and reductions in 
both preload and afterload.20 Elderly patients and patients 
with reduced intravascular volume are at risk for signifi­
cant hypotension when propofol is administered, especially 
if it is given rapidly. Titrated doses of propofol given slowly 
can help avoid this hypotension.
Propofol is a respiratory depressant. It often causes 
apnea after an induction dose. Propofol causes a significant 
reduction in upper airway reflexes, making it an excellent 
choice when a laryngeal mask airway is going to be placed.
Patients frequently report pain on injection of propofol. 
Administration of lidocaine 50 to 100 mg before or with 
the propofol often will attenuate this problem. Administer­
ing the propofol in a larger vein also lowers the incidence of 
pain on injection.
Propofol has a rapid onset and short duration of action. 
In addition to its usefulness to provide induction of general 
anesthesia, it can be used as an infusion as part of a total 
intravenous anesthesia regimen, often in combination with 
benzodiazepines and opioids. Propofol infusion also can 
be used as part of a balanced anesthetic technique with 
volatile agents, opioids, and nitrous oxide. Infusion rates 
between 100 and 200 mcg/kg/min are typically used in 
combination with opioids or nitrous oxide to provide gen­
eral anesthesia. Propofol is often used in titrated boluses 
or as an infusion to provide procedural sedation. Infusion 
rates between 25 and 75 mcg/kg/min are typically used for 
procedural sedation. Because of the respiratory depressant 
effect of propofol, it is recommended that it be administered 
only by individuals trained in airway management.
Propofol has an antiemetic effect. This makes it a useful 
agent in patients prone to postoperative nausea and vomiting.
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective α2-adrenergic ago­
nist approved for clinical use in 1999.22 It has sedative and 
analgesic effects. Dexmedetomidine is similar to clonidine; 
however, it is much more selective and shorter acting than 
clonidine. After intravenous administration, it undergoes 
rapid redistribution and is extensively metabolized in the 
liver.
After administration, dexmedetomidine produces a 
sedated but arousable state that resembles a natural sleep 
state. It causes minimal respiratory depression. Ventilatory 
response to hypercarbia is maintained.20 For these reasons, 
it may be particularly useful in certain patient populations 
such as the morbidly obese and patients with obstructive 
sleep apnea. These patients may be at risk for respiratory 
depression and obstructed airway if administered a benzo­
diazepine and opioid combination for procedural sedation.
Dexmedetomidine can cause bradycardia and hypoten­
sion. Agents such as glycopyrrolate and ephedrine should 
be readily available to treat bradycardia and hypotension 
should they occur.
For procedural sedation in adults a loading dose of 1 mcg/kg 
is infused over 10 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.6 
mcg/kg/hr. The rate of infusion should be titrated to achieve 
the targeted level of sedation. This will usually be at an infu­
sion rate of 0.2 to 1 mcg/kg/hr.21
Dexmedetomidine can enhance the effects of sedatives, 
hypnotics, anesthetic gases, and opioids. If these agents are 
given in conjunction with dexmedetomidine, the amounts 
administered of these agents or the dexmedetomidine infu­
sion may need to be adjusted.
KETAMINE
Ketamine is a phencyclidine derivative. It was first intro­
duced into clinical practice in 1965. It has a rapid onset of 
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
28
action because of its high lipid solubility. After administra­
tion of ketamine, the patient’s eyes remain open with a slow 
nystagmus. This cataleptic state is known as dissociative 
anesthesia.20 Ketamine produces significant analgesia with 
minimal respiratory depression. Ketamine relaxes bronchial 
smooth muscle, making its use beneficial in patients with 
reactive airway disease. Salivation is often increased by 
ketamine. Premedication with an anticholinergic can be 
given to limit this effect.
From a cardiovascular standpoint, ketamine can cause 
increases in blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac output 
from centrally mediated sympathetic stimulation. Ketamine, 
however, is a direct myocardial depressant. This effect 
can be seen when ketamine is administered to critically ill 
patients who have limited sympathetic reserve. Ketamine 
should be used with caution in patients with coronary 
artery disease or pulmonary hypertension.
In contrast to the other intravenous anesthetic agents, 
ketamine is a cerebral vasodilator and can cause increases 
in cerebral blood flow and cerebral metabolic rate. It is 
usually not used in patients with intracranial pathology or 
patients in whom increases in intracranial pressure would 
be detrimental.
One of the effects of ketamine that has limited its use 
over the years is unpleasant emergence reactions. Patients 
may experience bad dreams, hallucinations, and out-of-
body experiences. When benzodiazepines are given along 
with the ketamine, emergence reactions are significantly 
reduced and amnesia is increased.
One advantage of ketamine is that it can be given by a 
variety of routes—intravenously, intramuscularly, and 
orally. Anesthesia can be induced with 1 to 2 mg/kg intra­
venously or 4 to 6 mg/kg intramuscularly. Ketamine is 
available in a variety of concentrations, from 10 mg/mL 
to 100 mg/mL. It is important to pay close attention to 
the concentration to avoid giving an inappropriate dose. 
Ketamine also can be administered as small bolus doses of 
10 to 20 mg intravenously as part of a procedural sedation 
regimen.
Ketamine and propofol have been mixed together to 
produce ketofol for procedural sedation. One study mixed 
equal amounts propofol 10 mg/mL with ketamine 10 mg/mL. 
Bolus doses of 1 to 3 mL were titrated to effect.23 It was felt 
the addition of ketamine to propofol counteracts the respi­
ratory depression seen when propofol alone is used. Pro­
pofol blunts the adverse psychological effects of ketamine. 
Ketamine also provides an analgesic effect, which propofol 
does not have.
Allergic Reactions
The ability to manage and treat anaphylactic and anaphy­
lactoid reactions should be available in remote anesthesia 
areas. Patients are at risk in the operating room for allergic 
reactions from latex and numerous medications, primar­
ily muscle relaxants and antibiotics. In NORA locations, 
patients are at risk for adverse reactions from these agents 
and from intravenous contrast agents.
Intravenous contrast agents are used millions of times 
each year in radiological procedures to facilitate imaging. 
Older contrast agents were ionized, hyperosmolar, and 
fairly toxic. These agents have in large part been replaced 
by newer nonionized contrast agents. The incidence of 
adverse side effects has diminished since the introduction of 
the newer agents.24
Although the incidence of contrast reactions has 
decreased since the introduction of newer low-osmolarity 
agents, adverse reactions still occur. Patients with a his­
tory of asthma, a history of allergy, or prior contrast reac­
tion and medically debilitated patients are more likely to 
develop a contrast reaction.24 Symptoms can range from 
mild nausea and headache to severe life-threatening reac­
tions with bronchospasm and cardiovascular collapse. 
Usually these reactions occur within the first 15 minutes 
after injection of the contrast agent. Should an adverse 
reaction occur, treatment should be symptomatic. Oxy­
gen and inhaled bronchodilators should be administered 
to patients with bronchospasm. Patients with refractory 
bronchospasm or cardiovascular collapse should receive 
epinephrine. Steroids and antihistamines also should be 
administered (Box 3-4). If a patient experiences a severe 
reaction while under sedation, strong consideration 
should be given to proceeding to intubation. Patients can 
develop severe glottic edema, making intubation difficult. 
Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be needed to 
facilitate oxygenation and ventilation in a patient experi­
encing severe bronchospasm.
If patients have experienced a previous contrast reaction, 
they should be given prophylaxis before subsequent proce­
dures. Prophylaxis should include steroids and histamine-1 
and histamine-2 receptor antagonists.
Contrast-induced nephropathy is a complication of 
radiological procedures and is a leading cause of hospital-
acquired acute renal failure.15 Acetylcysteine and peri­
procedure hydration are used to lessen the incidence of 
contrast-induced nephropathy.
Benzocaine Spray and 
Methemoglobinemia
Benzocaine spray is often used to provide topical anesthesia 
for transesophageal echocardiography and gastrointesti­
nal endoscopy cases. Application of topical benzocaine can 
lead to the development of methemoglobinemia. Methemo­
globinemia can be a serious and potentially fatal adverse 
drug effect. Development of cyanosis in the presence of 
normal arterial oxygen saturation is an indication of the 
Box 3-4  Treatment of Anaphylaxis and 
Anaphylactoid Reactions
Stop causative agent or medication
Administer 100% oxygen
Bolus intravenous fluids
Epinephrine 10-100 mcg IV: Increase if no response
Consider epinephrine infusion 1-10 mcg/min
Vasopressin 2-5 units
Histamine-1 blocker: Diphenhydramine 50 mg IV
Histamine-2 blocker: Famotidine 20 mg IV or ranitidine 50 mg IV
Steroid: Hydrocortisone 50-150 mg IV
IV, Intravenously.
3  •  Room Setup, Critical Supplies, and Medications
29
development of methemoglobinemia. If a patient develops 
methemoglobinemia, the treatment is supplemental oxygen 
and methylene blue. Methylene blue 1% solution 1 to 2 
mg/kg intravenously is given slowly over 5 minutes.25 Meth­
ylene blue restores the iron in hemoglobin to its normal 
oxygen-carrying state.
Malignant Hyperthermia
It is not necessary to store a supply of dantrolene in each 
NORA location for treatment of malignant hyperthermia. 
However, a procedure should be in place to quickly obtain 
dantrolene and other malignant hyperthermia treatment 
supplies. Procedures should also be in place to quickly obtain 
the additional resources needed should a patient develop 
malignant hyperthermia. Nursing personnel in NORA 
locations should receive instruction regarding malignant 
hyperthermia and their role should an event occur. If the 
NORA location is more than 5 to 7 minutes from where the 
dantrolene is stored, then a malignant hyperthermia treat­
ment kit should be stored in that NORA location.
Conclusion
Providing an anesthetic in a non–operating room setting 
presents a unique set of challenges to the anesthesiologist. 
Because of the longer distance to the operating rooms, the 
unique arrangements of the NORA suite, and the hazards 
involved, such as radiation, diligent planning is needed 
before the patient enters the suite. Careful attention must 
be given to ensure proper room setup to provide a safe and 
satisfying experience for the patient, staff, and practitioners.
References
	 1.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Statement on nonoperating 
room anesthetizing locations, amended in 2008. http://www.asahq.
org/For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.
	 2.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Guidelines for determining 
anesthesia machine obsolescence. http://www.asahq.org/For-Members/
Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.
	 3.	 Souter KJ. Anesthesia provided at alternate sites. In: Barash PG, Cul­
len BF, Stoelting RK, et  al, eds. Clinical anesthesia. New York, NY: 
Walters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:861–875.
	 4.	 Currie S, Hoggard N, Craven I, et al. Understanding MRI: basic MR 
physics for physicians. Postgrad Med J. 2013;89(1050):209–223.
	 5.	 Berger A. Magnetic resonance imaging. BMJ. 2002;324(7328):35.
	 6.	 Kanal E, Barkovich A, Bell C, et al. ACR guidance document for safe 
MR practices: 2007. Am J Roentgenol. 2007;188(6):1447–1474.
	 7.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. 2009. Practice advisory on 
anesthetic care for magnetic resonance imaging: a report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists Task force on Anesthetic Care 
for Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(3):
459–479.
	 8.	 ECRI Institute. The safe use of equipment in the magnetic resonance 
environment (guidance article). Health Devices. 2001;30(12):421–444.
	 9.	 Cohen E, Bellville J, Brown B. Anesthesia, pregnancy, and miscar­
riage: a study of operating room nurses and anesthetists. Anesthesiol­
ogy. 1971;35(4):343–347.
	10.	 Knill-Jones R, Rodriques L, Moir D, Spence A. Anaesthetic practice 
and pregnancy: controlled survey of women anaesthetists in the 
United Kingdom. Lancet. 1972;1(7764):1326–1328.
	11.	 Buring J, Hennekens C, Mayrent SL, et al. Health experiences of oper­
ating room personnel. Anesthesiology. 1985;62(3):325–330.
	12.	 Tannenbaum T, Goldberg R. Exposure to anesthetic gases and repro­
ductive outcome: a review of the epidemiological literature. J Occup 
Med. 1985;27(9):659–668.
	13.	 Spence A. Environmental pollution by inhalational anesthetics. Br J 
Anaesth. 1987;59(1):96–103.
	14.	 Rothschild J, Winters B, Brenan-Rothschild K. Highway to the dan­
ger zone: hazmat. In: Gallagher C, Ginsberg SH, Lewis MC, et al, eds. 
Anesthesia unplugged. 2nd ed New York, NY: McGraw Hill Medical; 
2012:541–549.
	15.	 Stensrud P. Anesthesia at remote locations. In: Miller RD, Eriksson 
LI, Fleisher LA, et al, eds. Miller’s anesthesia. 7th ed. New York, NY: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2009:2461–2484.
	16.	 Katz J. Radiation exposure to anesthesia personnel: the impact of an 
electrophysiology laboratory. Anesth Analg. 2005;101:1725–1726.
	17.	 Nicholau D, Arnold W. Environmental safety including chemi­
cal dependency. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, et  al, eds. 
Miller’s anesthesia. 7th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 
2009:3053–3073.
	18.	 Reves J, Fragen R, Vinik H, Greenblatt D. Midazolam: pharmacology 
and uses. Anesthesiology. 1985;62(3):310–324.
	19.	 Bailey P, Pace N, Ashburn M, et  al. Frequent hypoxemia and 
apnea after sedation with midazolam and fentanyl. Anesthesiology. 
1990;73(5):826–830.
	20.	 Eilers H. Intravenous anesthetics. In: Miller R, Pardo M, eds. Basics of 
anesthesia. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2011:99–114.
	21.	 Reves J, Glass P. Intravenous anesthetics. In: Miller R, Eriksson LI, 
Fleisher LA, et  al, eds. Miller’s anesthesia. 7th ed. New York, NY: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2009:719–768.
	22.	 Kamibayashi T, Maze M. Clinical uses of alpha2-adrenergic agonists. 
Anesthesiology. 2000;93:1345–1349.
	23.	 Willman E, Andolfatto G. A prospective evaluation of “ketofol” (ket­
amine/propofol combination) for procedural sedation and analgesia 
in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 2007;49(1):23–30.
	24.	 Morcos S, Thomsen H. Adverse reactions to iodinated contrast media. 
Eur Radiol. 2001;11(7):1267–1275.
	25.	 Armstrong C, Burak K, Beck P. Benzocaine induced methemoglobin­
emia; a condition of which all endoscopists should be aware. Can J Gas­
troenterol. 2004;18(10):625–629.
30
In recent years, the number of non–operating room anes­
thesia (NORA) procedures has increased significantly. At 
our institution—Morgan Stanley Children’s Hospital of 
New York-Presbyterian—40% of all anesthesia procedures 
(∼4000/10,000 cases) were done outside of the operating 
room in 2011, in contrast to 20% in 2001 (∼1400/7000 
cases). A similar trend is occurring nationwide.1
Many reasons account for this change. First, many more 
procedures, such as bone marrow aspiration and lumbar 
puncture, require minimal supplies and can be performed 
in several locations outside the operating room. Some 
procedures, such as organ-selective chemotherapy, require 
specialized equipment that must be housed in specific 
locations outside the operating room—for example, an 
interventional radiology department.
Second, sophisticated diagnostic imaging methods are 
becoming increasingly available for medical investigation. 
These imaging procedures can be prolonged and require 
the patient to be completely still, often requiring anesthe­
sia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and single-photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT) scanning for seizure 
activity are two examples.
Third, for pediatric patients in particular, parents and refer­
ring physicians expect these young patients will have access to 
the same diagnostic and minimally invasive procedures that 
are offered to adults and that these patients will be taken care 
of safely, comfortably, and efficiently. These procedures often 
require anesthesia. These diagnostic and minimally invasive 
procedures, even those that do not require special equipment, 
are often best conducted in non–operating room venues. This 
has the additional benefit of being a cost-saving measure so 
that operating rooms are reserved for sterile procedures requir­
ing a more invasive approach. As we see more procedures 
performed outside the operating room, the anesthesiologist 
will be asked to play several roles. Anesthesiologists will have 
oversight of sedation and anesthesia at all NORA sites. They 
will develop these programs to ensure that all procedures are 
conducted with a level of safety similar to that in procedures 
performed in the operating room. They will provide training 
for anesthesia residents and nonanesthesia personnel. Anes­
thesiologists will also be providing much of the hands-on care 
for patients undergoing these procedures.
Oversight of Non–Operating 
Room Anesthesia
As the number of procedures conducted outside the oper­
ating room has increased, so has the number of practitioners 
providing anesthesia and sedation services to these patients. 
Many of these patients seen in non–operating room loca­
tions are still cared for by anesthesiologists, but providers 
increasingly come from the departments of medicine, pedi­
atrics, emergency medicine, dentistry, oral surgery, and 
radiology. Although many factors are driving this change, 
the involvement of multiple specialties has occurred because 
many non–operating room procedures do not require a 
surgical plane of anesthesia. For example, a claustropho­
bic patient undergoing MRI or an adolescent having a car­
diac catheterization who will receive local anesthesia may 
require only anxiolysis. A toddler having MRI will require 
deep sedation, whereas an adult undergoing bronchoscopy 
may require a moderate level of sedation. Nonanesthesiolo­
gists have embraced these procedures, as evidenced by the 
increasing publication of studies of procedural sedation and 
analgesia in their respective specialty journals.2 Published 
investigations by anesthesiologists often include sedation 
teams with nurse practitioners and pediatricians or radiolo­
gists as the personnel providing hands-on sedation.3,4 Care 
by nonanesthesia personnel also may be driven by insur­
ance companies that may not wish to pay for the additional 
cost of anesthesia services for some of these procedures.
As this transition to multispecialty providers occurs, 
anesthesiologists remain central to ensuring that all seda­
tion care is as safe as possible. As the pioneers of operating 
room safety, anesthesiologists are recognized by The Joint 
Commission as key players in the oversight of non–operat­
ing room sedation and anesthesia services, as well as oper­
ating room anesthesia. The requirement recently issued 
by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)* 
that all deep sedation and anesthesia services be under the 
oversight of a single physician in any hospital caring for 
their patients has led most institutions to assign that role to 
anesthesiologists, although the CMS does not require this 
physician to be an anesthesiologist. Thus anesthesiologists 
will continue to play a major role in all NORA sites where 
sedation or anesthesia is provided, even when the provid­
ers of such care are not anesthesiologists.
The roles of credentialing, establishing practice guide­
lines, and providing quality assurance for sedation and 
analgesia services conducted by other specialties have 
brought significant challenges to anesthesia departments. 
Two of these challenges are establishing nil per os (NPO, or 
nothing by mouth) standards and credentialing practitioners 
* Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services: http://www.cms.gov/
Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Transmittals/downloads/
R59SOMA.pdf.
The Role of the 
Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesiologist
E. HEIDI JEROME, MANON HACHE, and LENA S. SUN
4
4  •  The Role of the Non–Operating Room Anesthesiologist
31
for the use of propofol infusions. Anesthesiologists have 
long accepted NPO times of 2 hours for clear liquids and 
6 hours for other liquids and food to diminish the risk for 
aspiration. Emergency medicine physicians often encoun­
ter patients who would benefit from sedation and anal­
gesia but do not meet these NPO criteria. Several authors 
from this specialty have questioned the risk for aspiration 
in nonfasted patients and have attempted to demonstrate 
the safety of shorter NPO times. The American College of 
Emergency Physicians published a complex clinical advisory 
to determine what depth of anesthesia may be given to 
patients in the emergency room based on fasting from 0 to 
3 hours, the urgency and duration of a procedure, and the 
health of a patient. This advisory uses the terms dissocia­
tive sedation, non–extended moderate sedation, and brief deep 
sedation to describe levels and duration of sedation.5 These 
terms are not familiar to most anesthesiologists, nor are 
NPO times of less than 2 hours for clear liquids or 6 hours 
for solids acceptable to most anesthesiologists. The Ameri­
can Academy of Pediatrics also has published a guideline 
on sedation that allows the practitioner to balance the 
benefit of sedation for emergency procedures against the 
risk for aspiration for patients who are not on NPO status.6 
Changing attitudes toward NPO times by nonanesthesiolo­
gists will be important issues for anesthesiologists who have 
oversight of these practitioners.
The second controversial issue is credentialing non­
anesthesiologists in propofol sedation. Gastroenterologists 
enthusiastically embraced the use of propofol for patients 
undergoing endoscopy, starting a debate on the safe use 
of this drug for deep sedation.7-9 The American Society of 
Anesthesiologists’ (ASA’s) 2004 statement on the safe use 
of propofol limited use of propofol to “persons trained in 
the administration of general anesthesia.” In 2009, how­
ever, the ASA acknowledged the use of propofol and other 
anesthetic drugs by other specialists when it published a 
Statement on Granting Privileges for Deep Sedation to Non-
Anesthesiologist Sedation Practitioners. This document 
describes training, skills, monitoring, and quality assur­
ance review of nonanesthesiologist practitioners to ensure 
safe delivery of sedation. It requires that a trained individual 
be solely responsible for sedation and monitoring during 
propofol administration. Anesthesiologists must continue 
to provide such guidance to nonanesthesiologists as non–
operating room procedures evolve.
Although many articles have been published regard­
ing the safety and efficacy of various sedation regimens 
and NPO status, caution must be exercised when estab­
lishing guidelines for sedation by nonanesthesiologists. 
Severe complications, including death, are rare, so any 
comparison of the relative safety of different regimens in 
hundreds of patients simply lacks the power to establish 
safety. In addition, moderately severe complications such 
as respiratory depression are often poorly measured in 
these studies.
One approach that has been extensively used in anesthe­
sia is the ASA Closed Claims analysis. This method allows 
examination of adverse events and may help determine 
risk factors for these events. In 2009, non–operating room 
closed claims were compared to those in the operating 
room.10 Adverse respiratory events, including inadequate 
oxygenation and ventilation, were the most common cause 
for NORA claims. Monitored anesthesia care (MAC) was 
the most common anesthetic, and oversedation and lack of 
end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring was the most common 
scenario encountered. These events happened in older, 
sicker patients, most often in the gastroenterology suite, 
and more often resulted in death than events in the opera­
ting room. However, closed claims analysis provides only 
a retrospective look at adverse events, without the benefit 
of a control group or large number of patients. The Pediatric 
Sedation Research Consortium was created to improve 
the understanding of the nature and frequency of adverse 
events in patients undergoing anesthesia or sedation outside 
the operating room. The Consortium collects data from 37 
different institutions and is thus able to look at sedation 
encounters in thousands of patients. It recently published 
articles comparing sedation by pediatricians to that by 
nonpediatricians, including anesthesiologists, intensive 
care physicians, emergency room physicians, advanced 
practice registered nurses, pediatric nurse practitioners, 
physician assistants, dentists, surgeons, certified registered 
nurse anesthetists, registered nurses, medical technologists, 
and radiologists.11 The Consortium described monitoring 
modalities used during sedation, compared adverse events 
among various providers,12 looked at adverse events during 
propofol sedation by emergency room physicians,13 com­
pared propofol to pentobarbital sedation for MRI imaging,14 
compared etomidate versus pentobarbital for CT scans,15 
looked at the incidence and nature of adverse events outside 
the operating room,16 and looked at adverse events specifi­
cally with propofol sedation outside the operating room.17 
It confirmed that serious adverse events are rare and found 
no statistically significant difference in the rate of adverse 
events related to different providers of sedation. How­
ever, the Consortium concluded that the safety of pediatric 
sedation depends on the systems’ ability to manage less 
serious adverse events.
Levels of Sedation and Anesthesia
The various procedures or diagnostic imaging conducted 
outside the operating room require different levels of 
sedation or anesthesia. Diagnostic imaging is usually pain­
less and therefore requires minimal analgesia, whereas 
interventions may require intraoperative analgesics or 
postoperative pain management. The continuum of seda­
tion and analgesia can be categorized in different ways. The 
ASA published a statement18 defining different levels on 
the continuum of sedation that apply for any practitioner: 
Minimal sedation (anxiolysis) applies to the patient who is 
maintaining verbal contact with the practitioner admin­
istering sedation. Moderate (previously called conscious) 
sedation applies to patients who purposefully respond to 
verbal command or light touch. No airway support should 
be required, and spontaneous ventilation and hemody­
namic stability are maintained. Moderate sedation is often 
used for short procedures or diagnostic imaging. Deep seda­
tion and analgesia apply to patients who do not respond to 
light touch but will respond to painful or repeated stimuli. 
Spontaneous ventilation may not be maintained, and the 
patient may require intervention to maintain a patent 
airway. Deep sedation may be appropriate for pediatric 
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
32
patients who must be asleep to be immobile for imaging or 
for more invasive procedures in adult patients.
In contrast, MAC applies only to a patient who receives 
care from an anesthesiologist for non-painful or minimally 
painful procedures in which local or regional anesthesia is 
provided. MAC allows for administration of sedative and 
analgesic medicines in doses that exceed those used for 
moderate sedation and includes the possibility of having 
the patient go through all of the levels of sedation to general 
anesthesia, as needed. Even if no medications are used, the 
presence of the anesthesiologist is required to safely monitor 
patients who may become unstable.
For many diagnostic and minimally invasive non–
operating room procedures, particularly in pediatric 
patients, the level of sedation required to obtain optimal 
conditions often is deep sedation. Because the nature of 
sedation is fluid, it is easy for the patient to go from one level 
of sedation to the next. All personnel administering sedation 
to patients outside the operating room must be properly 
credentialed and trained in rescuing patients from a sedation 
level deeper than was intended. A practitioner who is plan­
ning deep sedation must be able to manage a patient who 
becomes truly anesthetized. This skill is part of credential­
ing for anesthesia practice, but many nonanesthesiologist 
practitioners will need to acquire additional skills and training 
to gain this ability.
Organizing Safe Practice
The anesthesiologist’s role as the administrator giving 
oversight to all NORA procedures and as the hands-on care 
provider for individual patients is to ensure the safety and 
comfort of all patients.
The first priority should always be safety. It is of para­
mount importance that patients undergoing procedures or 
diagnostic imaging have had a recent medical evaluation 
and that all preexisting conditions are optimized. This is no 
different from seeing patients before surgery in the operating 
room. A standard procedure is followed in the operating 
room for obtaining a history, undergoing a physical exami­
nation, signing consent forms, and providing insurance 
approval documentation. However, it is sometimes logis­
tically difficult to organize all of the patient’s information 
ahead of time in non–operating room settings. It can be 
helpful to designate a point person responsible for ensuring 
all NORA procedures are followed as smoothly as possible. 
That designated person should communicate with the refer­
ring physician and the team providing the procedural care 
so that all necessary documents are present and instruc­
tions are given before administering anesthesia. This point 
person or persons may be affiliated with the anesthesiology 
department or with the various non–operating room sites 
and services.
A gamma knife procedure is an excellent example of the 
complex interactions of several services. This treatment 
requires the presence of the anesthesiologist to sedate or 
intubate the patient, the neurosurgeon to place the head 
frame with pins, the MRI technologists to perform the 
scan, and the radiologists to make the radiation calcula­
tions based on the scan. The patient is transported by the 
anesthesiologists to the gamma knife, where the patient 
undergoes the radiation treatment with the help of gamma 
knife technologists and supervision of the radiologist. The 
procedure may take several hours. When the radiation is 
finished, the head frame is removed and the patient emerges 
from anesthesia or sedation and goes to the post-anesthesia 
care unit (PACU). Nurses and specially skilled nurse prac­
titioners in preprocedure preparation, MRI and gamma 
knife setup, and PACU care are essential at each phase of 
the procedure. A single coordinating individual must be 
responsible to bring these 8 to 12 care providers in different 
settings together in proper sequence.
In addition to facilitating communication with all services 
to ensure patient safety, the anesthesiologist is responsible 
for ensuring proper documentation, including preanesthesia 
evaluation, intraprocedural monitoring of vital signs and 
all drugs given, and postprocedure evaluation confirming 
that the patient is back to baseline status. Anesthesiologists 
must be active participants in providing quality assurance 
for these patients.
For some NORA procedures, information unique to 
those settings is essential. Several examples follow. A care­
ful screening for metal or device implants must be done 
before a patient enters the MRI scanner and is best done 
well ahead of time to prevent last-minute cancellation. For 
SPECT scanning, the patient must not receive intravenous 
glucose before the procedure. For cardiac catheterization, 
interventional radiology, and CT, a careful history for 
contrast dye must be obtained.
During the procedure, careful patient positioning must 
avoid any pressure injury while the patient is sedated or 
anesthetized. MRI beds can be hard, so pressure sites should 
be periodically relieved during long scans. Arm positioning 
during cardiac catheterization must be carefully done to 
avoid brachial plexus injury. Corneal abrasions are a par­
ticular risk for patients who are in several different planes of 
sedation. We may be reluctant to tape a patient’s eyes closed 
with moderate sedation, but an abrasion may occur if this is 
not done when that patient becomes deeply sedated.
Another goal is efficiency in providing anesthesia care. 
This is easiest when well-established protocols for patient 
flow before, during, and after the procedure are in place. A 
well-staffed admitting area, procedure area, and PACU with 
good communication among administrative assistants, 
nurses, anesthesiologists, and procedural physicians is key 
to efficiency.
In addition to providing relief from pain and anxiety dur­
ing the procedure, other aspects of patient comfort are also 
key to excellent patient care. Avoiding long waiting times, 
avoiding excessive NPO times, providing updates to waiting 
families, and providing postprocedural food and drink are 
some measures that can greatly improve a patient’s experi­
ence. Although some of these are not under the direct con­
trol of the anesthesiologists, they should have a voice, both 
individually and administratively, in ensuring these types 
of comforts for their patients.
For emergency management of patients during regu­
lar hours or after hours, these non–operating room sites 
should have the same staffing, preprocedure evaluation, 
consent requirements and consideration of NPO status that 
occur during nonemergency care. A call system to bring 
in nurses, technologists, radiologists, other procedural 
physicians and the anesthesiologist should be in place. As 
4  •  The Role of the Non–Operating Room Anesthesiologist
33
increasing familiarity with NORA procedures is gained, it is 
recognized that some of them can be lifesaving or provide a 
diagnosis that leads to lifesaving surgery. Again, the anes­
thesiologist may not have direct control over all aspects of 
emergency care in NORA sites, but should have a role in 
planning for that care and surely have a role in making sure 
that any single emergency procedure goes as smoothly and 
safely as possible.
We are also responsible for the safety of hospital personnel 
and the public. It is important that medications, anesthesia 
machines, and equipment are secured while not in use to 
ensure that no one without proper training uses them. If 
anesthesia equipment and drugs are stored in off-site loca­
tions, they may be particularly vulnerable to such misuse. 
Ensuring the safety of co-workers also is essential. Educa­
tion, appropriate screening, protective clothing, and lead 
glasses must be provided for anesthesia residents and nurse 
anesthetists who work with MRI scanners or in any site 
with x-rays or nuclear emissions. Anesthetic gases must be 
safely scavenged in NORA sites. When scavenging is not 
available, we should avoid the use of inhalational anesthetic 
agents.
When anesthesia is provided outside the operating room, 
unfamiliar surroundings and unfamiliar personnel may 
be a challenge. Considerable planning goes into providing 
anesthesia safely in these areas, and communication with 
all involved personnel is key. All practice guidelines must 
be followed, and all necessary equipment must be available 
before beginning the procedure.
Occasionally patients may come for a procedure or diag­
nostic test without having a primary physician within that 
institution. It is important to have guidelines in place to 
predetermine who will take ownership if the patient should 
require admission or further management of care.
Equipment
Several approaches are used to deliver NORA, but they 
broadly fall into two styles: mimicking the anesthesia 
equipment available in the operating room or bringing 
limited equipment and supplies for total intravenous anes­
thetic. Both styles have advantages and disadvantages. In 
mimicking operating room equipment, including anesthesia 
machines, monitors, and the supply cart, the anesthesio­
logist can provide a wide range of anesthetics, including 
general endotracheal anesthesia with inhaled anesthetic 
agents. This style also has the advantage of familiarity, 
which is particularly useful in residency training programs. 
The anesthesiology department maintains the equipment, 
and therefore it always should be in good condition.
Disadvantages of this complete anesthesia kit are that it is 
difficult to transport, so it is more suited to be permanently 
stationed in NORA sites. It occupies a fairly large space in 
these locations, which may be small; it requires mainte­
nance at some distance from the operating room; it requires 
scavenging if inhaled anesthetics are to be used; and a 
source of gases must be available. Further, nonanesthesio­
logists, including laypersons, may have access to this speciali­
zed equipment if it remains in NORA sites after hours. If the 
equipment is to be moved back to the operating room, 
personnel must be assigned this task.
Advantages of bringing a light anesthesia kit are portability 
and the ability to provide care in smaller spaces. However, 
the anesthesiologist will likely depend on the unfamiliar 
monitoring equipment available at the NORA site. In addi­
tion, the anesthesiologist must remember all essential 
supplies or be forced to use unfamiliar ones. The type of 
anesthetic will be limited to use of intravenous medications, 
and the usual wide variety of airway support equipment 
in operating room settings will not be available. Endotrac­
heal intubation equipment must always be immediately 
available, but, unless specifically planned, laryngeal mask 
airways and fiberoptic intubating equipment will not be 
available.
It may be convenient to induce anesthesia in an operat­
ing room setting or in another fully equipped site and then 
move the patient to a NORA site with only essential equip­
ment. The transport must be carefully planned. The transport 
to the recovery area must be similarly well planned at the 
end of any anesthetic, with oxygen tanks and suction as 
necessary, regardless of whether the anesthesiologist used 
complete equipment or limited supplies.
In institutions where a computerized anesthesia record is 
used, a decision must be made a priori whether this capability 
will be present and maintained in NORA sites.
Personnel
Anesthesia coverage in NORA settings can be provided 
in several ways. Unlike operating rooms, NORA sites are 
rarely clustered in the same location, so the flexibility and 
efficiency of assigning anesthesia personnel based on type 
of procedure and ASA patient status often is not possible in 
outlying areas. A single anesthesiologist or anesthesia teams 
consisting of an attending and nurse anesthetist or resident 
will usually go to the NORA site. The best use of anesthesia 
personnel is to provide anesthesia care for several procedures 
in sequence at the outlying site. For example, a full day of 
interventional cardiac procedures or a full day of pediatric 
MRI scans is usually a more efficient schedule than single 
cardiac catheterizations requiring anesthesia a few days of 
the week or single pediatric MRI scans on a daily basis.
In some NORA settings, the physician requesting anes­
thesia care may ask for a subspecialty-trained anesthesio­
logist. For example, the neurointerventional radiologist 
may wish to have a neuroanesthesiologist care for a patient 
with an arteriovenous malformation in the radiology suite, 
or the cardiologist may wish to have a cardiac anesthesio­
logist care for a patient with congenital heart disease in 
the catheterization laboratory. For some patients with 
ASA physical status 4, this may be appropriate, but providing 
such coverage for all patients at these NORA sites will 
adversely affect anesthesia staffing for neurosurgical and 
cardiac surgery patients in the operating room. If many of 
the anesthesiologists in an institution become familiar with 
providing anesthesia at multiple NORA sites, flexibility for 
operating room cases can be maintained. The anesthesio­
logist’s fami­liarity with NORA sites is important to main­
taining their anesthesia safety. In our institution, we have 
found no difference in the complication rate during pediatric 
cardiac catheterization procedures attended by cardiac 
anesthesio­logists and non–cardiac anesthesiologists.
SECTION 1  •  Preparation for Non–Operating Room Activities
34
In academic institutions, training of residents is an 
important role for attending anesthesiologists. As more pro­
cedures are done in NORA settings, teaching residents how 
to safely care for patients in many of these off-site facilities 
becomes an important goal of residency. It is often easier to 
assign a nurse anesthetist to a NORA site than train a resident 
who is unfamiliar with the unique challenges of these sites. 
However, the more familiar residents become with off-site 
anesthesia, the better they will be able to care for all patients 
in their future careers.
When off-site suites such as interventional radiology, 
cardiac catheterization, MRI, CT, or multiple gastroenterol­
ogy procedure suites are clustered together, anesthesia care 
can be provided by an attending anesthesiologist simulta­
neously supervising two residents or four nurse anesthe­
tists, if patient acuity permits. In these clustered off-site 
settings, preprocedural activities and PACU care can be run 
smoothly, similar to perioperative care.
When procedural sedation is provided by nonanesthesio­
logists, nurses and nurse practitioners may be supervised 
by trained medicine, pediatric, or emergency medicine 
specialists, or these trained specialists may directly provide 
care. Preprocedural evaluation and consent, physiologic 
monitoring during sedation, and postprocedural recovery 
must be conducted as it is when anesthesiologists provide 
care.
Conclusion
Despite the evolving nature of NORA, anesthesiologists 
must remain at the forefront to ensure patient safety and 
quality of care. The role of the anesthesiologist is not only 
to be present to provide anesthesia services but also to guide 
credentialing of all personnel administering moderate or 
deep sedation and ensure that proper quality assurance 
measures are being recorded. The choices of anesthesia 
equipment and monitoring devices for these procedures are 
crucial to providing safe care. Ensuring open communica­
tion among multiple services involved in these procedures 
and efficient scheduling of patients will allow a smooth 
encounter in NORA settings. Anesthesia practice needs to 
continue to evolve, along with new technologies and the 
modernization of our health care system.
References
	 1.	 Cravero JP, Blike GT. Pediatric anesthesia in the nonoperating room 
setting. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2006;19(4):443–449.
	 2.	 Cravero JP, Havidich JE. Pediatric sedation: evolution and revolution. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2011;21(7):800–809.
	 3.	 Mason KP, Lubisch N, Robinson F, Roskos R, Epstein MA. Intra­
muscular dexmedetomidine: an effective route of sedation preserves 
background activity for pediatric electroencephalograms. J Pediatr. 
2012;161(5):927–932.
	 4.	 Sanborn PA, Michna E, Zurakowski D, et al. Adverse cardiovascular 
and respiratory events during sedation of pediatric patients for imag­
ing examinations. Radiology. 2005;237(1):288–294.
	 5.	 Green SM, Roback MG, Miner JR, Burton JH, Krauss B. Fasting and emer­
gency department procedural sedation and analgesia: a consensus-based 
clinical practice advisory. Ann Emerg Med. 2007;49(4):454–461.
	 6.	 American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Pediatric 
Dentistry, Coté CJ, Wilson S, Work Group on Sedation. Guidelines for 
monitoring and management of pediatric patients during and after 
sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures: an update. Pedi­
atrics. 2006;118(6):2587–2602.
	 7.	 Rex DK, Deenadayalu VP, Eid E, et al. Endoscopist-directed adminis­
tration of propofol: a worldwide safety experience. Gastroenterology. 
2009;137(4):1229–1237 quiz 518–519.
	 8.	 Singh H, Poluha W, Cheung M, et al. Propofol for sedation during 
colonoscopy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;4:CD006268.
	 9.	 Vargo JJ, Holub JL, Faigel DO, Lieberman DA, Eisen GM. Risk factors for 
cardiopulmonary events during propofol-mediated upper endoscopy 
and colonoscopy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2006;24(6):955–963.
	10.	 Metzner J, Posner KL, Domino KB. The risk and safety of anesthesia at 
remote locations: the US closed claims analysis. Curr Opin Anaesthe­
siol. 2009;22(4):502–508.
	11.	 Monroe KK, Beach M, Reindel R, et al. Analysis of procedural sedation 
provided by pediatricians. Pediatr Int. 2013;55(1):17–23.
	12.	 Langhan ML, Mallory M, Hertzog J, Lowrie L, Cravero J. Pediatric Seda­
tion Research Consortium. Physiologic monitoring practices during pedi­
atric procedural sedation: a report from the Pediatric Sedation Research 
Consortium. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;166(11):990–998.
	13.	 Mallory MD, Baxter AL, Yanosky DJ, Cravero JP. Pediatric Sedation 
Research Consortium. Emergency physician-administered propofol 
sedation: a report on 25,433 sedations from the Pediatric Sedation 
Research Consortium. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;57(5):462–468.
	14.	 Mallory MD, Baxter AL, Kost SI. Pediatric Sedation Research Con­
sortium. Propofol vs pentobarbital for sedation of children undergo­
ing magnetic resonance imaging: results from the Pediatric Sedation 
Research Consortium. Paediatr Anaesth. 2009;19(6):601–611.
	15.	 Baxter AL, Mallory MD, Spandorfer PR, et  al. Etomidate versus 
pentobarbital for computed tomography sedations: report from 
the Pediatric Sedation Research Consortium. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2007;23(10):690–695.
	16.	 Cravero JP, Blike GT, Beach M, et al. Incidence and nature of adverse 
events during pediatric sedation/anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room: report from the Pediatric Sedation Research Consor­
tium. Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):1087–1096.
	17.	 Cravero JP, Beach ML, Blike GT, Gallagher SM, Hertzog JH. The 
incidence and nature of adverse events during pediatric sedation/
anesthesia with propofol for procedures outside the operating room: 
a report from the Pediatric Sedation Research Consortium. Anesth 
Analg. 2009;108(3):795–804.
	18.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of depth of seda­
tion: definition of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/analgesia. 
2009. https://www.asahq.org/coveo.aspx?q=continuum%20or%20
depth%20of%20sedation.
36
As described throughout this book, non–operating room 
anesthesia (NORA) locations present a major challenge for 
safe anesthesia care. A vital quality improvement and risk 
management system is important to prevent patient harm 
and improve the quality of care. This chapter will discuss 
continuous quality improvement (CQI), selection of quality 
indicators, and methods to improve quality of care, includ-
ing analysis of critical incidents and sentinel events using 
root cause analysis and systems analysis. Although these 
methods are typically employed in the operating room, they 
are also essential in NORA locations to improve patient 
safety. A checklist (Table 5-1) summarizes the steps necessary 
for establishing a CQI program in NORA settings.
Quality
Quality in health care means doing the right thing for every 
patient every time. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) defines 
quality as the “degree to which health services for individuals 
and populations increase the likelihood of desired health out-
comes and are consistent with current professional knowl-
edge.”1 To accomplish the desired goals, the IOM focuses on 
the following six principal areas of achievement:
   
	1.	 Safety: Avoiding preventable injuries, reducing medical 
errors
	2.	 Effectiveness: Providing services based on best clinical 
evidence
	3.	 Efficiency: Using innovative strategies in allocation of 
limited resources; avoiding waiting time
	4.	 Patient-centered: Individualizing care to the patient’s 
unique needs
	5.	 Timely: Reducing delays in delivery of care
	6.	 Equitable: Providing consistent care regardless of patient 
characteristics and demographics
   
Quality improvement encompasses efforts to improve 
patient outcomes (health), system performance (care), and 
professional development (learning and teamwork).2 CQI is a 
scientific approach to quality management that builds on tra-
ditional quality assurance methods by emphasizing the orga-
nization and systems of the health care system. CQI employs 
a systems approach to identifying and improving quality of 
care. CQI continually evaluates medical care to identify sys-
tematic problems and implements strategies to prevent their 
occurrence by a plan-do-study-act approach (Figure 5-1). By 
focusing on processes of care rather than individuals, latent 
system failures and errors are identified and corrected. Objec-
tive data are used to analyze and improve processes. Accurate 
and sensitive quality indicators, presented as a dashboard, are 
necessary to monitor performance according to benchmarks 
and improvements over time. When areas are identified for 
improvement, their current status is measured and docu-
mented. Changes are implemented, and the outcome is again 
measured after an appropriate time to determine whether 
improvement actually occurred.
Inspired by the Donabedian clinical indicators,3 CQI pro-
grams are oriented toward defining the structure, process, 
and outcome of health care delivery. Following the Donabe-
dian Quality-of-Care Framework, this model sees health 
care as a cyclic transformation mechanism. In this mecha-
nism, patients are inputs entering a health care organiza-
tion’s structure. In this structure, these inputs undergo a 
process of care through which they will become outcomes 
or outputs. These outcomes/outputs will further inform the 
feedback loop back to inputs.4
Selecting Indicators
Structural indicators refer to the setting in which the care takes 
place. It describes the type and quantity of resources used by 
a health system or organization to deliver programs and ser-
vices. Examples include organization, ownership, accredita-
tion of facilities, ratio of practitioners to patients, qualifications 
of medical staff such as board certification, and technological 
complexity. Structural characteristics are considered neces-
sary but insufficient elements in the delivery of health services. 
They are indirect measures of quality in that their presence 
enables but does not ensure the provision of quality health ser-
vices, whereas the absence of these structural characteristics 
decreases the probability of quality outcomes.
Process indicators assess medical activities performed by 
the provider to ensure the “best” patient care and preven-
tion, continuity of care, and physician–patient interaction. 
In the actual practice, process measures often imply compli-
ance with standards of care such as the following:
   
	□	 Was an adequate preanesthesia evaluation performed?
	□	 Did the patient provide informed written consent before 
the procedure?
	□	 Was the antibiotic administered in a timely manner?
Continuous Quality 
Improvement for 
Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesia Locations
JULIA I. METZNER and KAREN B. DOMINO
5
5  •  Continuous Quality Improvement for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Locations
37
	□	 Was central venous access obtained under strict sterile 
technique following established guidelines?
	□	 Was hyperglycemia in a patient with diabetes treated 
according to an insulin protocol?
   
Although process indicators are considered more proxi-
mal indicators of quality than structural indicators, they 
cannot guarantee a quality outcome; they can only increase 
its probability.
Outcome indicators refer to the impact of treatments on 
patient well-being, including mortality, morbidity, disabil-
ity, length of hospital stay, and patient functional status 
and satisfaction.
Validity of Continuous Quality 
Improvement Indicators in 
Anesthesiology
To confirm the validity of a quality indicator, the metrics 
must be connected to the accomplishment of a better out-
come. Process indicators that evaluate care delivery para-
digms, rather than patient outcomes, may be easier to 
measure and implement and can provide important insight 
into care.5 Furthermore, process indicators might yield to 
positive or negative inputs concerning performance and 
consequently influence efficient improvement in patient 
care. Structural indicators are valuable only if they dem-
onstrate an increase in either a good outcome or a process 
previously shown to yield better outcomes.
Because the outcomes of anesthesia care are so inter-
twined with surgery or procedural outcomes and patient 
comorbidities, choosing outcome measures sensitive 
to variations in quality of anesthesia care is difficult. 
Improvement in quality of anesthesia care was tradition-
ally measured by a reduction in mortality and morbidity. 
However, mortality and serious morbidity attributable 
to anesthesia have decreased significantly over the last 
several decades to the point that they cannot currently 
be accepted as valid CQI measures.6 In their review of 
Table 5-1  Quality Improvement Checklist for Locations 
Other Than the Operating Room
Steps
Description
Design a CQI 
infrastructure
Create a dedicated CQI committee with a 
designated chair and staff members
Delineate responsibilities (data collection, 
metrics, outcome analysis, reporting)
Provide resources (e.g., protected staff 
time, technical and IT support, electronic 
information system)
Make the CQI program an integral part of the 
department’s mission
Ensure a nonpunitive culture
Create a list of quality 
indicators relevant 
for the practice and 
facility
Structure: Refers to hospital staff, facilities, 
material, and overall organization
Process indicators: Coordination of patient 
care management activities (Was the 
antibiotic administered in a timely manner 
before incision? Was a preanesthetic  
evaluation performed and documented?)
Outcomes: Measure patient-related end 
results of anesthesia care (e.g., mortality, 
morbidity, unplanned admission, patient 
satisfaction)
See Table 5-2 for AQI quality indicators
Collect, analyze, and 
report data
Implement controlled and audited data col-
lection (chart review, electronic anesthesia 
records) as well as self-reporting
Use data element definitions that are clear, 
valid, and well defined
Use tools to understand the process (e.g., 
flow charts, cause and effect diagrams, 
trend charts)
Report data regularly to detect overall trends; 
calculate incidence rate (e.g., peripheral 
neurological deficit after regional 
anesthesia per total blocks performed)
Compare data to national benchmarks
Detect problems 
and make 
improvements
Identify areas of recurring patterns; conduct 
a “focused review” of critical incidents and 
initiate root cause analysis
Compare site-specific patterns with national 
trends
Focus on systems, rather than on provider 
error
Use a plan-do-study-act approach to make 
changes
Monitor for sustained 
improvement
Determine interval for reassessment (i.e., 
monthly, quarterly, yearly)
Reassess indicators after change has been 
implemented
Look for incremental performance 
improvement
Communicate results to team, staff, and 
leadership
Submit QI data to a 
nationally endorsed 
anesthesiology 
registry, such as the 
Anesthesia Quality 
Institute
CQI, Continuous quality improvement; IT, information technology; QI, quality 
improvement.
Plan
intervention
Do
intervention
Assess
problem
Identify a
problem
Check
impact
Figure 5-1  Continuous quality improvement (CQI) process uses a plan-
do-study-act approach.
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
38
108 current anesthesia quality indicators, Haller et al7 
concluded that traditional perioperative morbidity and 
mortality data lacked criteria of sensitivity and specific-
ity. Nearly half of the anesthesia quality indicators also 
measured surgical or postoperative care. Most indica-
tors were either outcome (57%) or process (42%) indi-
cators; only 1% of them were related to the structure of 
care. Patient safety (83%) and effectiveness (68%) were 
the two dimensions of quality of anesthetic care most 
often addressed, usually by outcome indicators. External 
benchmarking (comparison with other hospitals) and 
peer review by health care professionals were the pri-
mary methods used to identify possible quality issues.7
Despite these limitations, current quality-of-care indica-
tors still measure processes of care, perianesthetic morbidity 
and mortality, and patient satisfaction for anesthesia care 
within both operating room and NORA settings. Because 
many severe adverse events in anesthesia are sufficiently 
rare, rates of more frequent outcomes such as nausea or 
vomiting, pain control, and critical incidents are often 
used as quality indicators. The Anesthesia Quality Insti-
tute (AQI) created a national clinical outcomes registry to 
capture data specific to anesthesia care, including quality 
of care.8 Relevant quality indicators include rare outcomes 
(Table 5-2) (e.g., death), major adverse events (e.g., myo-
cardial infarction and aspiration of gastric contents), minor 
adverse events (e.g., delirium and dental injury), adminis-
trative events (e.g., delays and documentation issues), and 
process events (e.g., difficult intubation and use of naloxone 
or flumazenil), as well as patient experience (Figure 5-2). 
These indicators are relevant to both operating room and 
NORA locations.
Methods to Improve Quality of 
Care: Quality Improvement Model 
Descriptions
Mishaps in anesthesia care are discovered through a variety 
of mechanisms. Historically, medical errors were revealed 
retrospectively through morbidity and mortality confer-
ences and closed claims malpractice data.9
Review of a randomly selected or targeted sample of 
medical records has been used to identify problem areas 
and to collect data on adverse events.10 Although collec-
tion of data in this manner may yield important epidemio-
logic information, it is costly and provides little insight into 
potential error reduction strategies. Moreover, chart review 
detects only documented adverse events and often does 
not capture information regarding their causes. Important 
errors that do not result in patient harm may go undetected 
by this method.
Critical Incidents
Critical incidents and adverse events reporting are innova-
tions borrowed from the aircraft industry and adopted for 
anesthesiology quality improvement programs by Cooper11 
in the late 1970s. The goal is to report any unintended 
incident that could have jeopardized (if not corrected in a 
timely way) or did jeopardize patient safety. For example, a 
partial disconnect of the breathing circuit may be corrected 
before patient injury occurs, yet it has the potential to cause 
hypoxic brain damage or death.
Although learning from these incidents and “near-
misses” might improve patient safety, the influence of well-
recognized perception biases also will ultimately have an 
impact on the safety of care. These biases include under-
reporting because of fear of punishment, inadequate doc-
umentation, unfamiliarity with the process, and lack of 
awareness of how the reported events will be analyzed.12 
Although most providers were aware of the existence of an 
incident reporting system in the United Kingdom, 25% did 
not know how to access the reporting form and over 40% 
of staff had never completed an accurate record of a report-
able event.13
Incident reporting largely relies on the willingness of 
health care providers to voluntarily report them. The prev-
alence of underreported critical incidents has galvanized 
accrediting bodies such as The Joint Commission to promote 
mandatory reporting of select critical incidents and adverse 
outcomes as a requirement for institutional accreditation. 
The Joint Commission employs the term sentinel event in lieu 
of critical incident and defines it as “an unexpected occur-
rence involving death or serious physical or psychological 
injury, or the risk thereof.”*
Sentinel Events
Sentinel events are single, isolated events that may indi-
cate a systemic safety problem. A sentinel event may be 
an unexpected patient injury, such as an intraoperative 
death. Alternatively, a sentinel event may be a significant 
or alarming critical incident that did not result in patient 
injury, such as a syringe swap with administration of the 
wrong drug, noted and promptly treated.
The Joint Commission requires health care institutions 
to develop their own sentinel event policy. Such a pol-
icy would focus attention on underlying causes and risk 
reduction. The goal of the policy is to increase the general 
knowledge about medical errors, their causes, and preven-
tion. This policy is seen as a way to have a positive impact 
on patient care and maintain public confidence in the 
accreditation process. The Joint Commission requires that 
this policy have a reporting, review, and planned feedback 
mechanism. Reportable events include, but are not limited 
to, incidents that involve wrong site or wrong patient sur-
gery, incompatible blood transfusion reactions, awareness 
during general anesthesia, and, recently, preventing errors 
related to the use of common anticoagulants.*
The Joint Commission created a Sentinel Event Database 
as a component of its Sentinel Event Policy. This database 
accepts voluntary reports of sentinel events from member 
institutions, patients and families, and the press. The Joint 
Commission also mandates that accredited hospitals per-
form root cause analysis of critical sentinel events within 
45 days.
* The Joint Commission: http://www.jointcommission.org/sentinel_event.
aspx.
5  •  Continuous Quality Improvement for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Locations
39
Root Cause Analysis
Root cause analysis (RCA) is a system-based approach to 
investigate the underlying or contributing factors that 
lead to adverse events or critical incidents. The RCA was 
developed to analyze aviation and industrial accidents 
and is now widely implemented as an error analysis tool 
in health care. The goal of RCA is to determine what hap-
pened, why it happened, and what can be done to prevent 
it from happening again. This goal is accomplished by iden-
tifying the underlying problems and sequence of events in 
which the incident was rooted, not to “name and blame” 
individuals for the mistake. A typical RCA process follows 
a structured approach, which begins with data collection 
and reconstruction of the event through record review and 
participant interviews. A multidisciplinary team analyzes 
the sequence of events with the goal to spot why and how 
the incident occurred. Although identification of “active” 
errors is important, the major goal of the RCA is to uncover 
“latent” errors, such as system weaknesses hidden in 
a faulty operating system. To be thorough, an RCA must 
determine human and other factors, evaluate related 
processes and systems, analyze underlying cause and effect 
systems through a series of “why” questions, identify risks 
and their potential contributions, and suggest potential 
improvements in processes or systems.
Table 5-2  Anesthesia Quality Institute Recommended Quality Indicators
Type of Indicator
Description
Process
On-time starting percentages of first case
Cancellation rate
On-time prophylactic antibiotic administration
Adherence to central line insertion protocol
Temperature regulation
Beta-blockade administration if preoperative 
beta-blocker
Documentation compliance
Patient complaints
Patient fall
Use of naloxone or flumazenil
Regional block failure
Unplanned dural puncture
Equipment malfunction
Medication error
Difficult intubation
Unplanned reintubation
Transfusion error
Prolonged emergence
Desaturation <90%, lasting >5 minutes
Bradycardia or tachycardia requiring treatment
Hypotension requiring treatment
Clinical outcomes 
(major and 
minor adverse 
outcomes)
Death
Cardiac arrest
Perioperative myocardial infarction
Anaphylaxis or allergic reaction
Malignant hyperthermia
Transfusion reaction
New stroke or brain damage
Visual loss
Eye injury
Nerve damage
Incorrect patient, site, or procedure
Unplanned admission
Unplanned intensive care unit admission
Intraoperative awareness
Type of Indicator
Description
Surgical fire
Skin or soft tissue injury
Dental trauma
Perioperative aspiration of gastric contents
Vascular access complication
Pneumothorax
Infection after regional anesthesia
Epidural hematoma
High spinal
Postdural puncture headache
Local anesthetic toxicity
Patient experience 
(see Figure 5-2)
Overall patient satisfaction
Rate of PONV
Adequacy of pain management
Anesthesia 
Quality Institute 
recommended 
data collection
To assemble the indicators listed above, an 
anesthesia practice quality improvement 
program will need to electronically  
capture the following list of raw data for  
each case:
Location (facility and location other than the 
operating room)
CPT code(s)
Surgeon
Anesthesia provider(s)
Date
Time (or duration)
Anesthesia type (e.g., general, regional, 
sedation, monitored anesthesia care)
ASA class
PQRS compliance (yes/no/not applicable for 
each of three variables)
Occurrence of a listed complication (yes/no, and 
which one)
Patient survey data (satisfaction, PONV, pain 
questions)
Documentation completed, including QM form 
(yes/no)
From Dutton RP, DuKatz A. Quality improvement using automated data sources: the Anesthesia Quality Institute. Anesthesiol Clin. 2011; 29(3):439-454; and 
 http://www.aqihq.org/qualitymeasurementtools.aspx.
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; CPT, Current Procedural Terminology; PONV, postoperative nausea and vomiting; PQRS, Physician Quality Reporting 
System; QM, quality management.
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
40
The knowledge gained from an RCA is used to make 
system changes that will prevent the sentinel event from 
occurring in the future. It is important for staff members to 
be engaged in discussions and participate in the develop-
ment and implementation of practices or policies to reduce 
the risk for a similar event in the future. A plan for monitor-
ing the effectiveness of new systems or procedures should be 
included as part of the plan.14*
* The Joint Commission: http://www.jointcommission.org/Framework_
for_Conducting_a_Root_Cause_Analysis_and_Action_Plan.
Human Factors Analysis
Human factors analysis involves the study of human char-
acteristics that may have an impact on patient safety. 
Examples of human factors include fatigue, stress, train-
ing, job environment, equipment, task, and environmental 
design. The science of human factors analysis is a mul-
tidisciplinary field with contributions from psychology, 
engineering, industrial design, graphic design, statistics, 
operations research, and anthropometry. The technology 
of examining human factors has been historically employed 
Date
MR #
ASA Class
Provider ID
CRNA ID
Additional provider
QUALITY RATING 
Strongly
Positive
Somewhat
Neutral
Somewhat
Negative
Strongly
Negative
Don’t
Know
How satisfied were you with your anesthetic 
care?
How likely are you to recommend the facility, 
personnel and anesthetic technique that you 
just underwent?
After you left the recovery room or returned 
home…
How would you rate your pain on a scale of
1–10?  (1 – no pain at all, 10 – worst pain ever)
If so, please explain…
Not Part of Patient’s Chart
Used with hjhjhj from the Anesthesia Quality Institute.  Available at 
http://www.aqihq.org/qualitymeasurementtools.aspx
This is a template.  Please modify for local conditions.  
The definitions for each measure can be found on the AQI website.
Has your pain medicine been effective
Yes
No
Yes
No
Did you experience any unexpected events 
related to your procedure or the anesthetic?
Did you experience nausea?
Yes
No
Did you vomit at any time?
Yes
No
Figure 5-2  Postanesthesia care patient satisfaction survey. (Used with hjhjhj from the Anesthesia Quality Institute. http://www.aqihq.org/ 
qualitymeasurementtools.aspx.)
5  •  Continuous Quality Improvement for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia Locations
41
to improve aviation safety, and it is beginning to be used 
in health care in team training and in methods to reduce 
medication errors. It is also being incorporated into RCA.
Quality and Safety Improvement 
Efforts Outside the Operating 
Room
Surveillance of CQI processes at NORA locations must be as 
rigorous as in traditional operating room settings. Several 
of The Joint Commission’s national patient safety goals give 
special attention to ambulatory and office-based practices. 
The goals are formulated based on the information provided 
by the Sentinel Event Advisory Group and thus are a synthe-
sis of the reported sentinel events. The Joint Commission rec-
ommends program-specific patient safety goals for adoption; 
if the surveys show improvement in a specific area, the goals 
will be included in the accreditation standards. The Joint 
Commission revises, updates, and removes some goals each 
year while identifying new goals and requirements. These 
safety goals are found on The Joint Commission website.*
The Joint Commission’s 2013 goals relevant to ambulatory 
and office-based anesthesia care are focused on prevention 
of infections and wrong patient and wrong site procedures. 
In an effort to reduce health care–associated infections, The 
Joint Commission set priorities for hand hygiene and cathe-
ter-associated urinary tract infection. Anesthesiologists have 
a crucial role in promoting hand and anesthetic apparatus 
hygiene and consequently preventing the transmission of 
intraoperative bacterial infections. Loftus et al15 studied intra-
operative bacterial transmission associated with anesthesia 
providers and equipment in a tertiary care center. Overall, 
66% of provider hands were contaminated with one or more 
major pathogens, such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, methicillin-sensitive S. aureus, vancomycin-resistant 
enterococcus, Enterococcus spp, and Enterobacteriaceae. Bac-
terial organisms found on the hands of providers in a snap-
shot in time immediately before patient contact accounted for 
a fairly large proportion of the subsequent overall environ-
mental and patient intravenous line stopcock set contamina-
tion. Furthermore, negligence for hand-transmitted bacterial 
contamination was shown by an observational study that 
monitored hand hygiene behavior of 226 nonscrubbed staff 
for a period of 60 hours and found that hand hygiene was 
applied no more than 0.14 times per individual per hour. 
Hand hygiene on entering or leaving the operating room was 
rare (2% and 8%, respectively). The team used a total of six 
or seven pairs of nonsterile gloves per surgical procedure.16
The Joint Commission also continues to stress its policy 
for preventing wrong person and wrong site procedures and 
wrong procedures. The Universal Protocol must be applied 
to all surgical and nonsurgical invasive procedures. Proce-
dures that place the patient at the most risk include those 
that involve general anesthesia or deep sedation, although 
other procedures also may affect patient safety. The protocol 
is based on three intertwined elements: conducting a pre-
procedure verification process, marking the procedure site 
by directly involving the patient if possible, and performing 
* The Joint Commission: http://www.jointcommission.org.
a timeout before the procedure. The timeout is standardized, 
initiated by a designated member of the procedure team (usu-
ally the surgeon), and involves the immediate members of 
the procedure team. Team members agree about the patient 
identity, correct site, and procedure to be performed, and 
the timeout is documented. The surgical timeout has been 
recently expanded to improve team communication concern-
ing equipment readiness, patient conditions, and anticipated 
intraoperative or postoperative concerns, with demonstrated 
reductions in surgical morbidity and mortality.17 The Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists’ Committee on Ambulatory 
Surgical Care and the Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia’s 
Committee on Office Based Anesthesia also have developed 
recommendations for safe anesthesia in NORA settings.* 
They recommend careful pre–site selection review, initiating 
thorough CQI and risk management programs, comparison 
of quality indicators with national benchmarks, a minimum 
of an annual check of anesthesia and emergency equipment, 
and regular CQI review by stakeholders.
THE FUTURE OF CONTINUOUS QUALITY 
IMPROVEMENT OUTSIDE THE  
OPERATING ROOM
Health care policy makers and national patient safety pro-
grams consider health information technologies (HIT) to be 
crucial to make the infrastructure of health care delivery 
safer, more efficient, and economical.18,19
Anesthesiology was one of the first medical specialties 
to champion HIT, known in the anesthesia literature as 
anesthesia information management systems (AIMS). The 
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation took a lead role in 
encouraging the use of AIMS to collect data, standardize 
anesthesia terminology, and stipulate major projects of out-
come research and quality improvement.20
By definition, AIMS are a specific form of electronic medi-
cal record (EMR) systems that automatically capture, col-
lect, and store patient data from the wide variety of monitors 
used perioperatively. In addition to providing basic record-
keeping functions, most AIMS also allow end users to access 
information for patient management, quality improve-
ment, and research purposes. AIMS typically consist of a 
combination of hardware and software that interface with 
intraoperative monitors and in many cases hospital clinical 
data repositories or EMRs. All of this information is typically 
stored in a robust relational database that can be accessed 
simultaneously by multiple users through either a vendor’s 
commercial application or standard database tools such as 
structured query language.21
CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT  
AND ANESTHESIA INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Quality improvement may be supported by AIMS in several 
ways. First, these systems enable rapid collection of an enor-
mous quantity of clinical data that can detect specific pat-
terns and reveal deficiencies in the process of care. By gaining 
* Becker’s Hospital Review: http://www.beckershospitalreview.com/
anesthesia/15-quality-improvement-activities-for-office-based- 
anesthesia-recommended-by-asasamba.html.
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
42
insight into practices through uniform data collection, AIMS 
can smooth the progress of process improvement.
AIMS also facilitate reporting the continuously increasing 
number of quality metrics, such as timely administration of 
prophylactic antibiotics, preservation of normothermia, or 
indication for beta-blocker administration, as a condition of 
participation in pay-for-performance programs.
Clinical decision support systems also remind the provider 
about these care decisions and enhance the quality of care. 
For example, they can provide drug dosage guidance based 
on the patient’s weight, alert the provider about changing 
clinical conditions such as low blood pressure or rhythm 
other than sinus, notify about drug allergies and drug inter-
actions, send reminders regarding the need to re-dose antibi-
otics, or check blood sugar level in patients with diabetes. A 
recent report by Nair et al22 showed that with the use of real-
time reminders and feedback via clinical decision support, 
appropriate delivery of antibiotics was completed close to 
100% of the time, and the compliance level remained stable 
over a period of 8 months despite staff turnover every month.
Finally, use of bar codes and automated alerts reduced 
medication errors in patients undergoing anesthesia. A 
recent, prospective randomized trial using a multimodal 
AIMS with bar code reading capabilities combined with 
decision support systems showed a reduction in the rate of 
drug errors by 21%.23
Conclusion
In summary, a robust CQI system is as important, if not 
more important, in the NORA setting as in the operating 
room. Dashboard analysis of quality indicators with bench-
marking comparison to national standards is essential. 
Identification of safety concerns and critical incidents, thor-
ough review of sentinel events using RCA to identify sys-
tems failures, initiation of systems changes, human factors 
analysis, and continuing assessment in a PDSA approach is 
vital to the success of a CQI program.
References
	 1.	 Institute of Medicine. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system 
for the 21st century. Washington DC: National Academies Press; 
2001.
	 2.	 Atkinson S, Ingham J, Cheshire M, Went S. Defining quality and qual-
ity improvement. Clin Med. 2010;10(6):537–539.
	 3.	 Donabedian A. The quality of care: how can it be assessed? JAMA. 
1988;260(12):1743–1748.
	 4.	 Donabedian A. An introduction to quality assurance in health care. 44th 
ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2003.  200.
	 5.	 Pronovost PJ, Miller MR, Dorman T, Berenholtz SM, Rubin H. Devel-
oping and implementing measures of quality of care in the intensive 
care unit. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2001;7(4):297–303.
	 6.	 Benn J, Arnold G, Wei I, et al. Using quality indicators in anaesthesia: 
feeding back data to improve care. Br J Anaesth. 2012;109(1):80–91.
	 7.	 Haller G, Stoelwinder J, Myles P, McNeil J. Quality and safety 
indicators in anesthesia: a systematic review. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110(5):1158–1175.
	 8.	 Dutton RP, DuKatz A. Quality improvement using automated 
data sources: the Anesthesia Quality Institute. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2011;29(3):439–454.
	 9.	 Higginson J, Walters R, Fulop N. Mortality and morbidity meetings: 
an untapped resource for improving the governance of patient safety? 
BMJ Qual Saf. 2012;21(7):576–585.
	10.	 Shojania KG, Duncan BW, McDonald KM, Wachter RM, Markowitz 
AJ. Making health care safer: a critical analysis of patient safety prac-
tices. Evid Rep Technol Assess (Summ). 2001;43:1–668. i-x.
	11.	 Cooper JB, Newbower RS, Long CD, McPeek B. Preventable 
anesthesia mishaps: a study of human factors. Anesthesiology. 
1978;49(6):399–406.
	12.	 Staender S. Incident reporting in anaesthesiology. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol. 2011;25(2):207–214.
	13.	 Evans SM, Berry JG, Smith BJ, et al. Attitudes and barriers to inci-
dent reporting: a collaborative hospital study. Qual Saf Health Care. 
2006;15(1):39–43.
	14.	 Mahajan RP. Critical incident reporting and learning. Br J Anaesth. 
2010;105(1):69–75.
	15.	 Loftus RW, Muffly MK, Brown JR, et al. Hand contamination of anes-
thesia providers is an important risk factor for intraoperative bacterial 
transmission. Anesth Analg. 2011;112(1):98–105.
	16.	 Krediet AC, Kalkman CJ, Bonten MJ, Gigengack AC, Barach P. Hand-
hygiene practices in the operating theatre: an observational study. Br 
J Anaesth. 2011;107(4):553–558.
	17.	 Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et  al. Safe Surgery Saves Lives 
Study Group. A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and mor-
tality in a global population. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(5):491–499.
	18.	 Bates DW, Gawande AA. Improving safety with information technol-
ogy. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(25):2526–2534.
	19.	 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health Information 
Privacy. HITECH Act Enforcement Interim Final Rule. Washington, 
DC. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/enforce-
mentrule/hitechenforcementifr.html.
	20.	 Monk TG, Hurrell M, Norton A. Toward standardization of termi-
nology in anesthesia information management systems. Anesthesia 
Patient Safety Foundation. http://www.apsf.org/initiatives.php?id=2.
	21.	 Muravchick S, Caldwell JE, Epstein RH, et al. Anesthesia information 
management system implementation: a practical guide. Anesth Analg. 
2008;107(5):1598–1608.
	22.	 Nair BG, Newman SF, Peterson GN, Wu WY, Schwid HA. Feedback 
mechanisms including real-time electronic alerts to achieve near 
100% timely prophylactic antibiotic administration in surgical cases. 
Anesth Analg. 2010;111(5):1293–1300.
	23.	 Merry AF, Webster CS, Hannam J, et al. Multimodal system designed 
to reduce error in recording and administration of drugs in anaes-
thesia: prospective randomized clinical evaluation. BMJ. 2011;343. 
d5543.
43
The rise in the number of nonsurgical diagnostic and thera­
peutic interventions is driving the surge in volume of remote 
anesthesia and sedation services.1 These procedures have 
simultaneously become increasingly complex as a result of 
technological advances and sicker patient cohorts. Compli­
cating matters further, although these patients remain at 
high risk for anesthesia-related complications, they may be 
scheduled for such procedures precisely because they are 
poor surgical candidates. Settings requiring non–operating 
room anesthesia (NORA) include the interventional radiology 
department, cardiac catheterization laboratory, endoscopy 
suite, emergency room, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
suite, and hyperbaric oxygen chamber. The primary logisti­
cal challenges that abound in NORA include issues related 
to location, personnel, equipment, power supply, patient 
accessibility, and preprocedural screening.2
One critical consequence of NORA expansion is a short­
age of qualified anesthesiologist providers. This resource 
limitation has resulted in increased numbers of nonanes­
thesiologists providing sedation.3 The American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) categorizes sedation into four dis­
tinct categories: minimal sedation, moderate sedation, deep 
sedation, and general anesthesia (Table 6-1).4 Monitored 
anesthesia care (MAC) is another term commonly encoun­
tered during sedation. MAC does not describe a particular 
level of sedation but rather the delivery of anesthesia care 
during a procedure. This may involve the administration of 
sedation, local anesthesia, or no anesthesia at all, but the 
provider remains responsible for the monitoring and medi­
cal care of the patient.5
According to ASA mandate, general anesthesia is 
provided only by anesthesia professionals such as anes­
thesiologists, certified nurse anesthetists, and anesthesia 
assistants.6 However, the Centers for Medicare and Medic­
aid Services permits nonanesthesiologists to provide mini­
mal, moderate, or deep sedation. This group of providers 
includes physicians, dentists, oral surgeons, and podia­
trists. Great variation exists in these heterogeneous groups 
in their training, basic skills, and practice patterns, resulting 
in inconsistent care delivery.
In an effort to reduce anesthesia-related complications 
and improve outcomes, the ASA performed multiple closed 
claims analyses seeking to identify the root causes of adverse 
events during anesthesia. Initial analyses were focused on 
operating room–based general anesthetics.7 These sentinel 
studies revealed that the most adverse events were respi­
ratory and frequently preventable with improved monitor­
ing, specifically with the use of continuous pulse oximetry 
and capnography.7 Consequently, these monitors are now 
considered standard for oprerating room–based anesthetics 
and are nearly universally employed.
Subsequent analyses focusing on NORA have yielded 
similar results.8-10 The majority of complications in these 
studies were respiratory events. However, morbidity related 
to hypoventilation, hypoxemia, and hypothermia occurred 
at increased rates during NORA. Severity of injury and 
overall mortality also increased during remote location 
procedures.9,10 The endoscopy suite and cardiac catheteri­
zation laboratory were the most commonly identified loca­
tions. MAC was the most frequently documented anesthetic 
technique. Risk factors for complications during NORA 
included extremes of age, ASA III and IV physical health 
status (Table 6-2), obesity, and emergency procedures. The 
quality of anesthesia care was more likely to be substan­
dard in NORA claims in contrast to operating room–based 
claims, thus resulting in a call for improved monitoring and 
standardization of minimum monitoring requirements.8,9 
The ASA now recommends adherence to the same basic 
monitoring standards for anesthesia used in both operating 
room and non–operating room procedures.11
Nonanesthesiologist investigations by emergency room 
physicians, radiologists, and gastroenterologists similarly 
underscore the importance of minimum standard moni­
toring.12-19 Improved monitoring of respiratory function, 
specifically pulse oximetry and capnography, facilitates the 
detection of respiratory insufficiency. For providers lacking 
formal anesthesia training, standard monitoring is essen­
tial to mitigate delays in the recognition of respiratory or 
cardiovascular insufficiency and ensure safe care delivery.
Despite the development of monitoring guidelines and 
overwhelming evidence of the benefits of basic monitors, 
uniform implementation of monitoring standards for NORA 
has not occurred. Surveys of sedation providers demon­
strate inconsistent application of basic monitors.15 To effec­
tively improve patient safety during NORA, it is imperative 
that all providers understand and consistently adhere to 
basic monitoring standards.
Basic Monitors
The ASA recommends that minimum standard monitors 
employed for anesthesia should enable an assessment of 
oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation.11 No distinction 
is made for type of anesthesia or location of anesthetic deliv­
ery. For healthy patients (ASA I to II physical health status) 
undergoing uncomplicated procedures, this should include 
continuous monitoring of oxygenation with pulse oximetry, 
Critical Monitoring Issues 
for Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesia
JOHN P. SCOTT
6
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
44
respiratory rate and ventilation with capnography, and 
cardiac monitoring with electrocardiography. Noninvasive 
blood pressure measurements should be performed at least 
every 5 minutes. Measurement of patient body temperature 
is also recommended. Decisions regarding advanced invasive 
and noninvasive monitoring should be made on a case-to-
case basis depending on patient health status and procedural 
complexity. Monitor alarm limits must be adjusted to age-
appropriate vital sign thresholds and be clearly audible.
PULSE OXIMETRY
The introduction of continuous pulse oximetry during the 
1980s has greatly improved provider recognition of peri­
procedural hypoxemia. The ASA now mandates continu­
ous pulse oximetry during all anesthetics.11 Modern pulse 
oximeters calculate the arterial oxygen saturation based on 
the Beer-Lambert law. The measured arterial oxygen satu­
ration is derived from the absorption of probe-emitted red 
and infrared light by hemoglobin within arterial (pulsatile) 
blood. The four main hemoglobin species within adult blood 
are oxyhemoglobin (HbO2), deoxyhemoglobin (HbR), met­
hemoglobin (metHb), and carboxyhemoglobin (COHb).20 
Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is present in neonatal blood. HbO2 
and HbR, the predominant species in normal individuals, 
absorb light at different wavelengths. HbO2 absorbs near 
infrared light at a wavelength of 940 nm, and HbR absorbs 
red light at a wavelength of 660 nm. The pulse oximeter 
calculates arterial oxygen saturation according to the rela­
tive ratio of red and infrared light absorption.20
Continuous pulse oximetry during anesthesia reduces 
the incidence and severity of periprocedural hypoxemia, 
although it is unclear whether this has resulted in reduced 
morbidity.21 Prospective studies have not shown improved 
outcomes resulting from pulse oximetry,21 but as Eich­
horn22 pointed out in his 1993 editorial, the rate of hypoxia-
related adverse events during anesthesia is relatively low, 
making it impractical if not impossible to perform a study 
powered to detect statistically improved outcomes related 
the use of pulse oximetry.22 Nonetheless, it is reasonable to 
conclude that enhanced detection of hypoxemia through 
routine continuous pulse oximetry has led to clinically sig­
nificant improvements in care delivery.
Pulse oximetry has limitations. It does not provide infor­
mation regarding ventilation. Also, because pulse oxim­
eters rely on pulsatile blood flow to determine oxygen 
saturations, physiological states associated with decreased 
pulsatility, such as shock, severe vasoconstriction, and 
low cardiac output, may result in spurious pulse oximetry 
readings.23 The pulse oximeter probe is typically attached 
to fingertips. Nail polish on fingernails decreases tissue pen­
etrance of probe-emitted light and obscures pulse oximetry 
readings.20 Finally, increased levels of abnormal hemoglo­
bin variants such as methemoglobin and carboxyhemoglo­
bin are associated with inaccurate pulse oximetry values 
and require alternative methods such as co-oximetry to 
measure arterial oxygen saturation.
CAPNOGRAPHY
Capnography is the continuous measurement of the partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide over the respiratory cycle (Figure 
6-1). Capnography quantifies the amount of infrared radia­
tion absorbed by molecules of carbon dioxide. The amount of 
infrared radiation absorbed has an exponential relationship 
to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide.14 The measured 
partial pressure of carbon dioxide at the end of exhalation 
is called the end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2). Classically, 
capnography has been used to assess ventilation in intu­
bated patients. However, this technology may be used in 
nonintubated patients using nasal cannulas equipped with 
sidestream ports for sampling exhaled carbon dioxide.14 
Before the introduction of capnography, visual inspection 
and impedance plethysmography were used to measure 
respiratory rate and to detect hypoventilation and apnea 
during sedation. These methods largely have been replaced 
by capnography, which also allows for the continuous 
quantification of respiratory rate.
Capnography provides essential quantitative and quali­
tative information regarding the adequacy of ventilation.14 
Table 6-2  American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical 
Status Classification System
ASA 1  Healthy
ASA 2  Mild systemic disease
ASA 3  Severe systemic disease
ASA 4  Severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life
ASA 5  Moribund and not expected to survive
ASA 6  Brain dead; organ donor
Modified from American Society of Anesthesiologists. Physical Status Classifica­
tion System. Park Ridge, Ill: American Society of Anesthesiologists.
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.
Table 6-1  Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analgesia
Minimal Sedation 
(Anxiolysis)
Moderate Sedation/Analge­
sia (“Conscious Sedation”)
Deep Sedation/Analgesia
General Anesthesia
Responsiveness
Normal response to verbal 
stimulation
Purposeful response to 
verbal or tactile stimulation
Purposeful response 
following repeated or 
painful stimulation
Unarousable even with 
painful stimulation
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be 
required
Intervention often 
required
Spontaneous ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Frequently inadequate
Cardiovascular function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
May be impaired
From American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of depth of sedation: definition of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/analgesia—standards, guidelines 
and statements. Park Ridge, Ill: American Society of Anesthesiologists; 2009.
6  •  Critical Monitoring Issues for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
45
During procedural sedation complicated by hypoventila­
tion, capnographic waveforms typically exhibit two types 
of changes. Bradypneic hypoventilation, a common side 
effect of opioids, is hypoventilation caused by a decrease in 
respiratory rate. The capnographic tracing in bradypneic 
hypoventilation displays increased ETCO2 and decreased 
rate. Conversely, hypopneic hypoventilation, as commonly 
occurs with hypnotics such as propofol, is associated with 
decreased tidal volume and respiratory rate. A greater pro­
portion of each exhaled breath is dead space ventilation, 
and ETCO2 is consequently reduced with a widened arterial 
carbon dioxide level to ETCO2 gradient.14
Studies evaluating capnography in nonintubated patients 
during NORA suggest that respiratory insufficiency may be 
detected by capnography well before hypoxemia is detected 
with pulse oximetry. In pediatric studies of remote proce­
dural sedation in the emergency room and in MRI, capnog­
raphy detected hypopneic hypoventilation 2 to 3 minutes 
before hypoxemia was detected with pulse oximetry.17,18 
Similarly, in adult patients undergoing propofol sedation in 
the emergency room or in the endoscopy suite, capnography 
was shown not only to provide earlier detection of hypoven­
tilation but to also decrease the incidence of hypoxemia.16,19 
In patients undergoing procedural sedation receiving supple­
mental oxygen, capnography is crucial to the early detection 
of abnormal ventilation because hyperoxia delays the onset 
of hypoxemia.13 The utility of capnography is not limited to 
monitoring ventilation; it is also useful in assessing circulation, 
perfusion, and total body metabolism. Capnographic wave­
forms exhibit quantitative changes in many pathophysiologi­
cal states. Causes of increased exhaled carbon dioxide include 
hypoventilation, rebreathing of exhaled carbon dioxide, and 
hypermetabolic states such as malignant hyperthermia and 
hyperthyroidism. Causes of decreased exhaled carbon diox­
ide include unplanned airway disconnection (i.e., circuit 
disconnection or extubation), hyperventilation, increased 
dead space ventilation, and pulmonary hypoperfusion (i.e., 
profound shock, low cardiac output, pulmonary embolism, 
or venous air embolism).24
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring is the 
simplest form of noninvasive cardiac monitoring. The ECG 
provides a graphic representation of the electrical activity of 
the heart, including its heart rate and rhythm. During anes­
thesia, continuous ECG monitoring is critical in the detec­
tion of myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias, or important 
electrolyte disturbances such as hyperkalemia.24 However, 
the ECG provides little information regarding myocardial 
contractility or function.
Both three-lead and five-lead ECGs are employed for stan­
dard monitoring purposes. The three-lead ECG incorporates 
the I, II, and III limb leads first described by Einthoven. This pro­
vides basic ECG information, and only one lead may be viewed 
at a time. For more complex cases in at-risk patients, five-lead 
monitoring is recommended. This requires the placement of 
an additional limb lead and a fifth (V) intercostal lead, allow­
ing for a more comprehensive examination. During five-lead 
monitoring, valuable information may be gathered by viewing 
leads II and V simultaneously. Lead II is useful in the detection 
of arrhythmias and inferior wall ischemia, and lead V is helpful 
in the detection of anterior and lateral wall ischemia.24
NONINVASIVE BLOOD PRESSURE
Noninvasive arterial blood pressure measurements should 
be performed at least every 5 minutes during NORA using 
either manual or automated methods.11 These measure­
ments are classically performed by placing an appropriate-
size blood pressure cuff around the upper arm. Cuff inflation 
above the systolic blood pressure results in brachial arterial 
compression interrupting blood flow. Blood flow resumes 
with cuff deflation, allowing for an estimation of arte­
rial blood pressures. Manual blood pressure monitoring 
requires a sphygmomanometer and a stethoscope placed 
over the brachial artery. This method relies on ausculta­
tion of the Korotkoff sounds to determine the systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure. The mean arterial blood pressure 
(MAP) may be calculated based on these pressures.
Automated blood pressure monitoring uses the principles 
of oscillometry described by Von Recklinghausen.25,26 This 
method is based on the detection of oscillations transmitted 
as blood flow resumes in the previously compressed artery. 
Oscillometric blood pressure monitoring most accurately 
predicts the MAP, which occurs at the point of maximal oscil­
lations. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure are calculated 
based on specific algorithms, but the systolic blood pressure 
normally corresponds to the beginning of oscillations and the 
diastolic blood pressure to when the oscillations cease.
Temperature
According to the ASA, “every patient receiving anesthe­
sia shall have temperature monitored when clinically 
Figure 6-1  Normal capnogram. A and B, Dead 
space ventilation. B and C, Ascending expiratory 
phase (mixing of alveolar and dead space ventila­
tion). C and D, Alveolar phase. D, End-tidal carbon 
dioxide. D to A, Inspiratory phase.
A
B
C
D
A
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
46
significant changes in body temperature are intended, 
anticipated or suspected.”11 Acceptable temperature moni­
toring sites include the axilla, nasopharynx, esophagus, 
rectum, and bladder.27 Malignant hyperthermia is the 
most urgent temperature-related complication of general 
anesthesia with volatile gases. However, hypothermia is far 
more common, because most anesthetics induce a state of 
poikilothermia.
Temperature monitoring is equally important during 
NORA. Hypothermia is prevalent in remote locations, 
because many areas are not equipped with effective heating 
systems. Furthermore, some locations require active cooling 
to prevent equipment from overheating.28 Hypothermia 
during anesthesia has been linked to multisystem morbidity, 
including myocardial ischemia, surgical site infections, and 
coagulation disorders.27,29-31 Ultimately, undetected and 
untreated hypothermia is associated with prolonged length 
of hospital stay and increased costs.28
Advanced Monitors
INVASIVE INTRAVASCULAR MONITORING
All invasive intravascular monitoring systems require 
percutaneous placement of a vascular (i.e., arterial, cen­
tral venous, or pulmonary artery) catheter and a pressure 
transduction system. Continuously transduced arterial 
or venous waveforms are displayed on monitors, allow­
ing for the beat-to-beat assessment of arterial or venous 
pressures.24
Intraarterial blood pressure (IABP) monitoring is consid­
ered the most accurate method of blood pressure measure­
ment. Decisions regarding arterial line placement for NORA 
should be based on patient health status and procedural 
complexity. Complex endovascular procedures in inter­
ventional radiology and the cardiac catheterization labora­
tory are likely to require IABP monitoring to assist with the 
maintenance of tight blood pressure control and vital end-
organ perfusion pressure. In the mechanically ventilated 
patient, analysis of arterial pulse pressure waveforms and 
measurement of arterial pulse pressure variation during the 
respiratory cycle is predictive of preload responsiveness and 
may be used to guide fluid replacement therapy in hypovo­
lemic patients.32
Common indications for central venous line placement 
include central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring and the 
need to deliver vasoactive or inotropic medications. Histori­
cally, the CVP was thought to accurately reflect the right 
ventricular end-diastolic pressure, pulmonary capillary 
wedge pressure, and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure. 
Based on these presumptions, the CVP was used as an indi­
cator of ventricular preload responsiveness. Emerging 
evidence, however, suggests that CVP is not a reliable mea­
sure of intravascular volume status and should not be used 
in isolation to guide fluid resuscitation.33
The utility of pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) moni­
toring remains a source of great controversy within the 
anesthesia and critical care communities. PAC insertion 
allows for the measurement of right and left heart pressures 
and calculation of important hemodynamic variables, 
including cardiac output and vascular resistances. To 
date, no studies have linked PAC monitoring to improved 
patient outcomes. Instead, multiple observational studies 
suggest increased PAC-related morbidity and mortality.34 
Recognized complications of PAC insertion include 
arrhythmias, pulmonary artery rupture, and pulmo­
nary hemorrhage.35 Subsequently, PAC use for complex 
cardiac procedures and in the intensive care unit has 
declined in recent years. PAC monitoring during NORA 
should be reserved for experienced providers in select 
subsets of patients, such as those with left ventricular 
failure or liver transplants.
NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a completely nonin­
vasive methodology used to assess regional tissue oxygen­
ation and perfusion. NIRS also is based on the Beer-Lambert 
law and the absorption of near infrared light by hemoglobin 
species. NIRS probes contain a near infrared light source 
and two receivers. The light source emits near infrared light 
at 730- and 810-nm wavelengths to generate a tissue satu­
ration.36 The regional oxygen saturation (RSO2) measured 
via NIRS is a mean tissue oxyhemoglobin saturation, which 
tends to reflect tissue venous saturation.37 This RSO2 value 
provides valuable information regarding regional oxygen 
delivery and consumption.37 This is clinically important 
because reduced regional perfusion may be clinically silent 
until organ dysfunction occurs, resulting in increased 
morbidity and mortality.
NIRS is typically used in adults to monitor cerebral 
perfusion and blood flow. In terms of adult NORA proce­
dures, bilateral cerebral RSO2 monitoring has been used 
in interventional neuroradiology to detect critical changes 
in cerebral blood flow and oxygen delivery during endo­
vascular procedures.38 RSO2 monitoring has been used in 
children to measure tissue saturations in the brain, kidney, 
and mesentery. For children with congenital heart disease, 
cerebral and renal or somatic, NIRS has become a widely 
accepted standard monitor of regional perfusion in the 
operating room and intensive care unit after open heart 
surgery. Many of these same children require future cardiac 
catheterizations, and NIRS monitoring may be helpful during 
these procedures. Similarly, critically ill children requiring 
NORA may benefit from NIRS monitoring to assess vital 
organ oxygen delivery.39
NIRS does have limitations. The probe emits near 
infrared light that penetrates a tissue depth of only 2 to 6 
cm, which limits the utility of noncerebral RSO2 monitoring 
in obese patients.37 Additionally, because bilirubin also 
absorbs near infrared light, the device is not accurate in 
patients with hyperbilirubinemia, but it may still be used as 
a trend monitor.
BISPECTRAL INDEX MONITORING
Bispectral index (BIS) monitoring was developed to assess 
the levels of sedation and awareness during surgery. The BIS 
index, 0 to 100, is derived from continuous electroencepha­
lographic and electromyographic data and corresponds to 
the patient’s level of consciousness. A BIS of 0 equates to 
an isoelectric electrocardiogram (EEG) with no brain activ­
ity, and 100 to an awake and alert state.40 BIS values less 
6  •  Critical Monitoring Issues for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
47
than 60 are associated with a state of general anesthesia 
and reduced incidence of patient recall.41 BIS monitoring 
has been used during procedural sedation in remote loca­
tions to help providers titrate hypnotic and analgesic medi­
cations and avoid oversedation. Studies evaluating BIS 
monitoring for NORA confirm that patients under sedation 
frequently transition to a state of general anesthesia, which 
may be otherwise unnoticed by providers.40 The Cochrane 
database reviewed BIS monitoring for anesthesia and pro­
cedural sedation and concluded that BIS monitoring was 
associated with reduced anesthetic requirements and short­
ened recovery times. The incidence of patient recall during 
painful procedures was also decreased, with shortened time 
to extubation during procedures requiring general anesthe­
sia.41 Other monitors of the EEG are not reviewed here but 
may be useful.
Site-Specific Monitoring 
Considerations
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI requires a motionless patient to generate optimal 
images without artifact. Radiologists request sedation or 
general anesthesia for patients who are unable to lie still. 
Many standard monitoring devices are not MRI compat­
ible because of monitor interference or burn risks asso­
ciated with ferromagnetic heating of wires and cables. 
Standard ECG monitoring is distorted by electromagnetic 
interference. Modern MRI-compatible ECG devices produce 
gated ECG waveforms that subtract electromagnetic 
interference. The measurement of pulse oximetry, cap­
nography, and oscillometric blood pressure monitoring 
is largely unaffected by electromagnetic fields, but fiber­
optic cables or wireless devices are required, as are MRI-
compatible pulse oximeter probes and blood pressure 
cuffs.42 Transducers for invasive arterial pressure lines 
and CVP lines contain copper, which is nonferrous and 
thus MRI compatible, but transducers should be kept off 
the MRI bed to reduce artifact and limit interference.43 
The use of NIRS and BIS monitors during MRI is con­
traindicated because of the risk for probe-related burns. 
Temperature should be routinely monitored because 
hypothermia is common as a result of the lengthy nature 
of these scans, especially in children or when general 
anesthesia is required.28
Modern MRI-compatible monitors are designed with 
wireless technology (e.g., Invivo, Gainesville, Fla.). These 
devices are equipped to measure noninvasive and invasive 
parameters. MRI-compatible monitors must be positioned 
an appropriate distance from the magnet and secured 
safely. MRI scanning is also very loud, and it is imperative 
that alarms on physiological monitoring equipment are set 
to appropriate volume levels.44
ENDOSCOPY SUITE
The ASA closed claims analysis for remote locations high­
lighted an increased complication rate of endoscopy suite 
procedures, including endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan­
creatography (ERCP), upper endoscopy, and colonoscopy. 
Patients most likely to encounter complications were older 
(>70 years) and sicker (ASA status 3-5). Respiratory insuf­
ficiency was common during these cases. More than half of 
these claims were thought to be preventable with improved 
monitoring. Capnography was not employed in the majority 
of the claims.8,10
Endoscopic procedures requiring sedation are associated 
with various complications. The required sedation may 
diminish airway reflexes and increase aspiration risk. Endo­
scope placement frequently creates external airway com­
pression and may worsen upper airway obstruction. Also, 
prone positioning required during ERCP is associated with 
worsened respiratory mechanics and limits provider access 
to the patient’s airway. Early detection of respiratory insuf­
ficiency with continuous capnography and pulse oximetry 
is thus essential because the cases frequently involve shared 
airways and repositioning may be necessary to safely secure 
the patient’s airway. Patients also may be at increased risk 
for hemodynamic lability after bowel preparation regimens 
or in the case of active gastrointestinal bleeding; thus con­
tinuous ECG and intermittent NIBP measurements also are 
indicated.8
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION LABORATORY
The number of indications for cardiac catheterization in 
adults and children with heart disease is increasing. Histori­
cally, cardiac catheterization in adults was limited to percu­
taneous coronary interventions for coronary artery disease 
and electrophysiology studies for dysrhythmias. With the 
advent of percutaneous transcatheter valve replacement 
(TVR), patients with valvular heart disease who are poor 
surgical candidates may avoid the risks associated with 
surgical valve replacement and cardiopulmonary bypass.45 
These patients remain at high risk for anesthetic-related 
morbidity and mortality.
Cardiac catheterization may be performed under sedation 
with local anesthesia or general anesthesia. Irrespective 
of the choice of sedation, these individuals are at high risk 
because of cardiac disease and other comorbidities. Mini­
mum standard monitoring for adult cardiac catheterization 
should include pulse oximetry, capnography, ECG, NIBP, 
and temperature. Invasive monitoring (i.e., IABP, CVP) 
should be based on patient health status and procedural 
complexity. For TVR procedures, both advanced noninvasive 
(NIRS) and invasive (IABP, CVP) monitoring modalities are 
recommended. Transesophageal echocardiography is 
frequently used as well.
Children with congenital heart disease may require mul­
tiple cardiac catheterizations during infancy and childhood. 
The spectrum of congenital heart disease is vast, encom­
passing cyanotic and acyanotic lesions. Given the degree of 
physiological complexity, advanced invasive and noninva­
sive monitoring is frequently required. NIRS has proved to 
be an extremely useful monitor in the assessment of oxygen 
delivery and consumption for children with heart disease.39 
Two-site cerebral and somatic regional oximetry provides 
vital information regarding the distribution of blood flow, 
oxygen delivery, and cardiac output. Invasive arterial 
pressure and CVP monitoring also may be necessary, 
depending on the type of lesion, patient health status, and 
procedural complexity.
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
48
HYPERBARIC OXYGEN CHAMBER
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is prescribed for many condi­
tions, the most common of which is for the treatment of 
nonhealing wounds in diabetic patients. However, criti­
cally ill patients with carbon monoxide poisoning secondary 
to smoke inhalation or necrotizing soft tissue infections 
may also require hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Invasive 
monitoring is often required for these patients. Hyperbaric 
oxygen chambers may be configured for single or multiple 
patients, and access to the patient and ease of monitoring 
differ accordingly.46 In multipatient hyperbaric oxygen 
chambers, the monitoring devices are located within the 
chamber. In single-patient chambers, monitors are located 
outside the hyperbaric oxygen tank, and leads and cables 
must pass through pressure-sealed port holes to attach to 
the patient.46 Continuous pulse oximetry is not universally 
indicated because of the high partial pressure of oxygen 
delivered. Dangers associated with monitoring during 
hyperbaric oxygen therapy relate to the inherent fire risks of 
high oxygen tensions. Thus all monitors used in hyperbaric 
oxygen chambers must be electrically safe and in compli­
ance with National Fire Protection Association guidelines.46 
The development of wireless monitoring technology may help 
reduce fire risks and improve safety.47
OFFICE-BASED ANESTHESIA
Office-based anesthesia represents a rapidly growing seg­
ment of NORA. According to the American Hospital Asso­
ciation, the number of office-based anesthetics doubled 
from 1995 to 2005.48,49 Dental, cosmetic, and maxillofa­
cial procedures are commonly performed in office-based 
settings. These locations are not subject to the same gov­
ernmental regulations as their hospital and ambulatory 
surgery center counterparts. Office-based anesthesia prac­
tices have minimal accreditation requirements.50 Anes­
thetic techniques practiced in an office setting include local 
anesthesia, regional anesthesia, sedation, and general 
anesthesia.
Office-based practices should be equipped with the same 
standard monitoring capabilities (i.e., pulse oximetry, capno­
graphy, ECG, NIBP, and temperature) as hospitals and 
ambulatory surgery centers. Monitors must be well main­
tained and functional.50 The ASA recommends compliance 
with the same minimum monitoring standards as hospital 
and surgery center anesthetizing locations. Available moni­
toring capabilities also must be equipped to meet patient 
needs in the event of emergencies and transfers.
INTENSIVE CARE UNIT
Patients in the intensive care unit are critically ill by 
definition. Transportation of critically ill patients can 
be destabilizing, with significant morbidity and mortal­
ity. This has resulted in a growing number of surgical 
and nonsurgical procedures for patients of all ages in 
the intensive care unit (Table 6-3). These patients are at 
extremely high risk for sedation-related morbidity and 
should be monitored accordingly. In situ invasive moni­
toring lines should be continued. For patients without 
advanced monitoring, it is important to recognize that 
both the procedure itself and the required sedation may 
be life threatening. Thus additional invasive (i.e., IABP 
and CVP) and noninvasive (i.e., BIS and NIRS) monitor­
ing may be required. BIS monitoring may allow for more 
precise titration of sedative and analgesic medications, 
because excessive sedation may result in hemodynamic 
instability. However, BIS monitoring has not been linked 
to reduced days of mechanical ventilation or intensive 
care unit length of stay.51
Conclusion
The implementation of monitoring standards for all anes­
thetics regardless of location represents an essential quality 
initiative to improve care delivery and patient safety. Basic 
monitoring for NORA should include pulse oximetry, cap­
nography, ECG, and NIBP. Body temperature also should 
be measured. Anesthetics associated with increased risk, 
because of procedural complexity or patient comorbidities, 
require advanced monitoring. Facilities where complex 
procedures are performed on sick patients in remote loca­
tions must be equipped with monitoring capabilities to 
match patient needs.
References
	 1.	 Pino RM. The nature of anesthesia and procedural sedation outside of 
the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2007;20(4):347–351.
	 2.	 Van de Velde M, Kupyers M, Teunkens A, Devroe S. Risk and safety 
of anesthesia outside the operating room. Minerva Anestesiol. 
2009;75(5):345–348.
	 3.	 Lalwani K, Michel M. Pediatric sedation in North American chil­
dren’s hospitals: a survey of aesthesia providers. Pediatr Anesth. 
2005;15(3):209–213.
	 4.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of depth of sedation: 
definition of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/analgesia–standards, 
guidelines and statements. Park Ridge, Ill: American Society of Anesthe­
siologists; 2009.
	 5.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Distinguishing monitored 
anesthesia care (MAC) from moderate sedation/analgesia (conscious seda­
tion): standards, guidelines and statements. Park Ridge, Ill: American 
Society of Anesthesiologists; 2009.
	 6.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Advisory on granting privileges 
for deep sedation to non-anesthesiologist sedation practitioners: standards, 
guidelines and statements. Park Ridge, Ill: American Society of Anesthe­
siologists; 2010.
	 7.	 Caplan RA, Posner KL, Ward RJ, Cheney FW. Adverse respira­
tory events in anesthesia: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology. 
1990;72(5):828–833.
	 8.	 Robbertze R, Posner KL, Domino KB. Closed claims review of anesthe­
sia for procedures outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2006;19(4):436–442.
Table 6-3  Common Intensive Care Unit Procedures
Site
Procedures
Neonatal ICU
Patent ductus arteriosus ligation, balloon atrial sep­
tostomy, exploratory laparotomy, PICC insertion
Pediatric ICU
Bronchoscopy, endoscopy, delayed sternal closures 
after cardiac surgery, PICC insertion
Adult medical 
and surgical 
ICU
Bronchoscopy, endoscopy, percutaneous trache­
ostomy, percutaneous gastrostomy, external 
ventricular drain and intracranial pressure monitor 
placement, PICC insertion
ICU, Intensive care unit; PICC, peripherally inserted central catheter.
6  •  Critical Monitoring Issues for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
49
	 9.	 Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Cheney FW, et al. Injury and liability asso­
ciated with monitored anesthesia care: a closed claims analysis. Anes­
thesiology. 2006;104:228–234.
	10.	 Metzner J, Posner JL, Domino KB. The risk and safety of anesthesia at 
remote locations: the US closed claims analysis. Curr Opin Anaesthe­
siol. 2009;22(4):502–508.
	11.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Standards for basic anesthetic 
monitoring: standards, guidelines and statements. Park Ridge, Ill: Ameri­
can Society of Anesthesiologists; 2011.
	12.	 Tuite C, Rosenberg EJ. Sedation and analgesia in interventional radi­
ology. Semin Intervent Rad. 2005;22(2):114–120.
	13.	 Burton JH, Harrah JD, Germann CA, et  al. Does end-tidal carbon 
dioxide monitoring detect respiratory events prior to current sedation 
monitoring practices? Acad Emerg Med. 2006;13(5):5040–5044.
	14.	 Krauss B, Hess DR. Capnography for procedural sedation and analgesia 
in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 2007;50(2):172–181.
	15.	 Fanning RM. Monitoring during sedation given by non-anaesthetic 
doctors. Anaesthesia. 2008;63(4):370–374.
	16.	 Deitch K, Miner J, Chudnofsky CR, et al. Does ETCO2 monitoring dur­
ing emergency department procedural sedation and analgesia with 
propofol decrease the incidence of hypoxic events? A randomized, 
controlled trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;55(3):265–267.
	17.	 Kannikeswaran K, Chen X, Sethuraman U. Utility of endtidal carbon 
dioxide monitoring in detection of hypoxia during sedation for brain 
magnetic resonance imaging in children with developmental disabili­
ties. Pediatr Anesth. 2011;21(12):1241–1246.
	18.	 Langhan ML, Chen L, Marshall C, Santucci KA. Detection of 
hypoxia by capnography and its association with hypoxia in chil­
dren undergoing sedation with ketamine. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2011;27(5):394–397.
	19.	 Beitz A, Riphaus A, Meining A, et  al. Capnographic monitoring 
reduces the incidence of arterial oxygen desaturation and hypoxemia 
during propofol sedation for colonoscopy: a randomized, controlled 
study (ColoCap Study). Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107(8):1205–1212.
	20.	 Tremper 
KK, 
Barker 
SJ. 
Pulse 
oximetry. 
Anesthesiology. 
1989;70(1):98–108.
	21.	 Pedersen T, Moller AM, Pedersen BD. Pulse oximetry for perioperative 
monitoring: systematic review of randomized, controlled trials. Anesth 
Analg. 2003;96(2):426–431.
	22.	 Eichhorn JH. Pulse oximetry as a standard of practice in anesthesia. 
Anesthesiology. 1993;78(3):423–426.
	23.	 Severinghaus J, Spellman M. Pulse oximeter failure thresholds in hypo­
tension and vasoconstriction. Anesthesiology. 1990;73(3). 532–527.
	24.	 Stoelting RK, Miller RD, eds. Basics of anesthesia. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2002.
	25.	 Von Recklinghausen H. Neue Wege zur Blutdruckmessung. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag; 1931.
	26.	 Mark JB, Slaughter TF, Reves JG. Cardiovascular monitoring. In: 
Miller RD, ed. Anesthesia. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 
2000:1117–1206.
	27.	 Torossian A. Thermal management during anaesthesia and thermo­
regulation standards for the prevention of inadvertent perioperative 
hypothermia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2008;22(4):659–668.
	28.	 Missant C, Van de Velde M. Morbidity and mortality related to 
anaesthesia outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2004;17(4):323–327.
	29.	 Frank SM, Beattie C, Christopherson R, et  al. Unintentional hypo­
thermia is associated with postoperative myocardial ischemia: the 
perioperative ischemia randomized anesthesia trial study group. Anes­
thesiology. 1993;78(3):468–476.
	30.	 Kurz A, Sessler DI, Lenhardt R. Perioperative normothermia to reduce 
the incidence of surgical wound infection and shorten hospitaliza­
tion: study of wound infection and temperature group. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334(19):1209–1215.
	31.	 Putzu M, Casati A, Berti M, Pagliarini G, Fanelli G. Clinical complica­
tions, monitoring and management of mild perioperative hypother­
mia: anesthesiological features. Acta Biomed. 2007;78(3):163–169.
	32.	 Marik PE, Cavallazzi R, Vasu T, Hirani A. Dynamic changes in arterial 
waveform derived variables and fluid responsiveness in mechanically 
ventilated patients: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Care Med. 
2009;37(9):2642–2646.
	33.	 Kumar A, Anel R, Bunnell E, et al. Pulmonary artery occlusion pres­
sure and central venous pressure fail to predict ventricular filling 
volume, cardiac performance, or the response to volume infusion in 
normal subjects. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(3):691–699.
	34.	 Cowie BS. Does the pulmonary artery catheter still have a role in the 
perioperative period? Anaesth Intensive Care. 2011;39(3):345–355.
	35.	 Kearney TJ, Shabot MM. Pulmonary artery rupture associated with 
the Swan-Ganz catheter. Chest. 1995;108(5):1349–1352.
	36.	 Denault A, Deschamps A, Murkin JM. A proposed algorithm for the 
intraoperative use of cerebral near-infrared spectroscopy. Semin Car­
diothorac Vasc Anesth. 2007;11(4):274–281.
	37.	 Boushel R, Langeberg H, Olesen J, Gonzales-Alonso J, Bulow J, 
Kjaer M. Monitoring tissue oxygen availability with near infra­
red spectroscopy in health and disease. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 
2001;11(4):213–222.
	38.	 Mazzeo AT, Di Pasquale R, Settineri N, et al. Usefulness and limits of 
near infrared spectroscopy monitoring during endovascular proce­
dures. Minerva Anestesiol. 2012;78(1):31–45.
	39.	 Chakravarti SB, Mittnacht AJ, Katz JC, Nguyen K, Joashi U, Srivastava 
S. Multisite near-infrared spectroscopy predicts elevated blood lac­
tate level in children after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
2009;23(5):663–667.
	40.	 Gamble C, Gamble J, Seal R, Wright RB, Ali S. Bispectral analysis dur­
ing procedural sedation in the pediatric emergency department. Pedi­
atr Emerg Care. 2012;28(10):1003–1008.
	41.	 Punjasawadwong Y, Phongchiewboon A, Bunchungmongkol N. 
Bispectral index for improving anaesthetic delivery and postoperative 
recovery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;17(4):CD003843.
	42.	 Patterson S, Chesney J. Anesthetic management for mag­
netic resonance imaging: problems and solutions. Anesth Analg. 
1992;74(1):121–128.
	43.	 Taber KH, Thompson J, Coveler LA, Hayman LA. Invasive pressure 
monitoring of patients during magnetic resonance imaging. Can J 
Anaesth. 1993;40(11):1092–1095.
	44.	 Melloni C. Morbidity and mortality related to anesthesia outside the 
operating room. Minerva Anestesiol. 2005;71:325–334.
	45.	 Covello RD, Ruggeri L, Landoni G, et al. Transcatheter implantation 
of an aortic valve: anesthesiological management. Minerva Anestesiol. 
2010;76(2):100–108.
	46.	 Weaver LK. Hyperbaric oxygen in the critically ill. Crit Care Med. 
2011;39(7):1784–1791.
	47.	 Zheng JN, Wu BM, Wang Q. Development of physiological monitors 
based on the Zigbee technology for hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Chin J 
Med Instrument. 2008;32(3):193–197.
	48.	 American Heart Association. AHA trend-watch chartbook: trends 
affecting hospitals and health systems: May 2005. Chicago: American 
Heart Association; 2005.
	49.	 Evron S, Ezri T. Organizational prerequisites for anesthesia outside the 
operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2009;22(4):514–518.
	50.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Guidelines for office-based 
anesthesia. Committee of Origin: Ambulatory Surgical Care (Approved 
by the ASA House of Delegates on October 13, 1999, and last affirmed 
on October 21, 2009). Park Ridge, Ill: American Society of Anesthesio­
logists; 2009.
	51.	 Weatherburn C, Endacott R, Tynan P, Bailey M. The impact of bispec­
tral index monitoring on sedation administration in mechanically 
ventilated patients. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2007;35(2):204–208.
50
The operating room is considered to be the most expen­
sive part of the hospital, and therefore only procedures 
that require specific surgical care of the patient or dedi­
cated anesthesia resources and postoperative care should 
be performed in this environment. Business managers in 
particular are not keen on using expensive operating room 
resources when a procedure can be performed under local 
anesthesia or during sedation and analgesia without the 
need for anesthesiologists. Such procedures should, when­
ever possible, be performed outside the operating room envi­
ronment. Over the years, a disparity has existed between 
resources available and production targets, and demands to 
increase theater efficiency have therefore increased. Patient 
demands to provide good sedation and analgesia have 
simultaneously increased. As doctors, we are forced to meet 
the requests made by patients while ensuring safety and 
providing high-quality care at lower costs. These factors 
have created the need for providing competent anesthesia 
care outside the operating room at virtually no increased 
total costs to the health care provider. Thus the environ­
ment is ripe for creating optimal patient management 
systems in a non–operating room anesthesia (NORA) envi­
ronment at similar or reduced costs and providing safe care 
with increased patient satisfaction. No business environ­
ment within the health care sector has faced so many con­
flicting challenges, all at the same time, in the last decade.
Coupled with the issues around safe management at 
reduced costs outside the operating room is the challenge 
to provide satisfactory conditions for surgeons, physicians, 
and radiologists to be able to perform the procedure in a 
satisfactory way and subsequently discharge the patient 
home as soon as possible, preferably without using post­
anesthesia care unit (PACU) resources. Additionally, not 
only do patients want to be discharged home safely but 
they also want participate in decision-making, drive with­
out being injured or injuring others, take care of their chil­
dren at home, and often go back to work later the same 
day. Although many of these demands cannot always be 
fulfilled, careful planning and availability of short-acting 
intravenous drugs with minimal side effects has made the 
impossible now seem achievable. To contain costs, how­
ever, several facilities have resorted to using the services 
of non–anesthesia-trained personnel to achieve the goal of 
providing sedation or analgesia in a safe way. Under these 
circumstances, and with the added complexity of multiple 
comorbidities in an increasingly aged population, supervi­
sion by a trained anesthesiologist has become increasingly 
important when performing procedures outside the operat­
ing room environment. Clinical practices that best achieve 
the goals of safety, ease of management, and safe discharge 
after sedation and analgesia have become a hot topic for 
regular discussions in corridors and conference among doc­
tors, nurses, and health care managers, as well as the sub­
ject of increasing scientific publications in peer-reviewed 
journals throughout the world.
From an anesthesiology perspective, it is essential that 
the care given to patients undergoing procedures outside 
the operating room under sedation is, above all, safe. Com­
promising safety above costs is not acceptable practice for 
doctors or nurses. A team of competent and trained staff is 
thus needed to offer safe care at affordable costs and with 
full patient satisfaction. In hospitals, most guidelines on 
sedation and analgesia outside the operating room are 
today made keeping in mind the availability of competent, 
informed, and educated personnel. However, it is impos­
sible to extend the use the guidelines published in one coun­
try or hospital to other countries, because of differences in 
the availability of drugs, monitoring standards, staff educa­
tion and competence, and restriction on administration of 
drugs, among other factors. Therefore local practices and 
personnel competence should be considered when making 
recommendations for safe practice in sedation or analgesia 
techniques within each country and hospital. For instance, 
whereas only anesthesiologists in Australia and New Zealand 
can administer propofol, in Scandinavia, anesthesia nurses 
may administer propofol under the supervision of anesthe­
siologists but not surgeons. Thus it is important to take into 
consideration local governance, practices, and recommen­
dations pertaining to the use of drugs by competent persons 
trained in the safe use of these drugs.
This chapter aims to provide alternatives for the prac­
tice of safe sedation and anesthesia outside the operating 
room. The focus is on total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) 
as the method of choice, the drugs commonly used, and 
their pharmacology and side effects, but brief summary 
of an inhalational anesthetic as an alternative has been 
mentioned. Furthermore, the monitoring standards that 
should be used during TIVA are discussed, as well as spe­
cific patient scenarios. Details on procedure-related issues 
are adequately and more extensively covered in other 
chapters. This chapter focuses on the essentials of TIVA 
instead of details in the management of patients with 
coexisting morbidities in complex environments. The 
reader is referred to further reading in other chapters in 
Intravenous Anesthesia 
and Sedation Outside the 
Operating Room
ANIL GUPTA and JOHAN RAEDER
7
7  •  Intravenous Anesthesia and Sedation Outside the Operating Room
51
this book and more specialized textbooks when dealing 
with patients with comorbidities.
Although anesthesia can probably be achieved equally 
well outside the operating room environment using inha­
lational anesthetics, this may not be appropriate for sev­
eral reasons. For instance, procedural sedation has been 
described using nitrous oxide in children. However, the 
use of inhalational or gaseous anesthetics requires a dedi­
cated anesthesia machine and scavenging systems, which 
not only add significantly to the hospital costs but may also 
be detrimental to the non–operating room environment. 
Additionally, to achieve adequate sedation using inhala­
tion agents, personnel within the room would certainly 
be exposed to the potential harmful effect of these agents 
unless an endotracheal tube or laryngeal mask airway 
(LMA) device is used. These require a significantly deeper 
level of sedation anesthesia, with its attendant problems. 
A major feature and benefit of intravenous sedation and 
analgesia technique is the elegant and comfortable option 
(for both patient and anesthetist) in the smooth transition 
from being fully awake to anxiolysis through light sedation, 
deep sedation, and, if needed, general anesthesia. Another 
major feature with total intravenous techniques is the con­
cept of separating the different components of sedation and 
anesthesia and analgesia in a tailored and independent 
manner. To handle such smooth transitions of the level of 
sedation and anesthesia while providing excellent quality 
for patients and with maximal safety, qualified anesthesia 
personnel are often needed. Compromised airway, apnea, 
or cardiovascular problems may occur unpredictably and 
must be dealt with immediately and adequately by compe­
tent personnel.
Sedation, Sedation and Analgesia, 
and Anesthesia
A clear difference needs to be made at the outset between 
the different levels of sedation (effect of drug dose) and the 
different quality of sedation (effect of drug choice) that 
should be achieved in the individual case and for a spe­
cific procedure. The level of sedation may be differentiated 
into light sedation, moderate sedation, and deep sedation 
(Table 7-1), and the quality of sedation may be differenti­
ated into anxiolysis, hypnosis (from sleepy to unconscious), 
and amnesia. To each of these components, analgesia may 
be added during painful procedures. Several scores for the 
assessment of the level of sedation have been described, 
but the ones commonly used include the Ramsay Sedation 
Scale (Table 7-2) and the Modified Observer’s Assessment 
of Alertness/Sedation Scale (Table 7-3). The choice of scale 
that should be used depends on local education, trends, and 
practices, but it is important to regularly and routinely reg­
ister the level of sedation. It is usually helpful to make a plan 
together with the operator before starting the procedure 
as to what levels and qualities of sedation are needed and 
expected for a particular patient and the specific procedure. 
The plan may subsequently need to be adjusted during the 
procedure, depending on the patient’s actual response, the 
course of the planned intervention, and the side effects of 
the drugs used. Many procedures require anxiolytic and/
or hypnotic effect alone because no associated pain occurs, 
whereas others require predominantly analgesia, with the 
procedure being painful but not necessarily perceived as 
Table 7-1  American Society of Anesthesiologists Definitions of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation and Analgesia
Evaluation Factors
Minimal Sedation (Anxiolysis)
Moderate Sedation/Analgesia 
(“Conscious Sedation”)
Deep Sedation/Analgesia
Responsiveness
Normal response to verbal stimulation
Purposeful* response to verbal or 
tactile stimulation
Purposeful response* following 
repeated or painful stimulation
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be required
Spontaneous ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Cardiovascular function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
*Reflex withdrawal from a painful stimulus is not considered a purposeful response.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists. ASA standards, guidelines and statements, October 2007. http://www.asahq.org/publications/p-106-asa-
standards-guidelines-and-statements.aspx.
Table 7-2  Ramsay Sedation Scale
Score
Response
1
Anxious, restless, or both
2
Cooperative, oriented, and tranquil
3
Responding to commands
4
Brisk response to light glabellar tap or loud auditory 
stimulus
5
Sluggish response to light glabellar tap or loud auditory 
stimulus
6
No response to stimulus
From Ramsay MA, Savege TM, Simpson BR, Goodwin R. Controlled sedation 
with alphaxalone-alphadolone. Br Med J. 1974;2(5920):656-659.
Table 7-3  Modified Observer’s Assessment of Alertness/
Sedation Scale
Responsiveness
Score
Agitated
6
Responds readily to name spoken in normal 
tone (alert)
5
Lethargic response to name spoken in normal 
tone
4
Responds only after name is called loudly and/or 
repeatedly
3
Responds only after mild prodding or shaking
2
Does not respond to mild prodding or shaking
1
From Cohen LB, DeLegge MH, Aisenberg J, et al. AGA Institute review of 
endoscopic sedation. Gastroenterology. 2007;133(2):675-701.
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
52
uncomfortable or frightening to the patient. However, most 
procedures require a combination of anxiolysis, hypnosis, 
and analgesia, and the spectrum of effects ranges from pre­
dominant anxiolysis or sleep to predominant analgesia. 
Individual patient-, operator-, and procedure-related needs 
may differ; therefore it is important to inform the patient 
before the procedure what should be expected. Thus a radio­
logical investigation such as magnetic resonance imag­
ing often requires only anxiolysis or minimal sedation but 
no analgesia while extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy 
requires predominantly analgesia with anxiolysis or mini­
mal sedation. Gastroscopy requires predominantly sedation 
and anxiolysis but not pain relief, because the procedure is 
uncomfortable but usually not painful, whereas colonos­
copy may require a combination of good analgesia, anx­
iolysis, and minimal sedation. Although it may be easier to 
provide only sedation or analgesia, the combination of both 
sedation (adequate and individually tailored) and analge­
sia (optimal, without respiratory depression) is challenging 
because it requires a balance between adequate (not deep) 
sedation and optimal (not excessive) analgesia. Sedation 
that is too deep may result in loss of free airway and pro­
tective reflexes, and the excessive use of opioid analgesics 
may lead to respiratory depression. Therefore incorrect use 
of either of these may sometimes have major adverse effects, 
especially when combined and given in excessive doses. The 
need to maintain a free airway and assisted ventilation is 
unpredictable and can sometimes lead to a disaster when 
performed by personnel without anesthetic training and in 
an unfriendly and remote environment. In addition to the 
problems of maintaining adequate and optimal sedation 
and analgesia, the remote, sometimes dark working environ­
ment is also conducive to injury. Competent help is not 
immediately available in these circumstances, and instru­
ments, drugs, and devices are not always readily accessible, 
which delays quick and adequate management and thereby 
compromises patient safety.
Finally, the correct balance between sedation and analge­
sia is not only a science but also an art, requiring good edu­
cation and judgment combined with many years of training 
and experience, to achieve the correct drug dosing for indi­
vidual patient needs. Sedation and analgesia are more than 
a cookbook recipe that can be applied to all patients in all 
circumstances. They require education, training, regular 
auditing of practice, and continuous quality improvement.
Drugs Used for Sedation 
and Anesthesia
This section is not expected to replace a thorough, sys­
tematic knowledge of indications, contraindications, and 
dosing of drugs, which can be obtained from a manual or 
textbook on pharmacology and anesthesia.
INHALATIONAL AGENTS
Although inhalation anesthesia is used frequently for 
induction and maintenance of general anesthesia, it is 
rarely used today for sedation outside the operating room, 
except possibly during procedural sedation using nitrous 
oxide in children and laboring women. Inhalational agents 
should be used only in places where an appropriate scav­
enging system is present. However, they may occasionally 
be used for a short period in a well-ventilated room without 
a scavenging system with an appropriate indication, such 
as a child not accepting intravenous induction or for treat­
ing uncontrolled bronchospasm. When using inhalation 
agents, end-tidal gas monitoring is mandatory if low-flow 
systems are used but may not be necessary for occasional 
use of inhalational agents in high-flow systems. Sevoflu­
rane is today recommended as the routine inhalation agent 
because of its low risk for airway irritation and minimal 
pungency. Nitrous oxide is less potent and possibly also 
associated with nausea and vomiting, similar to other inha­
lational agents. It has some advantages, including a rapid 
on-off effect, minimal effect on ventilation and circulation, 
and a reduction in the consumption of other drugs by 20% 
to 40% percent. It is often used for procedural sedation in 
children. Desflurane may be useful for maintenance of 
anesthesia because of its lower tissue solubility and conse­
quently more rapid recovery in prolonged cases and in the 
obese, in contrast to sevoflurane.1 Other inhalation agents 
are seldom used today.
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF INTRAVENOUS 
ANESTHETICS AND ANALGESICS
Intravenous Hypnotics
The barbiturates (thiopentone and methohexitone) are 
rarely used in modern ambulatory anesthesia, but they are 
a low-cost alternative to propofol.
Thiopentone should be used only for induction of anes­
thesia or if the procedure is of very short duration, because 
its elimination half-life is very long. Some anesthetists and 
psychiatrists prefer this drug or its short-acting counter­
part, methohexitone, for electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 
because the seizures seen (intermittent myotonic contrac­
tions) are more evident than with propofol. Others argue 
that the routine use of electroencephalography to monitor 
seizures is the key to a successful ECT rather than the mus­
cle contractions.
Methohexitone is fairly rapidly cleared and eliminated 
and also has been used during TIVA by intermittent injec­
tion, but after the introduction of propofol, it is not com­
monly used today, except during ECT. One disadvantage of 
methohexital is that many patients may have involuntary 
movements and hiccups during induction.
The benzodiazepines that have been commonly used 
for sedation and anxiolysis during ambulatory procedures 
include diazepam and midazolam.
Diazepam has a long elimination half-life and active 
metabolites, and it appears to be less hypnotic and possi­
bly more anxiolytic than midazolam. It is a good choice for 
premedication, when given orally, especially if the patient 
needs an anxiolytic for some time before the procedure. It 
is seldom used today for sedation by anesthesiologists but is 
popular among some surgeons.
Midazolam is a hypnotic, anxiolytic, and amnesic. It is 
a short-acting benzodiazepine with no active metabolites. 
When it is given in low doses, most patients are fully awake 
and amnesic for a period of 30 minutes to 2 hours. It is often 
used as a sedative and anxiolytic by surgeons during pro­
cedures not associated with pain or in combination with 
7  •  Intravenous Anesthesia and Sedation Outside the Operating Room
53
analgesics when pain is anticipated. When midazolam is 
used in low doses, patients usually can maintain a free air­
way with adequate ventilation during short procedures. It 
is sometimes used for coinduction as part of the intravenous 
induction of anesthesia, but a small dose of propofol will 
have a similar effect without the risk for a longer recovery 
time.
Propofol is the gold standard hypnotic anesthetic for 
ambulatory surgery. In low doses it has anxiolytic, amne­
sic, and antiemetic properties and is also the drug of choice 
for sedation. Propofol is rapidly metabolized and has a high 
clearance, which is associated with rapid recovery. How­
ever, emergence from anesthesia after propofol infusion 
may be delayed unless the dose is carefully reduced toward 
the end of anesthesia. Recovery from propofol sedation 
and anesthesia is seen to be pleasant, with many patients 
being slightly euphoric. The antiemetic effect is an advan­
tage, and the incidence of shivering is low. Propofol has the 
disadvantage that mild pain may occur when it is injected 
into thin veins. This can be reduced by using propofol with 
medium-chain triglyceride solute, using a 5-mg/mL solu­
tion instead of the 10 mg/mL, injecting 2 to 3 mL of lido­
caine (10 mg/mL) or opioid before induction of sedation or 
anesthesia with propofol, or by mixing lidocaine 10 mg/mL, 
1 mL into each 10 mL of propofol shortly before injection. It 
has also been shown that using a local anesthesia pad (e.g., 
lidocaine and prilocaine [EMLA]) may further reduce the 
incidence of pain from propofol injection.
Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective alpha-2 adreno­
receptor agonist with both sedative and analgesic effect 
and only minor respiratory depression. The sleep induced 
by dexmedetomidine is more like physiologic sleep (deep 
non-REM sleep) in that patients may be very clearheaded 
soon after emergence. It also has the advantage of some 
analgesic effect, and, unless it is used in high doses, patients 
can maintain a clear airway without significant respira­
tory depression. It has been used successfully for premedi­
cation in children and during management of patients in 
the intensive care unit. Several studies have been published 
recently in which dexmedetomidine has been used for seda­
tion during ambulatory surgery, but its role needs to be bet­
ter elucidated before it can be recommended for routine use. 
Although attractive as an alternative to propofol, it seems 
to have a slower onset and offset, which may not be ideal in 
the ambulatory setting.
Ketamine is an N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) recep­
tor blocker with dose-dependent analgesic, hypnotic, and 
some muscle relaxation effects in high doses, with retained 
spontaneous respiration. In contrast to other general anes­
thetics, ketamine stimulates the sympathetic nervous sys­
tem and thus blood pressure is maintained and heart rate 
increased during anesthesia. One major problem with ket­
amine is the high incidence of nightmares and hallucina­
tions during emergence, which may be partly counteracted 
by a concomitant benzodiazepine administration. Because 
of the side effects experienced by patients, its use in ambula­
tory surgery is limited in most places. Although ketamine 
is associated with slower emergence and some incidence of 
unpleasant nightmares, Friedberg2,3 reported a high suc­
cess rate for sedation during plastic surgery under local 
anesthesia. In these studies, propofol, when supplemented 
by ketamine during sedation, caused no hallucinations and 
virtually no postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) 
despite retaining spontaneous ventilation. Although some 
studies in the ambulatory setting support this conclusion,4 
Aouad et al5 reported a greater incidence of agitation, Goel 
et  al6 reported delayed recovery, and a review by Slavik 
et  al7 concluded this technique had no specific benefits. 
Thus ketamine, in a dose of 5 to 20 mcg/kg/min, may be 
a promising alternative to low-dose opioids as an adjunct 
to propofol sedation with safe, spontaneous ventilation in 
the patient with unstable cardiovascular disease, but with 
some side effects that limit its routine use.
Opioids
Fentanyl is a short-acting analgesic with an onset time of 2 
to 4 minutes and effect duration of less than 45 minutes. It is 
usually administered in incremental doses of 1 to 2 mcg/kg. 
When used in higher doses, it may result in prolonged 
emergence and thus more PONV. It is useful for ambula­
tory procedures of short to intermediate duration if the total 
dose is kept low. With a single dose of fentanyl 0.05 to 0.1 
mg alone (without any sedatives) in the adult patient, spon­
taneous ventilation is usually maintained, but respiratory 
frequency could be reduced. Fentanyl may be used for post­
procedural pain in the ambulatory surgical patient.
Alfentanil is an alternative to fentanyl for short cases and 
for managing intense, short-duration nociceptive stimuli. 
Alfentanil has a peak effect after 2 to 3 minutes, which 
declines after 10 to 15 minutes. Incremental doses of 0.25 
to 0.5 mg in adults (10 to 20 mcg/kg in children) are effec­
tive for short procedures. Alfentanil has a rapid onset of 
action; therefore it may cause chest rigidity in higher doses, 
specifically when hypnotics are not given first.
Remifentanil is in many ways the ideal opioid for ambu­
latory surgery, with a rapid peak effect within 1 to 2 min­
utes, and 50% recovery occurs within 3 to 4 minutes after 
termination of infusion. Similar to the case with alfentanil, 
the anesthetist should be aware of the risk for chest wall 
rigidity with any dose exceeding 1 mcg/kg given rapidly, 
with the elderly being more prone to this complication. In 
addition, concern exists about postoperative hyperalgesia 
when using remifentanil during surgery, specifically when 
used in higher doses. It is therefore important to ensure 
adequate analgesia from nonopioids and, if needed, a small 
dose of longer acting opioids (e.g., fentanyl 1 mcg/kg) when 
a remifentanil infusion is terminated.
Sufentanil is fairly similar to fentanyl during ambulatory 
care, but has a slightly slower onset of action and no specific 
advantages over other short-acting opioids for use in this 
setting.
Oxycodone is the opioid with the highest and most pre­
dictable bioavailability (70% to 80%) after oral dosing. 
Oxycodone also may be used intravenously and is probably 
slightly more potent (25% to 50%) than morphine. Some 
studies suggest that oxycodone has a lower sedative effect 
than morphine and is possibly better for management of vis­
ceral pain because of its greater effect on kappa receptors.8
Nonopioid analgesics may be valuable when given 
before or at the start of anesthesia or sedation to reduce the 
need for stronger analgesics perioperatively, specifically in 
the ambulatory setting. This may in turn reduce the inci­
dence of the PONV that is common after administration 
of opioids. The cornerstones of nonopioid pain therapy 
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
54
include paracetamol, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) or coxibs, and glucocorticoid, as well as local 
anesthetics injected into the wounds. For further discus-
sion, the reader is referred to specialized textbooks for the 
management of postoperative pain.
Neuromuscular Blockers and Reversal Agents
The use of neuromuscular blockers has declined in modern 
anesthesia and ambulatory care. These should be used only 
with a specific indication, which could be during intubation 
or when the patient is not allowed to move, even minimally, 
during the procedure. Even in these situations, sufficient 
anesthesia depth usually ensures adequate relaxation.
Suxamethonium is a cheap, fast-acting and short-acting 
drug that does not need to be reversed after the end of the 
procedure. However, in addition to the common, known 
side effects, its use in ambulatory patients may result in 
troublesome muscular pains, sometimes lasting for up to 
1 to 2 days. In many countries, among the drugs used in 
anesthetic practice, it is believed to be the most common 
drug associated with anaphylactic reactions.9 Rarely (∼1 
in 4000 patients), a deficiency of the enzyme pseudocholin-
esterase occurs, which would prolong its metabolism and 
thus duration of action substantially.
Mivacurium is a fairly short-acting nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxant, not needing routine reversal because of 
breakdown by the pseudocholinesterase enzyme in the 
blood. Therefore enzyme deficiency, as with suxametho-
nium, may occur and prolong the effect of mivacurium. It 
is useful in ambulatory procedures of short to intermediate 
duration, but its slow onset of action has restricted its use in 
clinical practice.
Vecuronium and cisatracurium are well-established, safe 
alternatives for producing a nondepolarizing muscle block 
but also have a fairly slow onset and intermediate duration 
of action that requires monitoring and the frequent use of 
reversal at the end of the procedure.
Rocuronium has a much faster onset of action than other 
nondepolarizing agents, especially when used in high doses, 
which is almost comparable with suxamethonium. However, 
in these high doses, prolonged recovery from muscle relax-
ation will occur, unless the very rapid-acting, effective but 
expensive drug sugammadex is used (see later discussion).
Reversal of Neuromuscular Blockade.  Although seri-
ous clinical problems with residual neuromuscular block in 
recovery are rare today, the increased incidence of pulmo-
nary complications in the elderly has been demonstrated 
with inadequate reversal of neuromuscular block.10 Today, 
it is believed that train-of-four ratios of less than 0.9 may 
also interfere with normal swallowing and thereby increase 
the risk for aspiration.11
For the combination of neostigmine and glycopyrrolate, 
the dose of neostigmine should be 50 to 70 mcg/kg to ade-
quately reverse the effect of the muscle relaxant. However, 
when used in this dose, the risk for nausea and vomiting is 
increased12 and sometimes other side effects may be seen, 
such as bronchial constriction or defecation. In addition, it 
can take up to 20 minutes for full reversal of the block in 
some patients.13
Sugammadex is a rapid-acting reversal agent for 
rocuronium and vecuronium. Complete reversal from 
muscle relaxation is achieved within 1 to 2 min (2 to 
4 mg/kg) at any level of muscle relaxation but a much 
greater dose (16 mg/kg) is required when used imme-
diately after muscle relaxation (as after intubation).14 
Therefore it may be useful during microsurgery when 
full muscle relaxation must be maintained until the end 
of the procedure or when the surgeon abruptly completes 
the procedure during full muscle relaxation. In this way, 
the operating room is effectively used without delay in 
patient turnover. Other indications for the use of sugam-
madex include poor pulmonary function and morbid 
obesity, in which a complete and rapid reversal of muscle 
relaxation may reduce the risk for postoperative compli-
cations. Sugammadex is still not available for use in the 
United States because of the risk for allergic reactions, 
and it is expensive in Europe.
Antiemetics
Even during sedation, the incidence of PONV may be fairly 
high, especially when opioids are used. The use of antiemet-
ics in patients at risk, as suggested by Apfel et al,15 may be 
advisable. No specific protocols exist for use of antiemetics 
during sedation or anesthesia outside the operating room. 
The well-evaluated protocols for ambulatory surgery prob-
ably also apply to these procedures. For details about the 
drugs that may be useful in this situation, the reader is 
referred to specialized textbooks and reviews on this subject.
Target-Controlled Infusion
Target-controlled infusion (TCI) devices allow intrave-
nous infusion of anesthetic agents to ensure that sufficient 
drug is delivered by a preprogrammed computer to main-
tain adequate and stable levels of drug in plasma and at 
the effect site. The administration rate is determined by 
drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, which 
have been extensively tested in computer-assisted mod-
els and subsequently in humans. The infusion pumps 
are programmed in consideration of one or more patient 
variables—for example, weight, age, and sex (Figure 7-1). 
The pumps may use different pharmacokinetic models, but 
the end points remain the same. The TCI system ensures 
Figure 7-1  Target-controlled infusion (TCI) used during an endoscopic 
procedure.
7  •  Intravenous Anesthesia and Sedation Outside the Operating Room
55
rapid onset, stable effect, rapid offset or reduction in effect, 
and less work in mathematical calculations of doses of 
drugs to be administered.
The Target-Controlled Infusion Concept.  With a man­
ual scheme for administering propofol for rapid induction 
and subsequent maintenance of anesthesia in adults, the fol­
lowing general recipe can be used. Start with bolus of 2 mg/
kg with an infusion of 10 mg/kg/hr for 10 minutes, then 
step-down infusion to 8 mg/kg/hr for another 10 minutes, 
then another step-down to 6 mg/kg/hr, which is maintained 
for the rest of the procedure. Subsequently, anesthesia depth 
can be regulated by stepping up or down by increments or 
decrements of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/hr. This recipe may be put 
into a computerized pump and is based on the weight of the 
patient and simple mathematical calculations to administer a 
bolus dose and defined infusion rates. A computerized pump 
can be programmed to administer this automatically, and 
the resulting concentration, termed target concentration (or 
plasma concentration), and the concentration in the brain 
(effect site concentration) will correspond to approximately 
2.5 to 3 mcg/mL. In other words, during maintenance of 
TIVA (after 15 to 20 minutes), a propofol infusion of 6 mg/
kg/hr will correspond to a target (plasma or effect concentra­
tion) of about 2.5 mcg/mL.
With TCI the computer is programmed with the age and 
weight of the patient, and the computer then administers 
a bolus dose (based on body weight) and the infusion rate 
adjusts automatically depending on the plasma clearance 
and set target (plasma) concentration. Thus the only factor 
that is adjusted by the anesthesiologist is the target concen­
tration of propofol, which, for maintenance of anesthesia, 
would correspond to a target concentration of approxi­
mately 2.5 mcg/mL. If a greater anesthetic depth is desired, 
the target concentration can be increased in small incre­
ments (e.g., to 3 mcg/mL), and the computer will automati­
cally deliver a small bolus of drug to rapidly reach the set 
higher target concentration and subsequently adjust the 
infusion rate to maintain this greater anesthetic depth. If a 
shallower depth of anesthesia is desired and the target con­
centration reduced (e.g., to 2 mcg/mL), the computer auto­
matically stops the infusion briefly and then starts it again 
at a lower target concentration.
The system is, however, not perfect, and one major lim­
itation with using target concentration in plasma is that 
it does not take into account the delay in drug equilibra­
tion between plasma and brain (effect site) concentration. 
Because the anesthetic drug effect is not in the plasma but 
in the central nervous system, it would be better to have 
an infusion pump that could deliver a preset concentra­
tion of propofol into effect sites (in the brain) rather than 
plasma. Therefore the plasma TCI system can be repro­
grammed into an effect site system. With these models, 
an overshoot in plasma concentration occurs initially 
(to account for the quicker equilibration to effect site in 
the brain) and with every increase in target concentra­
tion, to create a stronger drug gradient from plasma to 
brain, and thereby a more rapid effect can be achieved. 
One problem with effect site modeling is that the delay 
in effect may be variable among individuals and also 
depend on the rate of bolus dosing, state of the circula­
tion, and other factors. However, the effect site modeling 
gets closer to the clinical needs and has been proved to 
be very useful in clinical work. It should also be noted 
that some models compensate for weight-to-height ratio 
or age, whereas others only compensate for total weight. 
The common models do not compensate for differences in 
propofol sensitivity, which is lower in children and possi­
bly in women. Multiple models are in use for propofol, the 
most common being the Schnider and the Marsh models; 
the latter is also available with some modifications. It is 
important for the anesthetist to become familiar with the 
clinical response to the targets of the model used in daily 
practice, because the Marsh model administers propo­
fol in greater doses for a given target than the Schnider 
model.
In the case of remifentanil, only one TCI model is in 
common clinical use, the Minto model for both plasma 
and effect site concentration.16,17 This model takes into 
consideration the patient’s weight, height, and age for the 
plasma concentration modeling. When used in the effect 
site modus, it will deliver only a predetermined drug con­
centration in the brain and not adjust for patient pharma­
codynamics or drug sensitivity, which is higher in elderly 
patients. For maintenance of analgesia during surgery, a 
remifentanil infusion of 0.1 mcg/kg/min will correspond 
to a target (plasma or effect) concentration of about 2.5 
ng/mL. When remifentanil is used as an infusion in doses 
of less than 0.1 mcg/kg/min (≈ effect concentration of 2.5 
ng/mL), spontaneous respiration often can be retained, 
as during endoscopic procedures.18 However, during sur­
gery, usually a dose of 0.2 to 0.5 mcg/kg/min (≈ effect 
concentration of 5 to 12 ng/mL) is needed. To tolerate 
a laryngeal mask insertion, a rule of thumb is to ensure 
a dose of 2 mcg/kg (≈ effect concentration of 6 to 8 ng/
mL) is administered over 2 to 3 minutes, whereas for intu­
bation without muscle relaxant, a dose of 3 to 4 mcg/
kg (≈ effect concentration of 10 to 12 ng/mL) is needed. 
When using these doses, however, the ventilation needs 
to be controlled, because hypopnea and apnea are com­
mon. A general recommendation on doses of propofol and 
remifentanil during TIVA and TCI are presented in Table 
7-4. The recommended doses are average based on body 
weight. These need to be adjusted for age and in individual 
patients depending on comorbidities. For more detailed 
discussion on pharmacokinetic modeling, the reader is 
referred to special literature.
Patient-Controlled Sedation
Some recent studies have looked at the administration of 
propofol using patient-controlled techniques, similar to the 
concept of patient-controlled analgesia. The natural advan­
tage and in-built safety in the system is that oversedation 
is avoided and thereby the risk for respiratory obstruction 
prevented. In contrast to total intravenous anesthesia 
and analgesia using propofol, alfentanil, or both or nurse-
administered sedation with midazolam, this technique was 
found to be associated with quicker recovery and greater 
patient satisfaction after endoscopic procedures19 but not 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.20 A 
method to close the loop by monitoring feedback from 
bispectral index–controlled sedation has been tested. More 
studies are needed on this important subject before defini­
tive conclusions can be made.
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
56
Monitoring During Total 
Intravenous Anesthesia and 
Analgesia
Poor monitoring should not compromise an otherwise 
perfect sedation or analgesia. In other words, not only is 
it adequate to provide satisfactory sedation and analgesia 
during the procedure outside the operating room but it is 
equally important to document that it has been performed 
safely. When things go wrong, and they sometimes do so, 
it is important to be able to go back to well-documented 
charts and be able to understand what went wrong, why it 
went wrong, when it went wrong, and what we can learn 
from the experience so that future patients receive the best 
clinical care. If not documented, it is considered “not done” 
by a lawyer if medicolegal problems arise from a case that 
does not go well.
When giving anesthesia to patients outside the operat­
ing room, the same monitoring standards are to be rec­
ommended as during anesthesia in the operating room. 
Just because a procedure is performed outside the oper­
ating room does not imply that safety standards should 
be reduced or compromised. Even when performing seda­
tion or analgesia, monitoring standards should remain 
high and include, as the minimum, heart frequency, 
oxygen saturation, and blood pressure. In addition, it is 
important to measure certain respiratory variables, such 
as end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) concentration and 
respiratory frequency. Although the former may not be 
completely accurate, depending on the breathing system 
being used, trends are important to register and a sud­
den drop in ETCO2 or progressive increase in ETCO2 and 
reduction in respiratory rate should alert the attending 
staff that all is not well with the patient. The former can 
result from respiratory obstruction, and the latter usu­
ally results from hypopnea. Constant observation of the 
patient and the breathing pattern may alert the personnel 
of potential airway obstruction. A sudden drop in ETCO2 
with signs of paradoxical respiration is a sign of upper 
airway obstruction and often indicates a level of sedation 
that is too deep. Tidal volumes are difficult to measure 
under these circumstances, and excessive opiate use may 
go unnoticed until the ETCO2 starts to increase, which 
could take up to 5 to 10 minutes in the healthy patient. 
Another important sign of opioid overdosing could be a 
progressive reduction in respiratory frequency below 8 to 
10 breaths/min.
In patients undergoing the procedure under sedation, the 
level of sedation needs to be measured and documented. The 
most commonly used is the Ramsay scale (see Table 7-2), 
which is a 6-graded scale, but an alternative scale is also 
available—the Modified Observer’s Assessment of Alertness/
Sedation Scale (see Table 7-3). The main aim of anxiolysis or 
conscious sedation is to maintain continuous contact with 
the patient; therefore sedation scores should be maintained 
at 2 to 3 on the Ramsay scale. Any attempt at increasing to 
moderate or deep sedation risks compromising the airway, 
sometimes with disastrous consequences. Thus it is impor­
tant that personnel caring for these patients should be well 
versed in using the Ramsay scale or the Modified Observer’s 
Assessment of Alertness/Sedation Scale.
When TIVA is used for anesthesia or analgesia during 
certain surgical procedures (Figure 7-2), monitoring should 
follow the convention used in operating rooms, and no 
compromise on this principle should be accepted. In addi­
tion to routine monitoring, this may include monitoring 
of anesthesia depth, but the evidence for benefit in healthy 
patients who have not received muscle relaxation therapy 
remains controversial.
Side Effects and Complications
It is important to state at the outset that in untrained hands, 
sedation, analgesia, and TIVA are risky procedures and that 
deaths and serious complications occur, although these 
are not common. Therefore training and education should 
form a part of continuing medical education for personnel, 
and regular simulator training may help in avoiding very 
rare but potentially life-threatening complications.
Table 7-4  Propofol and/or Remifentanil Sedation Doses
Drug
TIVA (Propofol: 
mg/kg/hr; 
Remifentanil: 
mcg/kg/min)
TCI* (Propofol: 
mcg/mL; 
Remifentanil: 
ng/mL)
Spontaneous respiration
  Propofol (alone)
  Remifentanil (alone)
2-4
0.1-0.15
1-2
2.5-3.5
Laryngeal mask
  Propofol (alone)
  Remifentanil (assisted/con­
trolled ventilation) (alone)
4-5
0.2-0.5
1.8-2.5
4-12
Spontaneous respiration (combination)
  Propofol
  + remifentanil
1-3
+0.05-0.1
0.5-1.5
+1-2.5
Controlled ventilation (combination)
  Propofol
  + remifentanil
4-5
+0.2-0.5
1.8-2.5
+4-12
TCI, Target-controlled infusion; TIVA, total intravenous anesthesia.
*The TCI propofol doses are for the modified (Struys) Marsh effect site model. 
For the Schnider model the targets should be approximately 25% higher, 
initially, then down to the levels in Table 7-4 after 10-15 minutes.
Figure 7-2  Total intravenous anesthesia used during a minor surgical 
procedure.
7  •  Intravenous Anesthesia and Sedation Outside the Operating Room
57
One common complication seen during sedation and 
analgesia is airway obstruction, which usually results 
from too deep a level of sedation and lack of patient contact 
(Ramsay score ≥3) in relation to perceived patient stress. 
It sometimes takes time to detect oversedation because of 
the dark working environment in endoscopy rooms. Addi­
tionally, oxygen is often being supplemented by a catheter 
or mask during these procedures, and a delay in detecting 
hypoventilation or absence of ventilation may occur and 
not be detected by the Spo2, thereby missing or misdiagnos­
ing hypercarbia with resulting loss of consciousness. As 
mentioned earlier, the occurrence of paradoxical breath­
ing should alert the personnel that the patient may not be 
maintaining a free airway. Depending on several patient 
factors, including age and comorbidities, some patients 
do not require much sedation before airway obstruction 
occurs. Thus, depending on several comorbid factors, air­
way obstruction can occur at surprisingly low doses of sed­
ative drugs.
Respiratory depression is another common complication 
that might result from both excessive sedation and exces­
sive use of opioid analgesics. Even apnea is known to occur 
in some patients given potent analgesics. This may mani­
fest by a decrease in respiratory frequency or a progressive 
increase in ETCO2. When respiratory depression occurs in 
the absence of deep sedation, the patient can be asked to 
breathe deeply and the problem is immediately corrected. 
However, when respiratory depression is accompanied by 
deep sedation or due to oversedation, it may require assisted 
ventilation, even in the absence of respiratory obstruction. 
It is important to be aware that deep sedation may occur 
without sedatives as a result of the progressive accumula­
tion of carbon dioxide.
Hypotension is a well-known complication of sedation 
and analgesia, occurring during deep sedation or TIVA, 
more often in the presence of concomitant hypovolemia. 
Reducing the level of sedation usually reverses the problem, 
but management should otherwise follow conventional 
methods, such as initiating a Trendelenburg position, giv­
ing a bolus of intravenous crystalloids, and even adminis­
tration of 5 to 10 mg intravenously of ephedrine or other 
vasopressors.
Hypertension may occur and may be a sign of either 
stress in a poorly sedated patient or pain. In all cases, the 
underlying causes must be determined and treated, but if 
not found, symptomatic treatment with a beta-blocker may 
be considered.
Bradycardia or tachycardia may sometimes occur. The 
former may be due to a combination of anesthetic and anal­
gesic drugs, specifically the combination of propofol and 
fentanyl, both of which are known to independently cause 
bradycardia. Even vagal stimulation, as during insertion of 
the gastroscope into the pharynx and esophagus, may lead 
to bradycardia and may require prompt treatment with 
intravenous atropine 0.5 to 1 mg. During endoscopies, 
bradycardia may also occur due to vagal stimulation from 
dilated large intestines when air is injected to provide better 
visibility by the endoscopist.
With the increased use of remifentanil during TIVA over 
the last few years, muscle rigidity and postoperative hyper­
algesia have been highlighted in several studies.22 Although 
the latter is usually not an issue with most procedures 
performed outside the operating room because pain is not 
common after these procedures, muscle rigidity can be dis­
turbing. Difficulty in ventilating an apneic patient should 
alert the physician to possible chest-wall rigidity. The dose 
of the analgesic used in a patient not receiving hypnotics 
simultaneously is often the key factor in muscle rigidity. As 
a rule of thumb, more than 1 to 2 mcg/kg of remifentanil 
is needed as a rapid bolus for the potential provocation of 
rigidity.
Rare and uncommon complications of endoscopy proce­
dures could be bleeding and persistent abdominal pain after 
the procedure, which are always the result of surgical com­
plications. Sore throat has been described frequently and 
may be the result of either gastroscopy or the use of an LMA 
or intubation. Spraying the pharynx with a local anesthetic 
may prevent the unpleasant sensation of a gastroscope 
going down the throat and may reduce postprocedural 
sore throat. Amnesia is not uncommon after benzodiaz­
epine sedation and occasionally also with propofol seda­
tion (although short-lasting); it is sometimes experienced as 
positive by patients, because memory of the unpleasant pro­
cedure is almost completely abolished. However, in some 
cases, amnesia is not beneficial, such as when the patient 
wants to communicate with the surgeon, watch the endo­
scopic procedure, or learn from the surgeon’s instructions 
during the procedure.
Recovery and Discharge
Postprocedural recovery should follow well-established 
routines as during ambulatory surgery. Depending on 
the procedure performed and associated postoperative 
pain, patients need to be treated on an individual basis 
and according to common convention and established 
guidelines. In general, pain is usually not a common prob­
lem because many procedures are either painless or the 
patients have received local anesthetics and sometimes 
strong analgesics during the procedure. On the other 
hand, nausea and vomiting may occur, despite the use of 
TIVA. Therefore prophylactic antiemetics should be given 
to patients at risk.
Most patients recover quickly, specifically those who 
have had sedation or analgesia with propofol and with 
or without opiod analgesics. Those receiving midazolam 
may remain sedated and have amnesia for longer periods, 
depending on the total dose of midazolam administered. 
The discharge criteria for patients having sedation or anal­
gesia are the same as after ambulatory surgical procedures. 
The score commonly used to assess recovery is the modified 
Aldrete score (Table 7-5) and to assess home discharge is 
the well-tested Post-Anesthetic Discharge Scoring System 
suggested by Chung et  al21 (Table 7-6). Home discharge 
requires that an adult person accompany the patient home 
in all cases, except when very low doses of propofol have 
been used to achieve sedation with or without the short-
acting analgesics alfentanil or remifentanil. Even when fen­
tanyl is used as an analgesic, recovery is usually rapid, but 
a small but significant risk for respiratory depression may 
remain at a later stage, depending on the doses used. It is 
rare that patients sedated or anesthetized outside the oper­
ating room need overnight admission to the hospital unless 
SECTION 2  •  General Management Principles
58
a complication has occurred during the procedure. An 
exception could be the aged patient with multiple comor­
bidities or a preterm baby, even after a minor procedure.
Total Intravenous Anesthesia for 
Specific Patients
In general, individual assessment of sedation is warranted 
for all patients during all procedures, and no cookbook 
recipe exists that can generalize doses and regimens, 
other than in broad terms, which have been outlined 
earlier. However, some specific patient factors should be 
considered because drug doses may need to be adjusted 
depending on several factors. Some of these situations are 
described in the following section, but it should be empha­
sized that the recommended doses should be taken with 
caution and individualized to each patient, depending on 
patient response.
OBESITY
In the obese, both remifentanil and propofol should be dosed 
by corrected ideal weight—that is, ideal weight plus 20% 
of the difference between ideal weight and actual weight. 
The obese are specifically prone to airway obstruction dur­
ing sedation, and many of them may have sleep apnea syn­
drome. For these reasons, drugs should be titrated extra 
carefully in the obese, and patients should be monitored 
carefully during sedation. Recovery staff should be aware 
that the obese should be in recovery for a longer period and 
require careful monitoring. For further details, the reader 
is referred to specialized books on the care of the obese 
patients.
CHILDREN
Local anesthetic skin cream should be used in children 
before intravenous cannulation to make the venous punc­
ture pain free. Propofol mixed with lidocaine may be used to 
reduce pain on injection of propofol, and sometimes an opi­
oid may be needed. Younger children may not lie still dur­
ing surgery under sedation; therefore a general anesthetic 
may be needed instead of sedation, and then an LMA may 
be more appropriate.
PREGNANCY
As with all types of surgery, the indication for doing the 
procedure under sedation should be carefully considered in 
the pregnant patient, specifically during the first trimester. 
With this said, most anesthetic drugs currently used are 
considered to be safe during pregnancy. Some exceptions 
may include NSAIDs, glucocorticoids, and nitrous oxide 
because their potential influence on DNA or cell growth in 
the fetus.
ALCOHOLICS AND DRUG ADDICTS
Patients who are unstable or under the influence of alcohol 
or narcotic medication should not be operated on except as 
emergencies. However, some of them may be stable and in 
a state of baseline sedative or opioid medication and oth­
ers may be in a drug-free state, with or without accompa­
nying restlessness. For these reasons the dose of the drugs 
used may need to be carefully titrated in these patients. If 
Table 7-5  Modified Aldrete Scoring System
Activity
Score
Able to move four extremities voluntarily on command
Able to move two extremities voluntarily on command
Able to move no extremities voluntarily on command
2
1
0
RESPIRATION
Able to breathe deeply and cough freely
Dyspnea or limited breathing
Apneic
2
1
0
CIRCULATION
BP ± 20% of preanesthetic level
BP ± 20%-49% of preanesthetic level
BP ± 50% of preanesthetic level
2
1
0
PULSE RATE
Pulse ± 20 beats of presedation rate
Pulse ± 50 to 21 beats of presedation rate
Pulse > ± 51 beats of presedation rate
2
1
0
CONSCIOUSNESS
Fully awake
Arousable on calling
Not responding
2
1
0
OXYGEN SATURATION
Maintains baseline saturation on room air
Needs O2 to maintain >90% saturation
O2 saturation <90% with O2 supplement
2
1
0
Table 7-6  Post-Anesthetic Discharge Scoring System
Vital signs: Vital signs must be stable and consistent with age and 
preoperative baseline
  BP and pulse within 20% of preoperative baseline
  BP and pulse 20%-40% of preoperative baseline
  BP and pulse >40% of preoperative baseline
2
1
0
Activity level: Patient must be able to ambulate at preoperative level
  Steady gait, no dizziness, or meets preoperative level
  Requires assistance
  Unable to ambulate
2
1
0
Nausea and vomiting: The patient should have minimal nausea and 
vomiting before discharge
  Minimal: Successfully treated with PO medication
  Moderate: Successfully treated with IM medication
  Severe: Continues after repeated treatment
2
1
0
Pain:
  The patient should have minimal or no pain before discharge
  The level of pain that the patient has should be 
acceptable to the patient
  Pain should be controllable by oral analgesics
  The location, type, and intensity of pain should be 
consistent with anticipated postoperative discomfort
Acceptability:
  Yes
  No
2
1
Surgical bleeding: Postoperative bleeding should be consistent with 
expected blood loss for the procedure
  Minimal: Does not require dressing change
  Moderate: Up to two dressing changes required
  Severe: More than three dressing changes required
2
1
0
7  •  Intravenous Anesthesia and Sedation Outside the Operating Room
59
possible, opioids should be avoided for sedation. However, 
patients with a stable dose of opioid replacement therapy 
(e.g., methadone and buprenorphine) should have their 
baseline medication given before the procedure. Addition­
ally, one should be generous in the use of depth of anesthe­
sia monitoring in these patients.
Conclusion
The demands for better sedation and analgesia by patients 
combined with concerns expressed by the medical profes­
sion as to the safety of procedures being performed by non­
anesthetic personnel has resulted in intense debate on the 
pros and cons of intravenous anesthetics administered by 
non–anesthesia-trained personnel for the safe management, 
earlier discharge, and greater satisfaction of patients after 
non–operating room procedures. Propofol has emerged as 
the agent of choice for sedation because of its better pharma­
cokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile that results in early 
recovery, quick discharge, and greater patient satisfaction. 
However, used incorrectly or in the wrong dosage, propo­
fol may be associated with greater patient risks. Therefore 
anesthesiologists worldwide prefer to actively participate in 
the management of these patients when using propofol for 
sedation, and several publications have questioned its use 
by non–anesthesia-trained personnel. This debate is likely 
to continue. Midazolam is a safe alternative for sedation but 
results in longer discharge time and lower patient satisfac­
tion. Additionally, the stronger amnesia from midazolam 
may be considered by many to be a negative attribute. 
When analgesics are needed during the procedure, alfen­
tanil has the advantage of a quicker onset of action than 
fentanyl but a greater risk for respiratory depression. Remi­
fentanil is a good alternative but should be given only by 
anesthesia-trained personnel. Dexmedetomidine and also 
the combination of ketamine and propofol are emerging as 
less respiratory-depressant alternatives to propofol or alfen­
tanil for sedation and analgesia, but more studies are war­
ranted, specifically on their safety profile and side effects. 
Finally, it is important to state that irrespective of who per­
forms the sedation or analgesia, continuous monitoring of 
physiological parameters and depth of sedation by properly 
trained personnel are essential prerequisites for a safe prac­
tice of sedation and analgesia outside the operating room.
Acknowledgment
Anil Gupta would like to thank the Department of Anaes­
thetics, Gisborne Hospital, Gisborne, New Zealand, for the 
time he was given during the nonclinical sessions, which 
gave him the opportunity to complete this chapter.
References
	 1.	 De Baerdemaeker LE, Jacobs S, Den Blauwen NM, et al. Postoperative 
results after desflurane or sevoflurane combined with remifentanil in 
morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg. 2006;16(6):728–733.
	 2.	 Friedberg BL. Propofol-ketamine technique. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 
1993;17(4):297–300.
	 3.	 Friedberg BL. Propofol ketamine anesthesia for cosmetic surgery in 
the office suite. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2003;41(2):39–50.
	 4.	 Messenger DW, Murray HE, Dungey PE, et  al. Subdissociative-
dose ketamine versus fentanyl for analgesia during propofol pro­
cedural sedation: a randomized clinical trial. Acad Emerg Med. 
2008;15(10):877–886.
	 5.	 Aouad MT, Moussa AR, Dagher CM, et al. Addition of ketamine to 
propofol for initiation of procedural anesthesia in children reduces 
propofol consumption and preserves hemodynamic stability. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2008;52(4):561–565.
	 6.	 Goel S, Bhardwaj N, Jain K. Efficacy of ketamine and midazolam as 
co-induction agents with propofol for laryngeal mask insertion in chil­
dren. Paediatr Anaesth. 2008;18(7):628–634.
	 7.	 Slavik VC, Zed PJ. Combination ketamine and propofol for pro­
cedural sedation and analgesia. Pharmacotherapy. 2007;27(11):
1588–1598.
	 8.	 Lenz H, Sandvik L, Qvigstad E, et  al. A comparison of intravenous 
oxycodone and intravenous morphine in patient-controlled post­
operative analgesia after laparoscopic hysterectomy. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109(4):1279–1283.
	 9.	 Mertes PM, Laxenaire MC. Anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reac­
tions occurring during anaesthesia in France. Seventh epidemio­
logic survey (January 2001-December 2002). Ann Fr Anesth Reanim. 
2004;23(12):1133–1143.
	10.	 Berg H, Roed J, Viby-Mogensen J, et al. Residual neuromuscular block 
is a risk factor for postoperative pulmonary complications: a pro­
spective, randomised, and blinded study of postoperative pulmonary 
complications after atracurium, vecuronium and pancuronium. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 1997;41(9):1095–1103.
	11.	 Sundman E, Witt H, Olsson R, et al. The incidence and mechanisms of 
pharyngeal and upper esophageal dysfunction in partially paralyzed 
humans: pharyngeal videoradiography and simultaneous manom­
etry after atracurium. Anesthesiology. 2000;92(40):977–984.
	12.	 Hagemann E, Halvorsen A, Holgersen O, et al. Intramuscular ephed­
rine reduces emesis during the first three hours after abdominal hys­
terectomy. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2000;44(1):107–111.
	13.	 Kirkegaard H, Heier T, Caldwell JE. Efficacy of tactile-guided reversal 
from cisatracurium-induced neuromuscular block. Anesthesiology. 
2002;96(1):45–50.
	14.	 Dahl V, Pendeville PE, Hollmann MW, et  al. Safety and efficacy of 
sugammadex for the reversal of rocuronium-induced neuromuscular 
blockade in cardiac patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Eur J 
Anaesthesiol. 2009;26(10):874–884.
	15.	 Apfel CC, Läärä E, Koivuranta M, et  al. A simplified risk score for 
predicting postoperative nausea and vomiting: conclusions from 
cross-validations between two centers. Anesthesiology. 1999;91(3):
693–700.
	16.	 Minto CF, Schnider TW, Egan TD, et al. Influence of age and gender 
on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of remifentanil. I. 
Model development. Anesthesiology. 1997;86(1):10–23.
	17.	 Minto CF, Schnider TW, Shafer SL. Pharmacokinetics and pharma­
codynamics of remifentanil. II. Model application. Anesthesiology. 
1997;86(1):24–33.
	18.	 Servin FS, Raeder JC, Merle JC, et al. Remifentanil sedation compared 
with propofol during regional anaesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2002;46:309–315.
	19.	 Kulling D, Bauerfeind P, Fried M, Biro P. Patient-controlled analgesia 
and sedation in gastrointestinal endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N 
Am. 2004;14:353–368.
	20.	 Gillham MJ, Hutchinson RC, Carter R, Kenny GN. Patient-maintained 
sedation for ERCP with a target-controlled infusion of propofol: a pilot 
study. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54(1):14–17.
	21.	 Chung F, Ghan V. A post-anesthetic discharge scoring system for 
home readiness afterambulatory surgery. J Clin Anesth. 1995;7:
500-506.
	22.	 Lenz H, Raeder J, Hoymork SC. Administration of fentanyl before 
remifentanil-based anaesthesia has no influence on post-operative 
pain or analgesic consumption. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2008;52(1):
149–154.
62
The provision of hospital-based, non–operating room anes­
thesia (NORA) has become a burgeoning part of almost 
every anesthesiology practice in the United States. Cost 
savings,1 facilitated scheduling (as opposed to in the main 
operating rooms), and increased patient satisfaction are 
just a few of the reasons this branch of anesthesiology is 
expected to continue its exponential growth in the future. 
Medical device technology has advanced in tandem with 
NORA, allowing many surgical procedures once reserved 
for the operating room to be performed in a less invasive 
manner in an alternative site (e.g., intracranial coiling and 
stenting has obviated the need for many craniotomies).2 
In other procedures still performed in the operating room, 
anesthesia is administered at an alternative anesthetizing 
site before the main surgical procedure (e.g., a patient with 
placenta percreta may have uterine artery balloon occlu­
sion catheters placed under anesthesia in the interventional 
radiology suite before a caesarean section in the operating 
room).3 However, the provision of care in alternative sites 
has yet to garner the same level of academic scrutiny as 
the mainstream anesthesia subspecialties. Initial guidelines 
published almost 20 years ago4 seem quaint considering 
the current diversity of alternative-site procedures requir­
ing anesthesia and analgesia.5
Similar to the pediatric anesthesiologist who scoffs at the 
notion that an infant is merely a scaled-down adult, those 
who perform NORA testify that what they do is not simply 
a duplication of their operating room routines. Patients 
who require NORA are often elderly and quite ill6 and may 
undergo procedures that are unfamiliar to the anesthesi­
ologist. The NORA environment itself may at times appear 
dark, crowded, and cold. Anesthesiologists may have to 
rely on machines and monitors they are unaccustomed to 
using. Ancillary staff may be unfamiliar with the needs of 
the anesthesiologist, and assistance, when necessary, may 
not be available in a timely manner.
Patient Selection
The benefits of anesthesia for alternative-site procedures 
are recognized by both clinicians and patients, resulting 
in a vigorous demand for these services. Patients expect 
amnesia and analgesia for even the most pedestrian pro­
cedures. Clinicians appreciate the patient relaxation and 
immobility afforded by a deep or general anesthetic and 
the freedom from having to personally control the patient’s 
sedation regimen. However, in the vast majority of cases, 
adequate patient comfort and cooperation can be ensured 
by a nurse familiar with sedation protocols who adminis­
ters drugs under the direction of the physician performing 
the procedure. Although anesthesiologists may dictate and 
oversee the sedation policy in their institution, their direct 
involvement in these cases is often unwarranted. Which 
cases, then, typically require the services of an anesthesi­
ologist during an alternative-site procedure?
PATIENTS WHO ARE UNABLE TO LIE STILL
This category encompasses a wide variety of patients, from 
those who are uncooperative because of mental or develop­
mental disabilities, acute intoxication, or substance abuse, 
to those with movement disorders such as Parkinson’s dis­
ease and Huntington’s chorea. Both diagnostic imaging and 
interventional procedures often require the patient to remain 
motionless for prolonged periods. Other procedures require 
a cooperative patient to breath-hold at full inspiration or 
full expiration to target a lesion. As discussed earlier, many 
of these patients can be given a trial of nurse-­administered 
sedation. If this fails, or if the situation is known to be chal­
lenging, an anesthesiology consult should be sought.
PATIENTS WHO CANNOT TOLERATE 
THE SUPINE POSITION
Patients in this classification have cardiopulmonary 
issues such as pulmonary edema or right heart failure or 
neuromuscular issues such as severe lower back pain and 
sciatica. In the latter cases, the amount of analgesia that 
the patient may require to complete the study might result 
in apnea.
PRACTITIONERS WHO ARE UNCOMFORTABLE 
PROVIDING THE NECESSARY LEVEL OF 
SEDATION
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has delin­
eated four levels of sedation that exist along a continuous 
scale—minimal sedation (anxiolysis), moderate sedation 
(previously referred to as conscious sedation), deep seda­
tion, and general anesthesia.7 Some have added a fifth level 
classified as dissociative sedation, produced by agents such 
as ketamine.8 The importance of the fact that these levels 
exist along a continuum and are not discrete destinations 
cannot be overstated. Even experienced clinicians may find 
a patient easily slipping into a deeper level of sedation than 
expected. If adequate and brisk resuscitation methods are 
not instituted, a direct correlation can be found between 
unintended deep sedation and the likelihood of adverse 
events.9 Given this facility to oversedate, The Joint Commis­
sion devised the sedation rescue philosophy, emphasizing 
that the clinician responsible for the sedation protocol must 
be able to rescue the patient from the next level of sedation 
beyond that intended.10 Therefore if deep sedation is the 
target, the practitioner must be prepared for the unexpected 
descent into general anesthesia.
Practice Procedure
ERIC A. HARRIS
8
8  •  Practice Procedure
63
PATIENTS WHO ARE UNABLE TO CONTROL 
THEIR RESPIRATORY RATE
A small subset of patients undergoing invasive procedures 
within the radiology suite, most notably computed tomog­
raphy (CT)-guided or ultrasound-guided ablations, will be 
required to perform voluntary breath-holds during certain 
phases of the procedure to allow precision targeting of a 
lesion. This is especially important for anatomic sites close 
to the diaphragm, including the kidneys, adrenal glands, 
liver, and basal lung segments.11 Patients who are unable 
to cooperate because of developmental delays, language 
barriers, or immaturity may require paralysis and con­
trolled ventilation under general anesthesia.
PATIENTS WITH SEVERE CLAUSTROPHOBIA
Although severe claustrophobia is typically more of a prob­
lem in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT, any 
procedure that requires the patient to be draped in a dark­
ened room may be intolerable for a claustrophobic patient. 
Nurse-administered sedation may be adequate, but the 
most severe cases may require general anesthesia for even 
the most routine diagnostic tests.
INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN
Pediatric patients typically account for the majority of 
patients requiring NORA. The presence of a parent in the 
room or techniques such as swaddling may be insufficient 
to keep the patient still and cooperative during the study or 
procedure.12 Small vessels may make intravenous access 
difficult in the pediatric patient, precluding the option of 
intravenous sedation. Oral sedative agents such as chlo­
ral hydrate and midazolam have unpredictable effects 
and may cause a paradoxical hyperexcitable state in some 
children.13-15 Finally, the lack of providers with Pediatric 
Advanced Life Support (PALS) certification may mandate 
(per institutional policy) the immediate availability of an 
anesthesiologist. However, in most institutions, the sheer 
volume of these cases would overwhelm almost any anes­
thesiology practice if each child required direct involve­
ment. Therefore a selection protocol must be adopted that 
delineates which pediatric patients can be sedated in the 
absence of an anesthesiologist’s uninterrupted supervi­
sion. Most children are given an initial trial of sedation 
provided by either a nurse under the direction of the clini­
cian performing the procedure or staff from the pediatric 
intensive care unit. Chloral hydrate or midazolam, either 
oral or intravenous, is typically the first-line drug and is 
often successful. Some clinicians have reported success 
with regimens as simple as midazolam, and others have 
expanded their practice to include the use of propofol or 
dexmedetomidine.16 If this regimen proves insufficient, 
the study or procedure is rescheduled for a time when it 
can be performed under the supervision of an anesthesi­
ologist. Exclusions are made for children with a history of 
unsuccessful sedation, children with ASA class IV status 
or greater, and children with anatomic anomalies that 
may make airway management difficult; in these patients, 
anesthesia is administered immediately under the care of 
an anesthesiologist.
Pitfalls of Non–Operating Room 
Anesthesia
The sympathetic response before NORA can begin up 
to 1 hour before beginning the procedure. Tachycardia 
and tachypnea are often present, along with dry mouth and 
moist palms. Blood pressure may be mildly elevated, and 
gastrointestinal discomfort is almost universal. Surpris­
ingly, these symptoms are present not in the patient 
but rather in the anesthesiologist assigned to the case. 
Most providers with stellar skills but limited NORA experi­
ence are loath to leave the security of the operating room. 
What is it about NORA that makes it seem so foreign?
DISTANCE FROM THE MAIN OPERATING ROOMS
Many anesthesiologists feel out of their element when asked 
to work outside the operating room. Their colleagues and 
the anesthesia technicians might not be familiar with the 
off-site anesthetizing locations, making it difficult and time-
consuming to acquire extra drugs, equipment, or personnel 
to provide a break during the case.17
DISTANCE FROM THE PATIENT AND MONITORS
In some sites the patient is monitored from a different room 
through a window, by MRI or CT, or by closed-circuit tele­
vision, such as in the radiation oncology suite (Figure 
8-1). Changes in intravenous line flow rates, vaporizer set­
tings, frequency of monitoring, or any other interventions 
that require direct contact ideally should be timed to occur 
during pauses in the diagnostic or therapeutic sequence.
ROOM CONFIGURATION
Anesthesiologists may find themselves positioned very close 
to the patient in a room that clearly was not designed to han­
dle anesthetic equipment.18 Standard operating rooms are 
built with space for the anesthesia machine and cart, ample 
lighting, gases and suction available from a wall or tower 
Figure 8-1  Closed-circuit televisions in the radiation oncology suite 
allow for remote monitoring of the patient.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
64
source, and electrical outlets that will continue to provide 
power in the event of a generalized power loss. NORA sites 
may have none of these amenities, forcing the anesthesiolo­
gist to rely on items such as gas cylinders and portable suc­
tion devices. These extra pieces of equipment must compete 
for limited space with the bulky surgical equipment that 
is often used off-site, such as C-arm fluoroscopy units and 
endoscopy carts (Figure 8-2). Adequate lighting may be an 
issue, especially if the room is kept dark during fluoroscopic 
procedures. Loud, continuous noise may make alarms diffi­
cult to hear.19 Positioning of the patient with an anticipated 
difficult airway may be problematic, because the tables in 
off-site locations typically are not as accommodating as 
tables in the operating room.20
LACK OF EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
Most NORA sites are equipped with crash carts containing 
Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) drugs, intubation 
supplies, and a defibrillator. More specialized equipment, 
such as tools to access a difficult airway or supplies for 
treating malignant hyperthermia, however, will almost 
certainly be located near the main operating rooms at a 
remote location, thereby stripping another layer of comfort 
from the anesthesia provider.
SCARCITY OF SUPPORT STAFF
The personnel employed in the gastrointestinal suite, cardiac 
catheter laboratories, interventional radiology suites, and 
similar settings are well trained in their fields of expertise. 
Unfortunately, these fields have little to do with anesthesi­
ology. Assistance with lines, difficult airways, or anesthetic 
emergencies may be delayed or completely unavailable.21 A 
request for cricoid pressure that will be immediately fulfilled 
in the main operating room may be met with blank stares 
in a NORA site. Surgical airway assistance may likewise be 
delayed or unattainable. Furthermore, the staff present in 
these locations are typically not as well trained in ACLS as 
the personnel in the operating and recovery rooms.
RADIATION HAZARD
In addition to interventional radiology or neuroradiology 
areas that rely on a fixed source of radiation-based imag­
ing, the anesthesiologist may be asked to work in the cardiac 
catheter laboratory or gastrointestinal suite, where the radia­
tion source is portable or derived from the patient by nuclear 
medicine. Anesthesiologists must be familiar with the meth­
ods to reduce radiation exposure to both themselves and their 
patients and be willing to wear leaded aprons, wear glasses and 
shields, maintain a safe distance from the radiation source, or 
follow other institutional protocols to minimize this risk.
RENAL STATUS
Many cases performed with radiographic assistance 
require the use of contrast to identify fluid-filled structures. 
The contrast agent is often nephrotoxic above a certain 
dose; thus it is the shared responsibility of all the provid­
ers to ensure that this threshold is not exceeded. The use 
of contrast necessitates frequent flushing of the lines, so 
the anesthesiologist also must be mindful of the patient’s 
volume status. Maintenance fluids should be reduced, and 
diuresis may be necessary.
ROOM TEMPERATURE
Pediatric and elderly patients may be especially sensitive to 
the temperature in many NORA sites, especially those in the 
radiology area. Patients with cold-sensitive conditions such as 
sickle cell anemia or cryoglobulinemia also may be at risk. 
Imaging machinery functions over a narrow (and often low) 
ambient temperature22,23; therefore the rooms are typically 
kept uncomfortably cold. To prevent temperature adjustment 
that might cause malfunction of the imaging equipment, no 
thermostats are located in the room. Instead, room tempera­
ture is controlled from a central, inaccessible location. Items 
such as forced-air warmers or fluid warmers may be difficult 
to obtain; challenging to fit in a limited space; and, in the case 
of MRI, impossible to use because of their ferrous components.
UNFAMILIAR EQUIPMENT
In some practices, NORA is still considered an inferior 
assignment within the department and thus older anes­
thesia machines and monitors may be relegated to NORA 
areas.24 Many junior anesthesiologists may never have 
worked with or even seen some of the older equipment pres­
ent at these sites.
Nowhere is the issue of unfamiliar equipment more salient 
than in the MRI suite,25 where objects containing iron, 
cobalt, or nickel will be forcibly attracted to the magnet with 
a logarithmically increasing intensity. Depending on the vol­
ume of general anesthetics administered in the MRI scanner, 
the hospital may choose one of the following arrangements:
   
	1.	 An anesthesia machine and monitoring equipment are 
stationed outside the room containing the magnet, and 
the door is left ajar to allow for the passage of cables and 
the breathing circuit. This is the least desirable configu­
ration, because the open door can result in degradation 
of the MRI images.
Figure 8-2  The various pieces of radiology equipment, in addition to 
the anesthesia machine and cart, often leave little room for the anes­
thesia provider.
8  •  Practice Procedure
65
	2.	 An anesthesia machine and monitoring equipment 
are stationed outside the room containing the magnet, 
but the door remains closed throughout the study. The 
cables and circuit are threaded through reinforced holes 
in the wall or floorboards (Figure 8-3).
	3.	 An MRI-compatible anesthesia machine and monitor­
ing panel are purchased that can safely remain in the 
MRI room at a certain distance—typically 6 feet—from 
the magnet bore. Most MRI-compatible machines are 
similar enough to their non-MRI counterparts to be 
familiar to most providers (Figure 8-4). Laryngoscopes 
are typically nonferromagnetic, although the batter­
ies inside will be weakly attracted to the magnet unless 
they are MRI-compatible lithium batteries. Equipment 
for vital sign monitoring is specific for the MRI suite, 
relying on distortion-free fiberoptic cables for the signal. 
The electrocardiogram may seem particularly foreign to 
the provider, because it will contain four graphite leads 
arranged in a cloverleaf pattern over the left sternal bor­
der (Figure 8-5). The short cable distance lessens the 
chance of a radiofrequency heating–induced burn.
	4.	 An MRI-compatible infusion pump is used, which 
allows the practitioner to administer total intravenous 
anesthesia. If necessary, assisted ventilation is provided 
with an MRI-compatible ventilator. It is important 
that all infusion pumps used in the MRI area are MRI-­
compatible, because use of a standard pump may result 
in an infusion rate that differs from what is entered into 
and displayed on the device.
Risks and Safety of Non–Operating 
Room Anesthesia
As the volume of patients requiring alternative-site anes­
thesia continues to grow, so does the litany of anesthesia-
related complications seen in this population. Examination 
of data from the ASA Closed Claims Project dispels the myth 
that patients who are too sick to undergo procedures in 
the operating room can be safely treated in a satellite loca­
tion. The ASA Closed Claims Project is a collection of closed 
anesthesia-related malpractice claims from 1970 onward, 
representing 35 professional U.S. liability insurance com­
panies.26 The Closed Claims Analysis reflects only cases per­
formed under the direct supervision of an anesthesiologist; 
cases done under the care of other health care providers, 
such as sedation in the gastrointestinal suite directed by 
the gastroenterologist, are not included in the results. Two 
recent analyses of these data27,28 reveal a clearer picture of 
the risks associated with NORA. In total, 87 claims were 
filed for NORA cases, in contrast to 3287 claims for operat­
ing room anesthetics.
As the volume of NORA cases has risen over the decades, 
so has the number of reported complications. During the 
1970s, NORA was cited in only 0.2% of the closed claims 
Figure 8-3  A reinforced floorboard in the magnetic resonance suite 
provides openings for intravenous tubing and circuit hoses.
Figure 8-4  This magnetic resonance imaging–compatible anesthesia 
machine is similar to its standard operating room counterparts.
Figure 8-5  The cloverleaf pattern of electrocardiogram leads in the 
magnetic resonance imaging suite.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
66
(n = 1) versus 1.2% (n = 24) from the period 1990 to 
2001.27 This rose to 2.8% (n = 62) from 2002 to 2009. 
Claims for patients who received NORA reveal that they 
are older, with 20% older than 70 years of age in contrast 
to 12% for operating room cases (P < .01). They are also 
sicker, with 69% of patients rated ASA class 3 to 5, in con­
trast to 44% in the operating room (P < .001). NORA proce­
dures are more likely to be emergent, 36 percent versus 15 
percent (P < .001).
Of these claims, 32% originated in the gastrointesti­
nal suite. An earlier study found 50% of the claims were 
gastrointestinal-related, with one third of those occurring 
during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogra­
phy.27 More than half of the reported complications in the 
gastrointestinal area were the result of unintended overse­
dation. The cardiac catheterization and electrophysiologi­
cal study laboratories accounted for another quarter of the 
claims, with the remainder occurring in the emergency 
room, the lithotripsy suite, and the radiology areas. Among 
all the radiology-related claims, 70% occurred during the 
administration of anesthesia in the MRI suite as a result of 
receiving burns from non–MRI-safe monitoring equipment, 
oversedation, and brachial plexopathy from patient posi­
tioning in the scanner. Oversedation is a noteworthy prob­
lem among children with developmental disabilities who 
receive anesthesia during an MRI examination; one study 
found the incidence among this population to be 11.9% 
versus 4.9% for children without these disabilities.29 The 
authors speculated that the narrowness of the palate seen 
in these children, especially those with cerebral palsy, may 
make them susceptible to airway obstruction.
The majority of NORA claims involved monitored anes­
thesia care (MAC) (50% versus 6%, P < .001). General 
anesthesia cases represented only 26% of claims, whereas 
the percentage was three times as high among the oper­
ating room cohort. Of the NORA claims, 21% involved no 
anesthetic because they chiefly involved airway manage­
ment provided by an anesthesiologist in the emergency 
room. Regional anesthesia, rarely performed in NORA sites, 
accounted for only 2% of claims versus 16% for the operat­
ing room.
The severity of injuries suffered by NORA patients was 
more substantial than their operating room counterparts, 
with a significantly larger number of operating room inju­
ries rated as temporary or nondisabling. Although death 
was the most common complication in both groups, it 
occurred at almost twice the frequency among the NORA 
cohort (54% versus 29%, P < .001). Other complications, 
such as brain damage, myocardial infarction, and aspira­
tion, occurred in roughly the same proportion. Only nerve 
damage was noted in a statistically significant higher per­
centage among the operating room group (19% versus 7%, 
P < .01.)
The primary mechanism of injury within both cohorts 
revolved around respiratory complications. However, the 
proportion of respiratory mishaps was double among the 
NORA group (44% versus 20%, P < .001) and the inci­
dence of inadequate oxygenation or ventilation was seven 
times higher among the NORA patients (21% versus 3%, 
P < .001). Of the NORA claims, 30% (n = 26) involved respi­
ratory depression as a result of drug overdose, with propo­
fol (either alone or in combination with other drugs) the 
agent most frequently cited as bearing responsibility. Fac­
tors associated with oversedation claims included obesity 
(56%), high-risk patients (ASA classes 3-5, 54%), and age 
over 70 years (27%). Of the 26 claims, 24 (92%) resulted in 
death or permanent neurological injury.
Perhaps the most salient figures to come from the study 
dealt with the preventability of injuries in NORA sites. 
Reviewers of the closed claims judged anesthesia care to be 
substandard in 54% of the remote location claims, in con­
trast to 37% in the operating room group (P < .01). Moni­
toring was cited as a key NORA deficiency, with 32% of 
the alternative site claims considered preventable by better 
monitoring, versus 8% in the operating room cohort (P < 
.001). The numbers were even higher in the gastrointesti­
nal suite, where 86% of the cases were judged to have sub­
standard care, including 62% of which were cited as having 
inadequate monitoring. The typical deficiency was the lack 
of end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) monitoring; in the gas­
trointestinal cases, capnography was used in only 15% of the 
claim cases and another 15% relied on no respiratory moni­
toring at all. Thus one of the most important lessons learned 
from the NORA claims in the ASA Closed Claims Project is 
the vital importance of measuring ETCO2 during the proce­
dure. Although this is typically standard fare during a gen­
eral anesthetic, analysis of the claims shows that it is often 
neglected during MAC cases. This occurs despite policy state­
ments by the ASA stressing the importance of monitoring 
ventilation (as opposed to only oxygenation) during seda­
tion.31 Oversedation is common during NORA cases, during 
which the noxious stimuli may be intermittent. Introduction 
of the gastroscope, which aggravates the typical patient, 
may be followed by a protracted period of relative calm. The 
dose of sedatives, analgesics, or anesthetics to blunt the ini­
tial stimulus may result in oversedation and apnea after­
ward, especially when dealing with agents that display long 
elimination half-lives.31 Apneic periods lasting 30 seconds 
or more are common, and in the absence of capnography or 
electrical impedance monitoring, apnea may be very difficult 
to recognize.32 In one study, anesthesiologists blinded to cap­
nography during MAC failed to identify a 20-second apnea 
period in every single cohort patient who displayed this lapse 
in breathing.33 Another study among endoscopists showed 
that when blinded to capnography, they failed to diagnose a 
30-second period of apnea in 63% of their sedated patients.34 
The presence of drapes or a darkened room may further hin­
der the ability to recognize apnea.
It is common for patients to be placed on supplemental oxy­
gen while sedatives are being administered; paradoxically, this 
may delay the detection of apnea.35 Pulse oximetry is not a 
sensitive monitor of apnea, especially if the patient is receiving 
supplemental oxygenation.36-38 Patients who receive supple­
mental oxygen and then become apneic will maintain their 
saturation longer than patients maintained on room air39; by 
the time desaturation is noted, the patient may have developed 
significant hypercarbia and be well on the way to an adverse 
respiratory event. Capnography, on the other hand, is exqui­
sitely sensitive; a recent study of patients in the gastrointestinal 
suite undergoing procedures under propofol sedation found 
no instances of apnea when ETCO2 monitoring was added to 
pulse oximetry.40 A similar study conducted among the pedi­
atric population reported similar results when capnography 
was used with propofol MAC anesthesia.41
8  •  Practice Procedure
67
Studies confined to the pediatric population receiving 
sedation or anesthesia for procedures outside the operat­
ing room have echoed the findings cited earlier. A report 
from the Pediatric Sedation Research Consortium reviewed 
35,000 pediatric alternative-site sedation cases.42 The data 
revealed no deaths attributable to the sedation regimen and 
only a single cardiac arrest and a single case of aspiration (in 
a different patient), both attributed to the anesthesia care. 
However, the incidence of airway compromise was signifi­
cant: 1 in 200 sedations required some type of unplanned 
airway assistance, and 1 in 400 patients progressed to 
develop stridor, laryngospasm, wheezing, or apnea. A sub­
sequent, larger report from the same group reviewed the 
nature and rate of complications among 49,836 propofol-
sedation episodes.43 This report also claimed no deaths and 
only 2 episodes of cardiac arrest and 4 cases of aspiration 
related to the sedation. However, the incidence of airway 
compromise in these cases was much more significant. One 
in 10 patients required some type of unplanned airway 
intervention, with 31.6% of those patients requiring more 
advanced airway techniques, including bag-mask ventila­
tion, oral airway insertion, and laryngeal mask airway or 
endotracheal tube placement. One in 65 patients progressed 
to develop stridor, laryngospasm, wheezing, or apnea. The 
authors concluded that although propofol sedation is unde­
niably safe in the NORA setting, it must be supervised by 
practitioners who are thoroughly skilled in the manage­
ment of airway obstruction and respiratory embarrass­
ment. Biannual PALS training using mannequins may not 
provide sufficient competency. Furthermore, ETCO2 moni­
toring and the immediate availability of suction equipment 
should be standard.
Beyond propofol, ketamine continues to be a reliable agent 
for providing both anesthesia and analgesia during NORA 
cases. Concurrent use of a benzodiazepine and an antisialo­
gogue may be necessary to moderate the side effects of ket­
amine. Dexmedetomidine is also a reliable choice for pediatric 
NORA cases,44-47 but the manufacturers’ recommended dose 
may provide insufficient anesthesia in this setting. Mason 
and associates48 found that a dosing regimen of a 3-mcg/kg 
bolus over 10 minutes, followed by a 2-mcg/kg/hr infusion, 
improved the effectiveness of alternative-site sedation from 
91.8% to 97.6% (versus a bolus of 2 mcg/kg and an infu­
sion of 1-1.5 mcg/kg/hr49). Respiratory depression was not 
noted, yet bradycardia manifested in 16.1% of the patients in 
the sample, with 4% experiencing a heart rate drop of greater 
than 20%. Glycopyrrolate was successful in reversing the 
bradycardia, but was associated with an exaggerated hyper­
tensive response,48 likely as a result of the increased sympa­
thetic vascular tone from the α2 adrenoreceptor stimulation. 
These findings have been reported by other authors, thereby 
questioning the usefulness of dexmedetomidine in patients 
prone to developing bradycardia or heart block.50
The Future of Non–Operating 
Room Anesthesia
Advances in medical technology have allowed many proce­
dures once reserved for the confines of the operating room 
to be performed in a variety of alternative locations. When 
cost savings, scheduling efficiency, and the decreasing 
willingness of patients to tolerate discomfort or anxiety are 
considered, little doubt should remain that NORA will con­
tinue to accelerate in the foreseeable future. Yet demand 
has begun to outstrip supply, because anesthesia depart­
ments must deal with staffing issues and limited reimburse­
ment when trying to meet the requests for service. Some 
nonanesthesiologist physicians, frustrated by the lack of 
sufficient anesthesiologist coverage for their alternative-
site cases, have begun to direct the delivery of sedation 
and anesthesia by themselves,51 at times using drugs once 
reserved for use by anesthesia providers52 (e.g., propofol,53 
alfentinil,54 and remifentanil55). The danger of this practice 
is twofold: the gravest risk falls on the patients, who may 
receive drugs with unintended effects that cannot be ade­
quately managed by the physician administering the medi­
cations. The secondary risk lies with anesthesiologists, who 
are often ultimately responsible for devising and overseeing 
sedation protocols for all health care providers at their hos­
pital. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has 
echoed this, requiring that sedation and analgesia services 
be under the direction of the hospital’s department of anes­
thesia.56 The ASA strengthened this position in 2012, issu­
ing a policy statement that any physician performing deep 
sedation must be qualified to recognize and rescue a patient 
from a state of general anesthesia.57
How will the medical specialty proceed beyond this cross­
road? First, anesthesiologists must come to terms with the 
fact that in the future a proportionately larger percentage of 
NORA will be provided by nonanesthesiologists. Although 
some anesthesiologists may think this is ceding both control 
of the profession and income to others, it is merely acting in 
the patient’s best interest by allowing a larger patient popu­
lation to undergo necessary procedures free from anxiety 
and pain. However, it is necessary to continue to improve 
the safety of nonanesthesiologist-supervised NORA by pro­
viding education, direction, and consultation to colleagues.
The safety profile of nonanesthesiologist-directed NORA 
will improve with the introduction of new pharmacological 
agents that provide sedation and analgesia with a low risk for 
side effects. One such agent, fospropofol disodium (Lusedra), 
already has shown promise in the gastrointestinal suite.58,59 
Fospropofol is a water-soluble prodrug that releases free pro­
pofol after being hydrolyzed by alkaline phosphatase. The 
pharmacokinetic profile of fospropofol is thought to result 
in the avoidance of the high initial peak plasma concentra­
tion seen with the lipid emulsion formula of propofol. Unfor­
tunately, several published reports of the pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of this drug have been retracted 
because of an error in the assay procedure.60-63 The dosing 
schedule begins with an initial bolus dose of 6.5 mg/kg. Re-
dosing, when necessary, is given as a bolus of 1.6 mg/kg.
Another way to improve the safety of nonanesthesiol­
ogist-directed NORA is to place sedation management in 
the patients’ hands. Similar to patient-controlled analgesia 
(PCA) pumps used to manage postoperative pain, patient-
controlled sedation (PCS) devices allow the patient to self-
administer a chosen sedative agent during the procedure. 
The patient presses a delivery button in response to pain 
or anxiety64; a certain level of consciousness is required to 
press the button, ensuring that the sedated patient will not 
receive an unnecessary dose. Similar to PCA pumps, PCS 
machines can be programmed with a lockout time to prevent 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
68
the delivery of a rapid succession of doses. Target-controlled 
infusion systems may provide even more assurance against 
unintended oversedation. These delivery systems rely on a 
computer bench that accounts for both the pharmacokinet­
ics of the drug and the physiological state of the patient to 
calculate and administer the ideal infusion rate.65
Ultimately, the best plan we have to minimize the risks of 
NORA is to hold it to the same rigorous patient preparation 
and intraoperative vigilance standards that apply to tradi­
tional operating room cases.66 This preparation begins with 
the preprocedure evaluation of the patients, an exercise 
that is occasionally overlooked when preparing for a NORA 
case. In some instances, patients are scheduled for NORA 
procedures by an alternative scheduling practice and are 
not seen for an anesthesiology preoperative visit. Other 
patients are anticipated to require only sedation provided 
by a nonanesthesiologist, but the sedation proves to be 
inadequate to complete the procedure. The anesthesia team 
is then called to provide anesthesia care to a patient who 
has already been sedated, forcing a preoperative evaluation 
based more on chart review than physician–patient interac­
tion. This situation also precludes the possibility of getting 
a proper informed consent from the patient to administer a 
more appropriate anesthetic. Excellent anesthetic care rests 
on the foundation of a thorough preprocedure assessment, 
and it is not always the case that this evaluation is com­
pleted with the same rigors and standards as for operating 
room cases.67 It is because of this risk for inadequate prepro­
cedure evaluation that the ASA has recommended that all 
NORA patients be channeled into the institutions’ routine 
and customary preoperative assessment channels.68
The safety of operating room anesthesia can be duplicated 
in alternative sites only when the necessary equipment is 
present or readily available. These safety measures include 
properly functioning anesthesia machines, standard moni­
toring technology, and a pharmaceutical dispensing system 
that offers both routine and emergency drugs. Ancillary 
staff must be available to provide assistance when dealing 
with unexpected events. Many providers take these things 
for granted in the operating room, yet are permissive to per­
form NORA cases in their absence. This is a fundamental 
mistake and one that exposes the patient to harm and the 
provider to legal hazard; the ASA standards of care apply to 
all patients and do not vary with the location of the case.4
Postoperatively, patients who have received NORA should 
be directed toward the same postanesthesia care unit area 
into which patients from the operating room are channeled. 
Although many alternative sites have their own recovery 
areas, such as the cardiac catheter laboratory and gastrointes­
tinal and interventional radiology suites, these are more suited 
for patients who have received only minimal sedation. The 
patient-to-nurse ratio may be too high, and the nurses them­
selves may be inexperienced in providing postanesthesia care.
The following chapters will delve more deeply into the 
intricacies of NORA in specific alternative sites. The com­
mon thread throughout will be the risks inherent to provid­
ing a safe anesthetic in each alternative location and ways 
to mitigate the hazard. Given the challenges of NORA, is it 
reasonable to wonder why a clinician would choose to prac­
tice under these difficult conditions? The answer from those 
who do a considerable amount of work in this field is that 
NORA is an enormously satisfying part of the specialty of 
anesthesiology. It challenges the technical, intellectual, and 
problem-solving skills of the anesthesiologist while building 
valuable bridges with our colleagues in other departments, 
such as radiology, gastroenterology, and interventional 
cardiology. By reading this text, you will familiarize your­
self with many of the pitfalls and eccentricities of NORA, 
thereby smoothing your path as you gain experience in the 
field. Although the learning curve associated with NORA 
may appear great, so too are the rewards.
References
	 1.	 Adams K, Pennock N, Phelps B, Rose W, Peters M. Anesthesia 
services outside of the operating room. Pediatr Nurs. 2007;33(3):
232–237.
	 2.	 Bader AM, Pothier MM. Out-of-operating room procedures: preproce­
dure assessment. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(1):121–126.
	 3.	 Cutter TW. Radiologists and anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology Clin. 
2009;27(1):95–106.
	 4.	 Holzman RS, Cullen DJ, Eichorn JH, Phillip JH. Guidelines for sedation 
by nonanesthesiologists during diagnostic and therapeutic proce­
dures. J Clin Anesth. 1994;6(4):265–276.
	 5.	 Pino RM. The nature of anesthesia and procedural sedation outside of 
the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2007;20(4):347–351.
	 6.	 Lai YC, Manninen PH. Anesthesia for cerebral aneurysms: a com­
parison between interventional neuroradiology and surgery. Can J 
Anaesth. 2001;48(4). 397–395.
	 7.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for seda­
tion and analgesia by nonanesthesiologists: a report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on sedation and analgesia by 
nonanesthesiologists. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(4):1004–1017.
	 8.	 Meyer S, Grundmann U, Gottschling S, Kleinschmidt S, Gortner L. 
Sedation and analgesia for brief diagnostic and therapeutic proce­
dures in children. Eur J Pediatr. 2007;166(4):291–302.
	 9.	 Coté CJ, Notterman DA, Karl WH, Weinberg JA, McCloskey C. Adverse 
sedation events in pediatrics: a critical incident analysis of contribut­
ing factors. Pediatrics. 2000;105(4 Pt 1):805–814.
	10.	 Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. 
2006 Comprehensive accreditation manual for hospitals: the official 
handbook. Oak Brook, Ill: Joint Commission Resources; 2005.
	11.	 Schenker MP, Martin R, Shyn PB, Baum RA. Interventional radiology 
and anesthesia. Anesthesiology Clin. 2009;27(1):87–94.
	12.	 Gozal D, Gozal Y. Pediatric sedation/anesthesia outside the operating 
room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2008;21(4):494–498.
	13.	 Massanari M, Novitsky J, Reinstein LJ. Paradoxical reactions in chil­
dren associated with midazolam use during endoscopy. Clin Pediatr 
(Phila). 1997;36(12):681–684.
	14.	 Slatt KA. Crazy with chloral hydrate: a parent witnesses a paradoxical 
reaction. Gastroenterol Nurs. 2009;32(4):296–297.
	15.	 Mancuso CE, Tanzi MG, Gabay M. Paradoxical reactions to benzodi­
azepines: literature review and treatment options. Pharmacotherapy. 
2004;24(9):1177–1185.
	16.	 McMorrow SP, Abramo TJ. Dexmedetomidine sedation: uses in pedi­
atric procedural sedation outside the operating room. Pediatr Emerg 
Care. 2012;28(3):292–296.
	17.	 Frankel A. Patient safety: anesthesia in remote locations. Anesthesiol 
Clin. 2009;27(1):127–139.
	18.	 Feldman JM, Kalli I. Equipment and environmental issues for nonop­
erating room anesthesia. Anesthesiol Clin. 2006;19(4):450–452.
	19.	 Melloni C. Anesthesia and sedation outside the operating room: how 
to prevent risk and maintain good quality. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2007;20(6):513–519.
	20.	 Wong AB, Moore MSR. Positioning of obese patients in out-of-­
operating room locations. Anaesth Analg. 2007;104(5):1306.
	21.	 Caplan JP, Querques J, Epstein LA, Stern TA. Consultation, com­
munication, and conflict management by out-of-operating room 
anesthesiologists: strangers in a strange land. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2009;27(1):111–120.
	22.	 Missant C, Van de Velde M. Morbidity and mortality related to 
anaesthesia outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2004;17(4):323–327.
	23.	 Eichorn V, Henzler D, Murphy MF. Standardizing care and monitoring 
for anesthesia or procedural sedation delivered outside the operating 
room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2010;23(4):494–499.
8  •  Practice Procedure
69
	24.	 Van de Velde M, Roofthooft E, Kuypers M. Risk and safety of 
anaesthesia outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2008;21(4):486–487.
	25.	 Girshin M, Shapiro V, Rhee A, Ginsberg S, Inchiosa Jr MA. 
Increased risk of general anesthesia for high-risk patients under­
going magnetic resonance imaging. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 
2009;33(2):312–315.
	26.	 Cheney FW. The American Society of Anesthesiologists Closed 
Claims Project: what have we learned, how has it affected prac­
tice, and how will it affect practice in the future? Anesthesiology. 
1999;91(2):552–556.
	27.	 Robbertze R, Posner KL, Domino KB. Closed claims review of anesthe­
sia for procedures outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2006;19(4):436–442.
	28.	 Metzner J, Posner KL, Domino KB. The risk and safety of anesthesia at 
remote locations: the US closed claims analysis. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2009;22(4):502–508.
	29.	 Kannikeswaran N, Mahajan PV, Sethuraman U, Groebe A, Chen X. 
Sedation medication received and adverse events related to sedation 
for brain MRI in children with and without developmental disabilities. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2009;19(3):250–256.
	30.	 Deleted in page proofs.
	31.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Prac­
tice Parameters. Standards for basic anesthetic monitoring. Approved by 
the ASA House of Delegates on October 21, 1986, and last amended on 
October 20, 2010 with an effective date of July 1, 2011. http://www.
asahq.org/For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.aspx.
	32.	 Gan TJ. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics 
of medications used for moderate sedation. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2006;45(9):855–869.
	33.	 Vargo JJ, Zuccaro GJR, Dumot JA, Conwell DL, Morrow JB, Shay SS. 
Automated graphic assessment of respiratory activity is superior to 
pulse oximetry and visual assessment for the detection of early respi­
ratory depression during therapeutic upper endoscopy. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2002;55(7):826–831.
	34.	 Soto RG, Fu ES, Vila Jr H, Miguel RV. Capnography accurately 
detects apnea during monitored anesthesia care. Anesth Analg. 
2004;99(2):379–382.
	35.	 Qadeer MA, Vargo J, Dumot JA, et al. Capnographic monitoring of 
respiratory activity improves safety of sedation for endoscopic chol­
angiopancreatography 
and 
ultrasonography. 
Gastroenterology. 
2009;136(5):1568–1576.
	36.	 Galvango SM, Bhavani-Shankar K. Critical monitoring issues outside 
the operating room. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(1):141–156.
	37.	 Srinivasa V, Kodali BS. Capnometry in the spontaneously breathing 
patient. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2004;17(6):517–520.
	38.	 Downs JB. Has oxygen administration delayed appropriate respi­
ratory care? Fallacies regarding oxygen therapy. Respir Care. 
2003;48(6):611–620.
	39.	 Keidan I, Gravenstein D, Berkenstadt H, Ziv A, Shavit I, Sidi A. Supple­
mental oxygen compromises the use of pulse oximetry for detection 
of apnea and hypoventilation during sedation in simulated pediatric 
patients. Pediatrics. 2008;122(2):293–298.
	40.	 Jense HG, Dubin SA, Silverstein PI, O’Leary-Escolas U. Effect of obe­
sity on safe duration of apnea in anesthetized humans. Anesth Analg. 
1991;72(1):89–93.
	41.	 Külling D, Rothenbühler R, Inauen W. Safety of nonanesthetist seda­
tion with propofol for outpatient colonoscopy and esophagogastro­
duodenoscopy. Endoscopy. 2003;35(8):679–682.
	42.	 Leroy PL, Nieman FH, Blokland-Loggers HE, Schipper DM, Zimmermann 
LJ, Knape JT. Adherence to safety guidelines on paediatric procedural 
sedation: the results of a nationwide survey under general paediatricians 
in The Netherlands. Arch Dis Child. 2010;95(12):1027–1030.
	43.	 Cravero JP, Beach ML, Blike GT, Gallagher SM, Hertzog JH. Pediat­
ric Sedation Research Consortium. Incidence and nature of adverse 
events during pediatric sedation/anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room: report from the Pediatric Sedation Research Consor­
tium. Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):1087–1096.
	44.	 Cravero JP, Beach ML, Blike GT, Gallagher SM, Hertzog JH. Pediatric 
Sedation Research Consortium. The incidence and nature of adverse 
events during pediatric sedation/anesthesia with propofol for proce­
dures outside the operating room: a report from the Pediatric Sedation 
Research Consortium. Anesth Analg. 2009;108(3):795–804.
	45.	 Cravero JP. Risk and safety of pediatric sedation/anesthesia for 
procedures outside the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2009;22(4):509–513.
	46.	 Munro HM, Tirotta CF, Felix DE, et al. Initial experience with dexme­
detomidine for diagnostic and interventional cardiac catheterization 
in children. Paediatr Anaesth. 2007;17(2):109–112.
	47.	 Phan H, Nahata MC. Clinical uses of dexmedetomidine in pediatric 
patients. Paediatr Drugs. 2008;10(1):49–69.
	48.	 Mason KP, Zurakowski D, Zgleszewski SE, et  al. High dose dexme­
detomidine as the sole sedative for pediatric MRI. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2008;18(5):403–411.
	49.	 Heard C, Burrows F, Johnson K, Joshi P, Houck J, Lerman J. A compar­
ison of dexmedetomidine-midazolam with propofol for maintenance 
of anesthesia in children undergoing magnetic resonance imaging. 
Anesth Analg. 2008;107(6):1832–1839.
	50.	 Mason KP, Zgleszewski S, Forman RE, Stark C, DiNardo JA. An exag­
gerated hypertensive response to glycopyrrolate therapy for brady­
cardia associated with high-dose dexmedetomidine. Anesth Analg. 
2009;108(3):906–908.
	51.	 Hammer GB, Drover DR, Cao H, et  al. The effects of dexmedeto­
midine on cardiac electrophysiology in children. Anesth Analg. 
2008;106(1):79–83.
	52.	 Metzner J, Domino KB. Risks of anesthesia or sedation outside the 
operating room: the role of the anesthesia care provider. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2010;23(4):523–531.
	53.	 Patel KN, Simon HK, Stockwell CA, et al. Pediatric procedural seda­
tion by a dedicated nonanesthesiology pediatric sedation service using 
propofol. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2009;25(3):133–138.
	54.	 Schilling D, Rosenbaum A, Schweizer S, Richter H, Rumstadt B. Seda­
tion with propofol for interventional endoscopy by trained nurses in 
high-risk octogenarians: a prospective, randomized, controlled study. 
Endoscopy. 2009;41(4):295–298.
	55.	 Miner JR, Gray RO, Stephens D, Biros MH. Randomized clinical trial of 
propofol with and without alfentanil for deep procedural sedation in 
the emergency department. Acad Emerg Med. 2009;16(9):825–834.
	56.	 Phillips WJ, Halpin J, Jones J, McKenzie K. Remifentanil for pro­
cedural sedation in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 
2009;53(1):163.
	57.	 Department of Health and Human Services. Revised hospital anesthe­
sia services interpretive guidelines. CMS Manual System, Department 
of Health and Human Services pub no. 100–07 State Operations Pro­
vider Certification, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ; 2011. 
http://www.asahq.org/for-members/advocacy/federal-legislative-
and-regulatory-activities/interpretive-guidelines.aspx.
	58.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists House of Delegates. Statement 
on granting privileges to nonanesthesiologist physicians for person­
ally administering or supervising deep sedation. Approved on October 
18, 2006, amended on October 17, 2012. http://www.asahq.org/
For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.aspx.
	59.	 Harris EA, Lubarsky DA, Candiotti KA. Monitored anesthesia care 
(MAC) sedation: clinical utility of fospropofol. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 
2009;5:949–959.
	60.	 Lubarsky DA, Candiotti K, Harris E. Understanding modes of moderate 
sedation during gastrointestinal procedures: a current review of the 
literature. J Clin Anesth. 2007;19(5):397–404.
	61.	 Gibiansky E, Struys MM, Gibiansky L, et al. Retraction. AQUAVAN 
injection, a water-soluble prodrug of propofol, as a bolus injection: a 
phase I dose-escalation comparison with DIPRIVAN. Part 1. Pharma­
cokinetics. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(4):1058.
	62.	 Struys MM, Vanluchene AL, Gibiansky E, et al. Retraction. AQUA­
VAN injection, a water-soluble prodrug of propofol, as a bolus injec­
tion: a phase I dose-escalation comparison with DIPRIVAN. Part 2. 
Pharmacodynamics and safety. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(4):1058.
	63.	 Fechner J, Ihmsen H, Hatterscheid D, et al. Retraction. Pharmacoki­
netics and clinical pharmacodynamics of the new propofol prodrug 
GPI 15715 in volunteers. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(4):1058.
	64.	 Fechner J, Ihmsen H, Hatterscheid D, et al. Retraction. Comparative 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the new propofol prodrug 
GPI 15715 and propofol emulsion. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(4):1058.
	65.	 Külling D, Bauerfeind P, Fried M, Biro P. Patient-controlled analgesia 
and sedation in gastrointestinal endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N 
Am. 2004;14(2):353–368.
	66.	 Egan TD. Target-controlled drug delivery: progress toward an intrave­
nous “vaporizer” and automated anesthetic administration. Anesthe­
siology. 2003;99(5):1214–1219.
	67.	 Bader AM, Pothier MM. Out-of-operating room procedures: preproce­
dure assessment. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(1):121–126.
	68.	 Whittemore AD. Introduction: the challenge of anesthesia outside the 
operating room. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(1):1.
70
The preoperative evaluation of the patient undergoing 
anesthesia is both a requirement of the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services and important in preparing an anes­
thetic plan. Certain parts of the anesthesia preoperative 
evaluation are standard, whereas other elements are indi­
vidualized depending on the patient, timing of the evalua­
tion, type of procedure, and location. Non–operating room 
procedures requiring anesthesia (NORA) present a unique 
set of challenges for the anesthesiologist. The anesthesiolo­
gist experiences pressure to evaluate the patient with lim­
ited information, start the procedure in a location where 
emergency equipment is not readily accessible, and provide 
an anesthetic that will allow for a short recovery period in 
a busy procedural suite. Although commonalities exist in 
the preoperative evaluation of patients regardless of their 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classifica­
tion (Table 9-1), many parts of the evaluation depend on 
a patient’s comorbidities and symptoms and the location of 
the planned procedure.
When patients have routine medical care, their comor­
bidities are known and properly managed. Other patients, 
however, present on the day of the procedure without 
diagnoses or with symptoms that may be serious enough 
to require further evaluation.1,2 The severity of the symp­
toms and the urgency of the procedure determine whether 
additional testing is required. It is the anesthesiologist’s 
responsibility to obtain a patient medical history, perform 
a physical examination, and decide with the proceduralist 
and patient how to best proceed.
Procedures outside the operating room are challenging 
for the anesthesiologist because emergency equipment such 
as the airway cart, defibrillator, and transducer for an arte­
rial line need to be planned for and obtained ahead of time. 
Nonanesthesia personnel in NORA locations may not be 
accustomed to the patient preparations needed by the anes­
thesiologist. Skilled anesthesia personnel may be far away 
from the procedure room. Recovery room personnel are often 
not familiar with caring for a patient recovering after a gen­
eral anesthetic. The goals of the anesthesiologist, procedural­
ist, and staff are to provide the patient with the safest, highest 
quality care in a way that is compassionate and efficient. A 
thorough preoperative evaluation by the anesthesiologist 
helps caregivers prepare for potential complications such as 
a difficult airway or prolonged recovery. Contingency plans 
should be communicated among practitioners so that chal­
lenges can be anticipated rather than unexpected.
Preoperative Assessment
To begin, it is important to address the standard elements 
of the preoperative assessment—a discussion with the 
patient or guardian to review the medical, medication, and 
anesthesia history and a physical examination focused on 
the airway, heart, and lungs. Diagnostic studies, previous 
anesthetics, laboratory values, and consultation reports are 
routinely reviewed during this assessment. On the basis of 
this information an ASA physical status is assigned to the 
patient. After reviewing and obtaining all the information, 
the anesthesiologist creates the anesthetic plan and then 
discusses it with the proceduralist and patient.
It is useful to have a mechanism to obtain patient-­
specific information. This can be a standardized form that 
documents the patient’s medical history online or on paper 
(Figure 9-1). The form can guide the anesthesiologist in 
completing the assessment and focuses on comorbidities, 
current medications, allergies, previous surgical and anes­
thetic history, and use of alcohol, tobacco, or other illicit 
substances. If the patient does not know the medications 
currently taken, a phone call to the patient’s pharmacy can 
provide this information. With this medication list, other ele­
ments of the patient’s medical history can be deciphered. A 
review of systems with questions pertinent to cardiovascu­
lar, pulmonary, or neurologic symptoms completes the nec­
essary evaluation. A targeted interview can subsequently 
concentrate on elucidating comorbidities pertinent to anes­
thesia care, their severity, frequency of exacerbations, and 
previous and current management. The interviewer will 
determine the patient’s functional capacity (Table 9-2) and 
assign the patient an ASA physical status classification that 
can stratify periprocedural risk.3 A better cardiopulmo­
nary reserve as evidenced by a metabolic equivalent (MET) 
greater than 4 or 5 predicts a lower risk for perioperative 
complications. Complications during previous anesthetics 
or any family complications with anesthesia are reviewed. 
Certain complications are more difficult to treat in NORA 
locations, where resources such as postoperative ventilator 
support are typically unavailable and the patient may need 
monitored transport to the nearest phase I postoperative 
anesthesia care unit.
Preoperative Evaluations
JENNIFER E. HOFER, MELISSA L. PANT and BOBBIEJEAN SWEITZER
9
Table 9-1  American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical 
Status Classification*
ASA 1
Normal healthy patient
ASA 2
Patient with mild systemic disease
ASA 3
Patient with severe systemic disease
ASA 4
Patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant 
threat to life
ASA 5
Moribund patient who is not expected to survive 
without the operation
ASA 6
Declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being 
removed for donor purposes
*An “E” classification added to the ASA status indicates emergency surgery.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists. http://www.asahq.org.
9  •  Preoperative Evaluations
71
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
During the physical examination, attention is given to the 
patient’s venous vasculature to assess how quickly or eas­
ily access can be obtained. If an abnormality is found on 
routine auscultation of the heart and lungs, a consultation, 
call to the patient’s cardiologist or pulmonologist, or further 
work may be necessary. Based on the information obtained 
in the interview, a more detailed examination may follow. 
For example, if a patient has had a stroke, a residual neu­
rological deficit is documented. The airway examination 
is critical to the preoperative assessment. The Mallampati 
type found on the physical examination will help determine 
if an airway has the potential for a difficult intubation. If a 
Patient’s Name  
 Age  
 Sex   
 Date of Surgery  
Proposed operation  
 
Primary care physician name/phone #  
 Cardiologist/phone #  
 
1. Please list all previous operations (and approximate dates).
a.
d.
b.
e.
c.
f.
3. Circle TESTS that you have already completed; list where and when you had them. Please bring all existing 
reports for your visit. We are NOT suggesting that you require (or need to have) these tests.
4. Please list all Medications you have taken in the last month (include over-the-counter drugs, inhalers, herbals, 
dietary supplements, and aspirin).
2. Please list any Allergies to medications, latex, food or other (and your reactions to them).
a.
c.
b.
d.
a. ECG
LOCATION:
Date:
b. STRESS TEST
LOCATION:
Date:
c. ECHO/Ultrasound of heart
LOCATION:
Date:
d. BLOOD WORK
LOCATION:
Date:
e. SLEEP STUDY
LOCATION:
Date:
f. Other
LOCATION:
Date:
a.
f.
b.
g.
c.
h.
d.
i.
e.
j.
Drug Name
Dose and how often (am or pm)
Drug Name
Dose and how often (am or pm)
5. Have you taken steroids (prednisone or cortisone) in the last year? .................................................... 
6. Have you ever smoked? 
(Quantify in           packs/day for            years) .............................. 
 Do you still smoke? 
(Quantify in           packs/day) ........................................................
 Do you drink alcohol? (If so, how much?) 
 ...................................................... 
 Do you use or have you ever used any illegal drugs? (we need to know for your safety) 
7. Can you walk up one flight of stairs without stopping? ......................................................................... 
8. Have you had any problems with your heart? (circle all that apply) ....................................................
(Chest pain or pressure, heart attack, abnormal ECG, skipped beats, murmur, palpitations, heart failure)
9. Do you have high blood pressure? ........................................................................................................ 
(Please check YES or NO and circle specific problems) 
 
 
YES
NO
Figure 9-1  Patient medical history.
Continued
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
72
10. Do you have diabetes? ..................................................................................... 
11. Have you had any problems with your lungs or your chest? (circle all that apply) ...................... 
 
(shortness of breath, emphysema, bronchitis, asthma, TB, abnormal chest x-ray)
12. Are you ill now or were you recently ill with a cold, fever, chills, flu or productive cough? 
 
Describe recent changes  
13. Have you or anyone in your family had serious bleeding problems? (circle all that apply) .........
 
(prolonged bleeding from nose, gums, tooth extractions, or surgery)
14. Have you had any problems with your blood? (circle all that apply) ............................................ 
 
(anemia, leukemia, lymphoma, sickle cell disease, blood clots, transfusions)
15. Have you ever had problems with your: (circle all that apply)
 
Liver (cirrhosis; hepatitis A, B, C; jaundice)? ..................................................... 
 
Kidney (stones, failure, dialysis)? ..................................................... 
 
Digestive system (frequent heartburn, hiatus hernia, stomach ulcer)? ...................................... 
 
Back, neck or jaws (TMJ, rheumatoid arthritis, herniation)? ..................................... 
 
 
Thyroid gland (underactive or overactive)? ..................................................... 
 
16. Have you ever had: (circle all that apply)
 
Seizures? ................................................................................................................ 
 
Stroke; facial, leg or arm weakness; difficulty speaking? ................................................. 
 
Cramping pain in your legs with walking? ............................................................................ 
 
Problems with hearing, vision or memory? .......................................................... 
17. Have you ever been treated with chemotherapy or radiation therapy? (circle all that apply)  
 
 
List indication and dates of treatment:  
18. Women: Could you be pregnant? Last menstrual period began:  
 
19. Have you ever had problems with anesthesia or surgery? (circle all that apply) ....................... 
 
(severe nausea or vomiting, malignant hyperthermia [in blood relatives or self], breathing
 
difficulties, or problems with placement of a breathing tube)
20. Do you have any chipped or loose teeth, dentures, caps, bridgework, braces, problems 
 
opening your mouth or swallowing, or choking while eating? (circle all that apply)
21. Do your physical abilities limit your daily activities? ................................................. 
22. Do you snore? ............................................................................................ 
23. Do you have sleep apnea? ............................................................................. 
24. Please list any medical illnesses not noted above:
 
 
25. Additional comments or questions for the anesthesiologist?
 
 
(Please check YES or NO and circle specific problems) 
 YES
NO
Figure 9-1, cont’d 
difficult airway is anticipated, preparations must be made in 
advance. Other pertinent elements of the airway examina­
tion appear in Box 9-1.
Although anesthesiologists often have to make treat­
ment decisions with only partial information available, the 
preoperative assessment should not be abbreviated because 
the anesthetic is being delivered in a NORA location. The 
assessment still must be thorough, even for a minor pro­
cedure with monitored anesthesia care. Any procedure 
or anesthetic has the potential for complications and may 
require conversion to a general anesthetic. In NORA loca­
tions, the paucity of resources makes planning for contin­
gencies for even a minor procedure important.
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATIONS
If a patient with a history of syncope previously not evalu­
ated is to undergo a colonoscopy, should the procedure 
continue as planned? It depends on whether the case is 
Table 9-2  Metabolic Equivalents of Functional Capacity 
Measured 1 Through 12
Eating, working at computer, getting dressed
1*
Walking down stairs at home, cooking
2
Walking 1-2 blocks
3
Gardening, raking leaves
4
Climbing one flight of stairs, cycling, dancing
5
Carrying clubs while playing golf
6
Playing singles tennis
7
Climbing stairs quickly, slow jogging
8
Moderate cycling, jumping rope slowly
9
Running, or swimming quickly
10
Cross-country skiing, playing basketball using a full court
11
Rapidly running for long distances
12
*One metabolic equivalent (MET) is equivalent to the consumption of 
3.5 mL O2/min/kg.
From Jette M, Blumchen G. Metabolic equivalents (METS) in exercise testing, 
exercise prescription, and evaluation of functional capacity. Clin Cardiol. 
1990;13(8):555-565.
9  •  Preoperative Evaluations
73
elective or emergent, if there is a likely explanation for the 
syncope, or other factors. If the case is emergent or the 
syncope is not likely due to continued pathological issues, 
the anesthesiologist may choose to proceed and will take 
precautions for problems such as arrhythmias. If the case 
is elective, further evaluation of the syncope is warranted 
before proceeding, if there is any doubt to the precipitating 
cause.
Certain comorbidities require evaluation before an 
anesthetic is administered. Ischemic heart disease is com­
mon and associated with increased risk during anesthesia 
and certain procedures. Patients may have diagnosed and 
well-managed ischemic heart disease or symptoms sugges­
tive of coronary artery disease (CAD) that have not been 
evaluated. Should the procedure proceed as planned? The 
American College of Cardiology Foundation and Ameri­
can Heart Association (ACC/AHA) have recommenda­
tions for testing and revascularization (Figure 9-2).3 The 
anesthesiologist should stop at the first part of the algo­
rithm that applies to the patient. For an emergency proce­
dure such as thrombolytic therapy for an acute stroke, the 
focus is on risk reduction with beta-adrenergic blockers, 
statins, and perioperative surveillance with serial elec­
trocardiograms (ECG), enzyme levels, and monitoring.4 
An emergent procedure should not be delayed for further 
testing. However, if the case is not emergent, a procedure 
should be postponed to have a patient’s active cardiac 
condition stabilized or corrected. Active cardiac condi­
tions include unstable angina, acute or recent myocardial 
infarction if other myocardium is at risk, decompensated 
heart failure, significant arrhythmias, or severe valvular 
disease. A patient without active cardiac symptoms who 
is undergoing a low-risk procedure proceeds without fur­
ther testing. If the patient has a MET greater than 4 and is 
asymptomatic or stable, no additional testing is required, 
because the majority of NORA procedures would be con­
sidered low-risk procedures.
Coexisting Diseases
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Patients with CAD are managed with medication regard­
less of whether they have had cardiac stenting or coro­
nary artery bypass grafting. Evidence supports long-term 
benefits of statins and aspirin in all patients with vascular 
disease. Patients who have had a myocardial infarction 
benefit from beta-adrenergic blocking drugs unless con­
traindicated. These drugs typically need to be continued in 
the perioperative period, although acute initiation has been 
associated with increased risk. See the section on medica­
tions for a detailed discussion.
HEART FAILURE
Heart failure is associated with risk for perioperative compli­
cations.5 Patients with heart failure may have fatigue, recent 
weight gain, dyspnea, orthopnea, or peripheral edema. Some 
patients may have new-onset heart failure, an exacerba­
tion that needs additional evaluation, medication, or diet 
modification. For patients with decompensated heart failure, 
elective procedures are postponed until echocardiographic 
imaging is obtained and the patient’s status has returned to 
baseline. Causes of heart failure are numerous, ranging from 
excessive circulating volume requiring diuretic therapy, to 
postchemotherapy cardiomyopathy, to worsening ischemic 
heart disease requiring evaluation. If the patient has symp­
toms compatible with undiagnosed, poorly managed, or 
decompensated heart failure, a cardiology evaluation is rec­
ommended for optimization of the patient’s condition before 
the procedure. If a patient’s symptoms are not significant 
and are stable, minor procedures may proceed as planned.
HEART MURMURS
Certain cardiac murmurs merit evaluation. Functional 
murmurs from turbulent flow across valves in high-output 
states such as pregnancy, hyperthyroidism, and anemia are 
not concerning.6 Other murmurs may be pathological and 
need to be evaluated by echocardiography before an elec­
tive procedure. Valvular disease is suspected in patients with 
CAD, advanced age, a history of rheumatic fever, cardio­
megaly, heart failure, or pulmonary disease. Some patients 
Box 9-1  Elements of the Airway Examination
Cervical spine: Limited extension, limited flexion, known or possible 
unstable
Neck anatomy: Limited laryngeal mobility, mass, radiation 
changes, thick or obese, tracheal deviation
Thyroid cartilage to mentum distance: <6 cm, ≥6 cm
Mouth opening interincisor or intergingival distance: <3 cm, ≥3 cm
Mandibular protrusion test
Mallampati classification: I, II, III, or IV
Full beard or mustache
Dentition: Normal, dentures or partials, edentulous, missing or 
broken teeth
History of cough
History of rhinorrhea
History of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; treatment with 
steroids or bronchodilators
History of asthma
History of nightly snoring
History of obstructive sleep apnea requiring continuous positive 
airway pressure, bilevel positive airway pressure, or surgery
From Kheterpal, S, Han R, Tremper K, et al. Incidence and predictors of ­difficult 
and impossible mask ventilation. Anesthesiology. 2006;105(5):885-891.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
no
no
no
Emergency surgery?
Major clinical predictor?
Coronary revascularization within the last
5 years without significant interim
change in symptoms?
yes
OR
yes
CC
yes
OR
OR
yes
Favorable cardiac evaluation in 2 years?
Figure 9-2  Cardiac evaluation algorithm.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
74
will report having known mitral or aortic valvular patho­
logical conditions.7 The type of valvular disease may affect 
the choice of anesthetic technique and may necessitate 
advanced monitoring via arterial line or transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE), which are not routinely available 
in NORA locations. Delineation of conditions and communi­
cation are important. For example, if severe aortic stenosis is 
present, spinal anesthesia is relatively contraindicated and 
the degree of stenosis is quantified before general anesthesia 
for an elective procedure. Aortic stenosis may be confused 
for aortic sclerosis in older patients. Both have associated 
systolic murmurs, but aortic sclerosis is more prevalent and 
is not associated with hemodynamic stability. In contrast, 
patients with severe or critical aortic stenosis require a cardi­
ology evaluation before elective procedures. These patients 
may be best managed by moving to an operating room set­
ting where advanced support is available. If the case necessi­
tates being done in NORA location, an anesthesiologist who 
can transport and use a TEE may be requested for the case.
ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS
Guidelines by the American Heart Association that desig­
nate who requires antibiotic prophylaxis against infective 
endocarditis appear in Boxes 9-2 and 9-3.8 Antibiotic rec­
ommendations depend on the patient’s preexisting condition 
and the type of procedure. For patients with native valves, 
antibiotic prophylaxis is not routinely recommended even if 
an abnormality on the native valve is present. However, if a 
patient has a transplanted heart with valvular abnormali­
ties, antibiotic prophylaxis is necessary for certain proce­
dures. For a patient with a prosthetic cardiac valve, previous 
infective endocarditis, unrepaired congenital heart disease, 
or lifelong valvular defects after repair, antibiotic prophy­
laxis is also necessary after certain procedures, which are 
listed in Box 9-3. Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective 
endocarditis is no longer recommended for genitourinary 
and gastrointestinal procedures. For patients with abnor­
malities listed in Box 9-2 undergoing dental procedures that 
involve manipulation of gingival tissues or oral mucosa or 
for procedures on the respiratory tract or infected tissue, 
antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended.
STENTS AND ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY
Patients who have had percutaneous coronary interven­
tion (PCI) should be identified before scheduling a procedure. 
The length of wait time before an elective noncardiac proce­
dure after PCI is determined by the type of revascularization 
and the period of recommended dual antiplatelet therapy to 
prevent thrombosis.9,10 For PCI without stenting, 2 weeks 
of dual antiplatelet therapy should be completed. If a drug-
eluting stent is placed, 12 months of aspirin and thienopyri­
dine therapy (clopidogrel or ticlopidine) is required. If a bare 
metal stent is placed, 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy 
is indicated. The patient is considered high risk during the 
mandated period of dual antiplatelet therapy, and elective 
procedures requiring cessation of antiplatelets or with a risk 
for bleeding are delayed. However, if a procedure mandates 
the discontinuation of thienopyridine therapy during the 
high-risk period, aspirin is continued, with a plan to restart 
the thienopyridine postoperatively.11 The preanesthetic visit 
Box 9-2  Cardiac Conditions for Which 
Endocarditis Prophylaxis Is Indicated
Prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for cardiac 
valve repair
Previous infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease (CHD)
Unrepaired cyanotic CHD (palliative shunts and conduits)
Completely repaired congenital heart defect with ­prosthetic 
material or device, during the first 6 months after the 
­procedure
Repaired CHD with residual defects
Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac 
­valvulopathy
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endo­
carditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2007;116(15):1736-1754.
Box 9-3  Endocarditis Prophylaxis 
Indications
	•	 Bacteremia resulting from daily activities is much more likely to 
cause infective endocarditis than bacteremia associated with a 
dental procedure.
	•	 Only an extremely small number of cases of infective endo­
carditis might be prevented by antibiotic prophylaxis even if 
prophylaxis is 100% effective
	•	 Limit recommendations for infective endocarditis prophylaxis 
to only those conditions listed in Box 9-2.
	•	 Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended for any other 
form of congenital heart disease, except for the conditions 
listed in Box 9-2.
	•	 Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended based 
solely on an increased lifetime risk for acquisition of infective 
endocarditis.
	•	 Antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended solely to prevent 
infective endocarditis for genitourinary or gastrointestinal tract 
procedures.
   
For patients with underlying cardiac conditions associated with 
the highest risk for adverse outcome from infective endocardi­
tis (see Table 9-2), antibiotic prophylaxis is reasonable for the 
following:
   
	•	 All dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival 
tissues or periapical region of teeth or perforation of oral 
mucosa.
	•	 Procedures on respiratory tract or infected skin, skin structures, 
or musculoskeletal tissue.
   
Although these guidelines recommend changes in indications 
for infective endocarditis prophylaxis with regard to selected 
dental procedures, the writing group reaffirms that those medical 
procedures listed as not requiring infective endocarditis prophy­
laxis in the 1997 statement remain unchanged and extends this 
view to vaginal delivery, hysterectomy, and tattooing. Additionally, 
the committee advises against body piercing for patients with 
conditions listed in Box 9-2 because of the possibility of bacteremia, 
while recognizing minimal published data exist regarding the risk 
for bacteremia or endocarditis associated with body piercing.
From Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endo­
carditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2007;116(15):1736-1754.
9  •  Preoperative Evaluations
75
offers the opportunity to identify the type of PCI and discuss 
the dual antiplatelet therapy with the patient’s cardiologist. 
Premature discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy can have 
catastrophic consequences, such as stent thrombosis, myo­
cardial infarction, or even death. The patient needs to be 
aware of the risks of discontinuation of these drugs (Box 9-4).
HYPERTENSION
Patients with hypertension who are to undergo NORA pro­
cedures may have elevated blood pressure on the day of a 
procedure as a result of chronically poor control, anxiety, 
or not taking morning medications.12 Patients with severe 
hypertension commonly have comorbidities such as heart 
failure, renal insufficiency, ischemic heart disease, or his­
tory of stroke. The preoperative goal is to restore blood 
pressure to normal levels over a period of weeks before a 
procedure and to avoid intraoperative hypotension, which 
can result in an ischemic event.13 Aggressive lowering of 
blood pressure on the day of a procedure is more danger­
ous than hypertension. Delaying procedures for patients 
with severe hypertension until a blood pressure of less than 
180/110 mmHg is achieved is recommended.
CARDIOVASCULAR IMPLANTABLE ELECTRONIC 
DEVICES
Patients with pacemakers or implantable cardioverter-­
defibrillators (ICDs) have pathological arrhythmias, cardio­
myopathies, or ischemic or valvular disease.14 The patient’s 
wallet card will contain pertinent information regarding 
the device. Electrocautery can cause an ICD to discharge 
or inhibit pacemakers from pacing. A patient can be inap­
propriately defibrillated or not be paced adequately if he or 
she is pacemaker-dependent. All ICDs have backup pacing 
capabilities. Application of a magnet on an ICD inhibits 
antitachycardia therapies, but does not affect the pacing 
function. A magnet placed over a pacemaker converts the 
device to asynchronous pacing for the duration of magnet 
application. Suggestion has been made that if electrocau­
tery is limited to below the umbilicus, it is highly unlikely 
to affect a pacemaker or ICD and use of a magnet or repro­
gramming the device is not necessary. If it is anticipated that 
electrocautery will be used above the umbilicus, it is pru­
dent to contact someone who is familiar with such devices 
for recommendations on the use of a magnet or whether 
the device requires reprogramming. A defibrillator must be 
immediately available to deliver antitachycardia therapy 
or transcutaneous pacing whenever a patient with an ICD 
or a pacemaker who is pacemaker-dependent is having a 
procedure. Magnets may permanently disable antitachy­
cardia therapies when applied to ICDs. If a magnet is used, 
the device was reprogrammed, or interference from electro­
cautery has occurred, these devices must be reinterrogated 
to establish previous settings before the patient leaves a 
monitored setting. A summary of the potential interactions 
between implanted cardiac devices and various procedures 
is provided in Box 9-5.
PULMONARY DISEASE
Postoperative pulmonary complications are more preva­
lent in patients with poor general health, older age, heart 
failure, a smoking history, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), 
or poorly controlled pulmonary pathological conditions 
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma.15 
Box 9-4  Summary of Recommendations 
from the 2007 Science Advisory and the 
2007 American College of Cardiology and 
American Heart Association
	•	 Premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy with 
new coronary stents increased risk for life-threatening stent 
thrombosis in the perioperative period.
	•	 The time period for this risk is 4 to 6 weeks for bare metal 
stents and 12 months for drug-eluting stents.
	•	 Timing of elective surgery with new coronary stents: Elective 
procedure should be deferred until patients complete an appro­
priate course of thienopyridine therapy.
	•	 Elective noncardiac surgery is not recommended when thieno­
pyridine therapy or thienopyridine and aspirin therapy needs 
to be continued during the perioperative period.
	•	 The recommended period of thienopyridine therapy or thieno­
pyridine and aspirin therapy is a minimum of 1 month or 4 to 
6 weeks for bare metal stents and 12 months for drug-eluting 
stents.
	•	 If surgery cannot be deferred and thienopyridine therapy must 
be interrupted in patients with new coronary stents, aspirin 
should be continued. The thienopyridine should be restarted 
as soon as possible after the surgical procedure.
	•	 Dual antiplatelet therapy should be continued beyond the 
recommended time frame in any patient at high risk for stent 
thrombosis. Even after thienopyridine has been discontinued 
for a procedure, aspirin therapy should be continued periop­
eratively in any patient with a drug-eluting stent.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and 
Practice Parameters. Practice alert for the perioperative management of 
patients with coronary artery stents. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:22-23.
Box 9-5  Potential Problems with 
Cardiovascular Implantable Electronic 
Devices During Surgical Procedures
Bipolar electrocautery does not cause EMI unless applied directly 
to CIED; bipolar cautery should be used when possible.
EMI from monopolar electrocautery is common.
If monopolar cautery is used, bursts should be ≤5 seconds.
Pacemakers may oversense and be inhibited by EMI.
Device reset infrequently occurs with electrocautery.
Cardioversion can reset CIED.
Keeping the current path away from CIED decreases potential for 
CIED complications.
Gastrointestinal procedures using cautery can cause interference.
ECT causing tachycardia may prompt review of ICD tachycardia 
therapy zones.
TENS can cause EMI.
CIED, Cardiovascular implantable electronic device; ECT, electrocon­
vulsive therapy; EMI, electromagnetic interference; ICD, implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator; TENS, transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation.
From Crossley GH, Poole JE, Rozner MA, et al. The Heart Rhythm Society 
(HRS)/American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) expert consensus state­
ment on the perioperative management of patients with implantable 
defibrillators, pacemakers and arrhythmia monitors: facilities and patient 
management—executive summary. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8(7):e1-e18.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
76
General anesthesia increases the risk of postoperative pul­
monary complications. The bronchoscopy suite personnel 
are especially concerned about pulmonary complications. 
Preoperative administration of beta-adrenergic agonists and 
steroids can minimize bronchospasm with intubation for 
patients with obstructive or reactive airways disease. Meth­
ods to decrease postoperative pulmonary complications 
include treating pulmonary infections and heart failure, 
using pulmonary recruitment maneuvers such as incen­
tive spirometry, using continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP), and avoiding general anesthesia when possible.
OBESITY
Obesity is a common disorder; 35% of adults in the United 
States are obese (body mass index [BMI] >30), 5% are 
severely obese (BMI >40), and 1% are superobese (BMI 
>50).16 Obese patients have increased rates of chronic dis­
ease, including obstructive sleep apnea, CAD, pulmonary 
hypertension, diabetes, hypertension, and right and left 
heart failure. They also may be more difficult to ventilate 
by mask and intubate and desaturate more quickly after 
onset of apnea.17 Special equipment is required to anesthe­
tize extremely obese patients in a NORA location, includ­
ing appropriate-sized operating or procedure room tables. 
Depending on the model, most interventional radiology 
fluoroscopic tables can support up to 350 to 400 lb (159-
181 kg), and most standard gurneys can support 500 lb 
(227 kg). Computed tomography scanners have an inter­
nal diameter of 27.5 inches (70 cm) and circumference of 
87 inches (221 cm) and can support up to 450 lb (204 kg). 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanners have an inter­
nal diameter of 24 inches (60 cm) and circumference of 
74 inches (188) and can support 350 to 400 lb (159-181 
kg), again depending on model. Some obese patients will 
not fit into these devices, and measurement of their weight 
and abdominal girth should be performed before adminis­
tering sedation or anesthesia.
DIABETES
Diabetes affects all major organ systems, especially the 
kidneys, heart, nervous system, and vasculature. Surgical 
and anesthetic risk both increase with poorly controlled 
diabetes, probably because of comorbid conditions such as 
cardiovascular disease, renal insufficiency, and increased 
susceptibility to infection. Patients with poorly controlled 
type 1 diabetes are at risk for ketoacidosis, even with glu­
cose values less than 300 g/dL. Patients with poorly con­
trolled type 2 diabetes are at risk for extreme hyperglycemia 
(>500 g/dL) and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic 
syndrome. Despite this, no evidence supports cancellation of 
ambulatory surgery cases for hyperglycemia as long as no 
evidence of ketoacidosis, dehydration, or extreme hypergly­
cemia exists. Cases should be delayed for patients with severe 
hypoglycemia (glucose <50 g/dL). General preoperative 
goals for patients with diabetes are to avoid hypoglycemia 
by appropriately managing insulin during periods of fast­
ing and prevent ketoacidosis and extreme hyperglycemia by 
ensuring proper glucose monitoring and medication man­
agement (Table 9-3). Perioperative glucose management 
has become a controversial topic, with literature supporting 
tight glycemic control in patients undergoing cardiac sur­
gery but not in general and ambulatory patients.18 The risk 
for hypoglycemia may outweigh any possible benefit of eug­
lycemia, particularly in the NORA setting.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
OSA is a prevalent, often undiagnosed disorder characterized 
by intermittent apnea or hypopnea during sleep.19 Patients 
with OSA have increased rates of chronic disease, including 
hypertension, arrhythmia, stroke, heart failure, pulmonary 
hypertension, and CAD.20 Airway management, including 
mask ventilation and intubation, can be more challeng­
ing, and postoperative respiratory complications, including 
hypoxemia, atelectasis, pneumonia, and prolonged hospitali­
zations, occur more frequently in patients with moderate to 
severe OSA.21 The ASA recommends screening for OSA as 
part of the preanesthetic assessment.2 Many screening sur­
veys exist; the STOP-BANG questionnaire is a previously val­
idated eight-item survey (Figure 9-3).22 Controversy exists 
over appropriate perioperative management of patients with 
OSA, in particular postoperative monitoring. The Society 
for Ambulatory Anesthesia consensus statement on OSA 
states that outpatient surgery is reasonable, providing the 
patient has otherwise good health or well-controlled comor­
bidities, will not receive opiates as the main source of pain 
control, and is willing to be compliant with CPAP therapy 
during any periods of rest for several days after surgery.20 
If a patient uses a CPAP or bilevel positive airway pressure 
(BiPAP) device, it should be brought to the procedure. In 
patients in whom moderate to severe OSA is suspected but 
not diagnosed, prolonged monitoring and empirical CPAP 
therapy may be indicated if obstruction occurs postopera­
tively. Patients with OSA may benefit from recovering in the 
main operating room postanesthesia care unit if possible.
RENAL DISEASE
Kidney disease is usually classified according to glomerular 
filtration rate (GFR), varying from stage 1 (kidney damage 
with normal GFR greater than 90 mL/min/1.73 m2) to 
stage 5 (kidney failure with GFR <15 mL/min/1.73 m2). 
Stage 3 and above chronic kidney disease is associated 
with cardiovascular disease and is one of the five major 
Table 9-3  Preoperative Testing Guidelines for Procedures 
Performed Outside the Operating Room
Condition
Test
Potential for blood loss
Hemoglobin, hematocrit
Potential for transfusion
Hemoglobin, hematocrit
Administration of contrast media
Creatinine
Women of childbearing age
Diabetes
Cirrhosis
Active cardiac conditions†
Offer human chorionic 
gonadotropin*
Glucose*
Prothrombin time, international 
normalized ratio, platelets
Electrocardiogram
*Day of procedure.
†New onset or unstable angina, decompensated heart failure, new onset or 
significant arrhythmias, and severe valvular disease.
9  •  Preoperative Evaluations
77
clinical risk indicators identified in the ACC/AHA preopera­
tive guidelines.23,24 Kidney disease is also associated with 
disturbances in serum electrolytes, acid-base status, and 
intravascular volume, particularly in patients who require 
dialysis. Patients on chronic dialysis should be dialyzed the 
day before surgery to optimize volume status and electrolyte 
levels. Mild hyperkalemia (potassium 5.2-6.0) is common in 
patients on hemodialysis, and correction preoperatively is 
not usually necessary for procedures without expected long 
duration or need for transfusion, particularly if the potas­
sium level is within the patient’s baseline values. Patients 
with renal insufficiency are more susceptible to further renal 
injury with contrast media for interventional and imaging 
studies, and consideration is given to prehydration with 
normal saline or saline with sodium bicarbonate for those 
with creatinine greater than 2.0 or GFR less than 60 mL/
min/1.73 m2.25 Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis can be caused 
by administration of gadolinium to patients with stage 4 or 
5 chronic kidney disease. Most radiology and cardiology 
departments have specific protocols regarding administra­
tion of contrast to patients with renal insufficiency or failure.
ANEMIA
Anemia is often a marker of underlying disease. It is associ­
ated with increased perioperative mortality, possibly because 
anemic patients are more likely to receive blood products and 
incur the associated risks of transfusion.26 In asymptomatic 
anemic patients without other major comorbidity undergo­
ing outpatient procedures associated with minimal blood 
loss, preoperative transfusion is usually not indicated, but 
identification of the underlying source of their anemia may be 
beneficial. ASA practice guidelines state that patients should 
receive blood if their hemoglobin level is less than 6 g/dL.27 
Patients who are members of the Jehovah’s Witness faith 
often refuse blood transfusion because of a religious belief that 
blood is sacred and should not leave the body or be stored out­
side of it. They may accept factor concentrates and are usu­
ally willing to accept cell-salvage blood as long as it remains 
in circuit. Clear delineation of their preferences is necessary 
before procedures associated with blood loss, and the assigned 
anesthesia team must be notified because some anesthesia 
providers will recuse themselves of caring for patients unwill­
ing to accept transfusion. Iron can be prescribed preopera­
tively to increase hemoglobin, and some Jehovah’s Witnesses 
will accept erythropoietin. Type and screen is not drawn on 
patients who will not accept blood products.
PREGNANCY
Pregnant patients should receive preoperative and postop­
erative fetal heart rate (FHR) assessment. Depending on the 
gestational age, procedure type, and anesthetic, continuous 
fetal monitoring may be indicated. The American College 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommends preprocedure 
and postprocedure FHR assessment by Doppler for previable 
fetuses with a gestational age of 24 weeks or under and elec­
tronic FHR and preprocedure and postprocedure contraction 
monitoring for viable fetuses.28 They also support intraop­
erative fetal monitoring if it will guide intraoperative care, 
including oxygen delivery or blood pressure and positioning 
management, and if the patient will provide informed consent 
STOP BANG Questionnaire
Age _____    Height _____ inches/cm   Weight _____ lb/kg   Male/Female
BMI _____    Neck circumference* _____ cm
1. Do you snore loudly (louder than talking or loud enough to be heard through closed doors)?  Yes   No
2. Do you often feel tired, fatigued, or sleepy during daytime?  Yes   No
3. Has anyone observed you stop breathing during your sleep?  Yes   No
4. Do you have or are you being treated for high blood pressure?  Yes   No
5. BMI more than 35 kg/m2?  Yes   No
6. Age over 50 yr old?  Yes   No
7. Neck circumference greater than 40 cm?  Yes   No
8. Gender male?  Yes   No
* Neck circumference is measured by staff
High risk of OSA: answering yes to three or more items
Low risk of OSA: answering yes to less than three items
Figure 9-3  STOP BANG questionnaire.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
78
for cesarean delivery should sustained decompensation in 
FHR occur.28 Coordination with obstetricians and obstetric 
nursing preoperatively is required to facilitate fetal moni­
toring. In particular, if continuous monitoring is planned, 
a member of the obstetric team will need to be present for 
the procedure. The second trimester of pregnancy is the saf­
est time for patients to receive anesthesia because the risk 
for spontaneous abortion is lower than in the first trimes­
ter, and the risk for preterm labor is lower than in the third 
trimester.28 After the first trimester, pregnant patients have 
decreased lower esophageal sphincter tone but gastric vol­
umes and pH similar to those in nonpregnant individuals.29 
Therefore they may be at higher risk for aspiration, which 
should be considered during anesthetic planning, in par­
ticular with deep sedation. Pregnant patients with viable 
fetuses undergoing NORA procedures should be cared for 
in a center with an obstetric suite, neonatal services, and 
capability to perform emergency delivery.28
Prematurely born infants are at increased risk for postop­
erative apnea, and admission should be planned for observa­
tion for at least 12 hours if they are younger than 60 weeks’ 
gestational age.30 Gestational age is defined as the number 
of weeks the neonate is beyond the mother’s last menstrual 
period or by considering the infant’s due date as 40 weeks 
and adding or subtracting number of weeks from that date 
until the current day. Any neonate with a history of anemia 
or apnea or on home apnea monitoring is not an appropri­
ate candidate for an outpatient procedure and may ben­
efit from administration of caffeine to prevent apnea.30,31 
In healthy infants born at term, practice varies, but most 
centers discharge patients older than 44 weeks’ gestational 
age, as long as no respiratory events are observed postop­
eratively. Young infants should be scheduled as the first 
case of the day, and appropriately sized monitors, supplies, 
a pediatric resuscitation cart, and a warming device should 
be present before anesthesia administration.
Preoperative Testing
Routine diagnostic testing not tailored to patients’ specific 
comorbidities offers little value and has not been shown to 
affect outcome in patients undergoing low-risk ambulatory 
surgery.32-34 In fact, pursuing abnormal results discovered 
on routine preoperative testing may lead to more harm 
than benefit, because further diagnostic tests may incur 
unwarranted risk to the patient.1,32 However, patient-
specific comorbidities may warrant further investigation 
or monitoring, such as assessing coagulation status in cir­
rhotic patients, because abnormal values may change both 
anesthetic and procedural plans. Type and screen should 
be ordered only for procedures in which blood loss is antici­
pated. Assessment of kidney function is recommended for 
patients receiving contrast media.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAMS
Routine requirement for preoperative resting 12-lead ECGs 
has not been shown to improve care in patients undergoing 
ambulatory surgery.35,36 ECG abnormalities are very com­
mon, particularly in older patients, and are generally very 
poor predictors of postoperative cardiac events.34 The ASA 
Preoperative Evaluation Practice Advisory acknowledges 
that electrocardiography does not improve prediction of 
cardiac risk beyond risk factors identified by patient his­
tory.2 The ACC/AHA guidelines state that “ECGs are not 
indicated in asymptomatic persons undergoing low-risk 
surgical procedures.”3 The vast majority of patients under­
going low-risk NORA procedures will not benefit from a 
preoperative resting ECG.
CHEST RADIOGRAPHS
Preoperative “routine” chest radiographs have not been 
shown to predict postoperative pulmonary complications 
and should not be ordered without indication.15
PREGNANCY TESTING
The effects of anesthesia on the developing fetus are 
unknown; therefore women of childbearing age should be 
offered pregnancy testing, particularly for elective proce­
dures. Recommended preoperative testing guidelines are 
summarized in Table 9-3.
Perioperative Medications
Patients are often confused about which medications to 
continue or discontinue in the perioperative period, partic­
ularly on the day of surgery. Written instructions can help 
clarify which medications the patient should take. Medi­
cations need to be reconciled between the medical record 
and patient during the preoperative visit. Both comorbidi­
ties and the type of procedure should be considered when 
managing medications before NORA anesthesia.
CARDIOVASCULAR AND ANTIHYPERTENSIVE 
MEDICINES
Cardiovascular medications, including antihypertensive 
agents, are continued preoperatively. Cessation of beta 
blockade perioperatively is associated with adverse cardio­
vascular events and is not recommended.37 Most patients 
undergoing ambulatory surgery do not need to be started 
on perioperative beta blockers because they are undergoing 
low-risk procedures. Specific abnormalities noted during the 
preoperative history and physical may warrant changes in 
preoperative medication instructions. Patients taking angio­
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor 
blockers, especially in combination with diuretics, may have 
refractory hypotension during general anesthesia that is 
unresponsive to treatment with conventional vasopressors. 
The potential for hypotension should be balanced against 
the benefit of continuing these agents, especially for patients 
with heart failure. Patients with heart failure are continued 
on their diuretic dose unless hypovolemia is suspected.
ASPIRIN AND OTHER ANTIPLATELET DRUGS
Aspirin is commonly used to lower the risk for cardiac 
events in patients with cardiac disease, cerebrovascu­
lar disease, peripheral vascular disease, and diabetes. 
Although aspirin has traditionally been discontinued for 
9  •  Preoperative Evaluations
79
the week before surgery, preoperative cessation of aspirin 
puts patients at increased risk for cardiovascular or cere­
brovascular events preoperatively, possibly by creating a 
hypercoagulable state.38,39 Aspirin should be continued 
in patients with atherosclerosis taking it for secondary 
prophylaxis against vascular events, except in procedures 
in which bleeding into closed spaces could cause severe 
injury, such as spinal surgery. Aspirin should usually be 
stopped in patients taking it for primary prophylaxis.38 For 
secondary prophylaxis, 81-mg, or “baby,” aspirin may be 
substituted for regular aspirin for the week before surgery. 
Aspirin can be continued at full dose for many superficial 
procedures not associated with blood loss, such as cataract 
extraction. Full-dose aspirin is also usually continued for 
patients with peripheral arterial disease undergoing revas­
cularization surgery or arterial stenting. Neuraxial anes­
thesia is not contraindicated in patients taking aspirin.40 
The thienopyridines clopidogrel (Plavix) and ticlopidine 
(Ticlid) inhibit platelet function and should be discontinued 
before most procedures, with the exception of some vascu­
lar cases, including peripheral arterial stenting procedures. 
It is important to confirm with the proceduralists whether 
thienopyridines should be continued. Neuraxial anesthesia 
is contraindicated in patients taking thienopyridines; clopi­
dogrel is discontinued for 7 days and ticlopidine 10 days 
before intrathecal or epidural anesthesia.40,41
ANTICOAGULANT THERAPY
Dabigatran (Pradaxa), a direct thrombin inhibitor used 
mainly for chronic anticoagulation in patients with atrial 
fibrillation, should be discontinued 1 to 5 days before proce­
dures requiring normal coagulation, depending on creati­
nine clearance (CrCl) (1-2 days for those with CrCl >50 mL/
min, 3-5 days for those with CrCl <50 mL/min). Of note, 
the anticoagulant activity of dabigatran cannot be assessed 
by prothrombin time and international normalized ratio 
(INR); activated partial thromboplastin time gives an esti­
mate of effect, but thrombin time and ecarin clotting time 
give the most accurate assessment. Warfarin may increase 
bleeding except in very superficial procedures. If the INR is 
2 to 3, warfarin should be held for 5 days before the proce­
dure; if greater than 3, it should be held longer, with a goal 
INR of less than 1.5.40 Neuraxial anesthesia is contraindi­
cated with an INR greater than 1.3. Bridging of anticoagu­
lation after warfarin discontinuation is necessary for some 
patients, in particular those with mechanical heart valves, 
history of atrial fibrillation–related embolic stroke or atrial 
thrombus, or recently diagnosed deep vein thrombosis. 
Therapeutic-dose low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) 
is commonly used for this purpose. Therapeutic LMWH is 
discontinued 24 hours before procedures or planned neur­
axial anesthesia.40 Subcutaneous unfractionated heparin 
5000 units once or twice daily is not a contraindication to 
neuraxial anesthesia, although timing of a block 1 hour 
before next dose may be the safest.40
INSULIN AND ORAL DIABETES MEDICINES
Patients taking insulin usually have a basal insulin require­
ment that needs to be maintained, even during fasting. All 
patients taking long-acting glargine (Lantus) insulin should 
be continued on their usual dose perioperatively. Patients 
with insulin pumps should continue on their lowest basal 
rate. Patients with type 1 diabetes should take one third to 
half of their normal morning dose of intermediate-acting to 
long-acting insulin (Lente or neutral protamine Hagedorn 
[NPH]), and patients with type 2 diabetes can take up to 
half their dose of intermediate-acting to long-acting insulin 
or combination insulin on the date of their surgery. Taking 
half of the usual dose of intermediate, long-acting, or com­
bination insulins on the day of surgery improves periopera­
tive glycemic control in contrast to taking none on the day 
of surgery.42 Short-acting insulins intended to provide cov­
erage for meals are discontinued during fasting and on the 
day of surgery.
Sulfonylurea agents can cause hypoglycemia in fast­
ing patients. Insulin sensitizers such as metformin and 
pioglitazone and agents that decrease intestinal carbo­
hydrate absorption such as acarbose do not cause hypo­
glycemia during fasting. Metformin does not need to be 
discontinued before the date of surgery; the risk for lac­
tic acidosis with metformin occurs only in patients with 
kidney and liver dysfunction. To avoid confusion, many 
centers hold all oral diabetic medications on the day of 
surgery.
STEROIDS
Steroids should be continued on the date of surgery. 
Patients taking chronic steroids may have suppression of 
their glucocorticoid production and are therefore unable 
to increase levels during physiological stress, causing 
acute adrenal insufficiency.43,44 Patients who have taken 
more than 5 mg/day of prednisone or its equivalent for 
more than 3 to 4 weeks in the past year are at risk for 
adrenal suppression. Most NORA procedures are not 
physiologically stressful, and no increase in steroid dose is 
typically indicated if patients have taken their usual dos­
ages on schedule. If a NORA procedure is anticipated to be 
stressful or acute adrenal insufficiency is suspected, a dose 
of 25 mg of intravenous hydrocortisone can be given to 
the patient.45
PSYCHIATRIC MEDICINES
Psychiatric drugs such as selective serotonin reup­
take inhibitors, antipsychotics, and monoamine oxi­
dase inhibitors (MAOIs) should be continued on the 
date of surgery because discontinuation puts patients 
at risk for relapse of their condition or suicide. MAOIs 
were previously discontinued before surgery for several 
weeks because of concern about serotonin syndrome 
or hypertensive crisis developing from their interaction 
with drugs commonly used during anesthesia. Provider 
awareness and avoidance of medications that periopera­
tively interact with MAOIs should negate the need for 
their discontinuation.
HERBAL SUPPLEMENTS
Herbals and supplements are discontinued at least 7 days 
before surgery. Garlic, ginseng, and gingko have mild anti­
coagulant activity.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
80
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Patients can continue opioid medications, benzodiazepines, 
and nicotine replacement therapy to avoid withdrawal 
symptoms and pain or anxiety.46 Patients undergoing 
MRI scans need to remove transdermal patches before the 
study.
A summary of recommendations for perioperative medi­
cation management is listed in Box 9-6.
Fasting Guidelines
Current ASA guidelines for adult patients recommend fast­
ing for 6 hours after a light meal or nonclear liquid and 
8 hours after meals containing fatty foods or meat before 
procedures requiring anesthesia.47 Most patients may con­
tinue clear liquids up to 2 hours before the procedure and 
take medications with water on the day of surgery. Patients 
with conditions that are associated with aspiration, such as 
hiatal hernia, long-standing diabetes mellitus, pregnancy, 
severe ascites, and bowel obstruction, should remain on 
nil per os (NPO) restriction for 8 hours, except for neces­
sary medications with water. Pediatric patients follow the 
same instructions, except that infants may have breast 
milk up to 4 hours before the procedure or formula up to 
6 hours before the procedure, and intake of clear liquids is 
encouraged up until 2 hours before the procedure to avoid 
dehydration.
Conclusion
Patients undergoing NORA require adequate preoperative 
evaluation and preparation, most importantly a compre­
hensive history and properly conducted physical examina­
tion and appropriate medication and fasting instructions. 
Most patients undergoing NORA will not require further 
cardiovascular testing unless an active cardiac condition 
is discovered during the preoperative assessment, and 
routine laboratory testing usually is not indicated. Ensur­
ing access to appropriate anesthetic monitors, devices, 
and drugs, as well as adequate planning for patients with 
comorbidities, will lead to improved care and less frustra­
tion on the part of providers operating outside their usual 
environment.
References
	 1.	 Apfelbaum JL. Preoperative evaluation, laboratory screening, and 
selection of adult surgical outpatients in the 1990s. Anesth Rev. 
1990;17(suppl 2):4–12.
	 2.	 Apfelbaum J, Connis RT, Nickinovich DG, et al. Committee on Stan­
dards and Practice Parameters. Practice advisory for preanesthesia 
evaluation: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthe­
siologists Task Force on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Anesthesiology. 
2012;116(3):1–17.
	 3.	 Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA, et al. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines 
on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac 
surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50(17):1707–1732.
	 4.	 Grayburn PA, Hillis LD. Cardiac events in patients undergoing non­
cardiac surgery: shifting the paradigm from noninvasive risk stratifi­
cation to therapy. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138(6):506–511.
	 5.	 Jessup M, Abraham WT, Casey DE, et al. 2009 Focused update: ACCF/
AHA guidelines for the diagnosis and management of heart failure in 
adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53(15):1343–1382.
	 6.	 Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K, et al. 2008 focused update 
incorporated into the 2006 ACC/AHA guidelines for the man­
agement of patients with valvular heart disease. Circulation. 
2008;118(15):e523–e661.
	 7.	 Frogel J, Galusca D. Anesthetic considerations for patients with 
advanced valvular heart disease undergoing noncardiac surgery. 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2010;28(1):67–85.
	 8.	 Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endo­
carditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2007;116(15):1736–1754.
	 9.	 Newsome LT, Weller RS, Gerancher JC, et al. Coronary artery stents. 
II. Perioperative considerations and management. Anesth Analg. 
2008;107(2):570–590.
Box 9-6  Preoperative Medication 
Management
Continue Day of Surgery
Anxiolytics, psychiatric medications
Antihypertensives*
Aspirin for secondary prophylaxis
Asthma medications
Autoimmune medications
Cardiac medications
Clopidogrel (Plavix): Patients with drug-eluting stents <12 months 
or bare metal stents <1 month
Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors
Diuretics: Triamterene, hydrochlorothiazide
Eye drops
Estrogen compounds
Gastrointestinal reflux medications
Insulin
Type 1 diabetes: Take less than one third to half of intermediate 
to long-acting (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH], Lente)
Type 2 diabetes: Up to half of long-acting (NPH) or combination 
(70/30) glargine (Lantus)
Insulin pump: Continue lowest basal rate
Opioids for pain or addiction
Oral contraceptives
Seizure medications
Statins
Steroids (oral or inhaled)
Thyroid medications
Discontinue
Aspirin for primary prophylaxis 5 to 7 days before surgery
Autoimmune
Methotrexate (if risk of renal failure)
Etanercept (Enbrel) 2 weeks before
Infliximab (Remicade) 6 weeks before
Adalimumab (Humira) 8 weeks before
Clopidogrel (Plavix): No recent stents, nonvascular surgery
Diuretics: Potent loop diuretics except for patients with heart 
failure
Estrogen compounds if not for cancer or contraception
Herbals and nonvitamin supplements: 7 to 14 days before surgery
Hypoglycemic agents, oral
Insulin: Short-acting insulin (except lowest basal rate for continu­
ous pump therapy)
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs: 48 hours before day of 
surgery
Topical creams and ointments
Viagra or similar medications: 24 hours before surgery
Vitamins, minerals, iron
Warfarin: Discontinue 5 days before surgery (except for cataract 
surgery)
*Consider discontinuing angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
and angiotensin receptor blockers based on patient condition and 
procedure.
9  •  Preoperative Evaluations
81
	10.	 Grines CI, Bonow RD, Casey Jr DE, et  al. Prevention of premature 
discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coro­
nary artery stents: a science advisory from the American Heart Asso­
ciation/American College of Cardiology, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, American College of Surgeon, and 
American Dental Association with representation from the American 
College of Physicians. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:734–739.
	11.	 Burger W, Chemnitius JM, Kneissl GD, et  al. Low-dose aspirin for 
secondary cardiovascular prevention-cardiovascular risks after its 
perioperative withdrawal versus bleeding risks with its continuation: 
review and meta-analysis. J Intern Med. 2005;257(5):399–414.
	12.	 Howell SJ, Sear JW, Foëx P. Hypertension, hypertensive heart disease 
and perioperative cardiac risk. Br J Anaesth. 2004;92(4):570–583.
	13.	 Wax DB, Porter SB, Lin HM, et  al. Association of preanesthesia 
hypertension with adverse outcomes. J Cardiovasc Vasc Anesth. 
2012;24(6):927–930.
	14.	 Crossley GH, Poole JE, Rozner MA, et al. The Heart Rhythm Society 
(HRS)/American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) expert consensus 
statement on the perioperative management of patients with implant­
able defibrillators, pacemakers and arrhythmia monitors: facili­
ties and patient management—executive summary. Heart Rhythm. 
2011;8(7):e1–e18.
	15.	 Smetana GW, Lawrence VA, Cornell JE. American College of Phy­
sicians. Preoperative pulmonary risk stratification for noncardio­
thoracic surgery: systematic review for the American College of 
Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(8):581–595.
	16.	 Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity in the 
United States, 2009–2010. NCHS Data Brief No. 82. Atlanta: National 
Center for Health Statistics; January 2012.
	17.	 Gonzalez H, Minville V, Delanoue K, et al. The importance of increased 
neck circumference to intubation difficulties in obese patients. Anesth 
Analg. 2008;106(4):1132–1136.
	18.	 Lipshutz AK, Gropper MA. Perioperative glycemic control. Anesthesi­
ology. 2009;110(2):408–421.
	19.	 Young T, Skatrud J, Peppard PE. Risk factors for obstructive sleep 
apnea in adults. JAMA. 2004;291(16):2013–2016.
	20.	 Bradley TD, Floras JS. Sleep apnea and heart failure. I. Obstructive 
sleep apnea. Circulation. 2003;107(12):1671–1678.
	21.	 Hwang D, Shakir N, Limann B, et  al. Association of sleep-dis­
ordered 
breathing 
with 
postoperative 
complications. 
Chest. 
2008;133(5):1128–1134.
	22.	 Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, et  al. STOP questionnaire: a 
tool to screen patients for obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 
2008;108(5):812–821.
	23.	 Joshi GP, Ankichetty SP, Gan TJ, Chung F. Society for Ambulatory 
Anesthesia consensus statement on preoperative selection of adult 
patients with obstructive sleep apnea scheduled for ambulatory sur­
gery. Anesth Analg. 2012;115(5):1060–1068.
	24.	 Mathew A, Devereaux PJ, O’Hare A, et  al. Chronic kidney disease 
and postoperative mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Kidney Int. 2008;73(9):1069–1081.
	25.	 Tepel M, Aspelin P, Lameire N. Contrast-induced nephropathy: a 
clinical and evidence-based approach. Circulation. 2006;113(14):
1799–1806.
	26.	 Beattie WS, Karkouti K, Wijeysundera DN, et  al. Risk associated 
with preoperative anemia in noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2009;110(3):574–581.
	27.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative 
Blood Transfusion and Adjuvant Therapies. Practice guidelines for 
perioperative blood transfusion and adjuvant therapies: an updated 
report. Anesthesiology. 2006;105(1):198–208.
	28.	 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Nonobstetric 
surgery during pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 474. Obstet Gyne­
col. 2011;117(2 Pt. 1):420–421.
	29.	 Chesnut D, Polley L, Wong C, Tsen L. Chestnut’s obstetrics anesthesia 
principles and practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2009.
	30.	 Walther-Larsen S, Rasmussen LS. The former preterm infant and risk 
of post operative apnoea: recommendations for management. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2006;50(7):888–893.
	31.	 Coté CJ, Lerman J, Todres ID. A practice of anesthesia for infants and 
children. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008.
	32.	 Chung F, Yuan H, Yin L, et al. Elimination of preoperative testing in 
ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg. 2009;108(2):467–475.
	33.	 Narr BJ, Hansen TR, Warner MA. Preoperative laboratory screen­
ing in healthy Mayo patients: cost-effective elimination of tests and 
unchanged outcomes. Mayo Clin Proc. 1991;66(2):155–159.
	34.	 Liu LL, Dzankic S, Leung JM. Preoperative electrocardiogram abnor­
malities do not predict postoperative cardiac complications in geriatric 
surgical patients. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50(7):1186–1191.
	35.	 Gold BS, Young ML, Kinman JL, et al. The utility of preoperative elec­
trocardiograms in the ambulatory surgical patient. Arch Intern Med. 
1992;152(2):301–305.
	36.	 van Klei WA, Bryson GL, Yang H, et al. The value of routine preop­
erative electrocardiography in predicting myocardial infarction after 
noncardiac surgery. Ann Surg. 2007;246(2):165–170.
	37.	 Fleischmann KE, Beckman JA, Buller CE, et  al. 2009 ACCF/AHA 
focused update on perioperative beta blockade. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2009;54(22):2102–2128.
	38.	 Chassot PG, Delabays A, Spahn DR. Perioperative antiplatelet ther­
apy: the case for continuing therapy in patients at risk of myocardial 
infarction. Br J Anaesth. 2007;99(3):316–328.
	39.	 Senior K. Aspirin withdrawal increases risk of heart problems. Lancet. 
2003;362(9395):1558.
	40.	 Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, et al. Regional anesthesia in 
the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: Ameri­
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine evidence-based 
guidelines (3rd edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35(1):64–101.
	41.	 Kearon C, Hirsh J. Management of anticoagulation before and after 
elective surgery. N Engl J Med. 1997;336(21):1506–1511.
	42.	 Likavec A, Moitra V, Greenberg J, et al. Comparison of preoperative 
blood glucose levels in patients receiving different insulin regimens. 
Anesthesiology. 2006:A567.
	43.	 Salem M, Tainsh RE, Bromberg J, et al. Perioperative glucocorticoid 
coverage: a reassessment 42 years after emergence of a problem. 
Ann Surg. 1994;219(4):416–425.
	44.	 Udelsman R, Norton JA, Jelenich SE, et al. Responses of the hypotha­
lamic-pituitary-adrenal and renin-angiotensin axes and the sympa­
thetic system during controlled surgical and anesthetic stress. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 1987;64(5):986–994.
	45.	 Coursin DB, Wood KE. Corticosteroid supplementation for adrenal 
insufficiency. JAMA. 2002;287(2):236–240.
	46.	 Spell III NO. Stopping and restarting medications in the perioperative 
period. Med Clin North Am. 2001;85(5):1117–1128.
	47.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and 
Practice. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of 
pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: 
application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an 
updated report. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(3):495–511.
82
The treatment of structural heart disease is undergoing a 
revolution reminiscent of the management of coronary 
artery disease 30 years ago—the development, evaluation, 
and application of catheter-based techniques of valve repair 
and replacement. Catheter deployed devices have also dis­
placed surgical repair as the preferred treatment for several 
other cardiac conditions, such as patent ductus arteriosus, 
atrial septal defect, and patent foramen ovale. These proce­
dures typically require radiological imaging and thus are 
usually performed in a catheterization laboratory rather 
than a conventional operating room. This chapter reviews 
the anesthetic considerations of adult patients undergoing 
these procedures in the interventional cardiology cath­
eterization laboratory (ICCL) and examines in detail a new 
procedure, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), 
which has been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) and will be performed at an increas­
ing number of hospitals in the near future. No outcomes 
studies addressing these issues exist; therefore the informa­
tion in this chapter is based on the author’s experience and 
discussions with other practitioners.
Most patients having procedures in the ICCL do so with­
out direct anesthesiologist involvement. Diagnostic cath­
eterizations, percutaneous coronary interventions, and 
many other procedures, including balloon mitral valvulo­
plasty and closure of atrial septal defect and patent fora­
men ovale, are routinely managed with local anesthetic 
infiltration by the operator and conscious sedation with 
intravenous agents administered by specially trained regis­
tered nurses under the supervision of the operator, and only 
occasionally do patients who may be difficult to sedate or 
have a history of problems with sedation require anesthesia 
management. Guidelines are published regarding the use of 
moderate sedation by nonanesthesia personnel.1 However, 
an increasing number of ICCL interventions call for gen­
eral anesthesia because of the inherent nature of the pro­
cedure. Whether anesthesiologists are routinely involved 
with a particular procedure will vary from center to center, 
depending on how the procedure is performed, the comfort 
level of the operators with their ability to manage the seda­
tion, and the hemodynamics while trying to perform the 
intervention. The most effective approach to these cases is 
probably for the interventional cardiologist and the anes­
thesiologist to discuss the needs of the procedure and the 
options for anesthetic management and come to a consen­
sus of how best to manage them. The characteristics and 
needs of each individual patient must also be considered in 
making the final anesthesia plan.
Many ICCL procedures are performed using trans­
esophageal echocardiography (TEE) to guide the operator 
and assess the results.2 Although diagnostic TEEs are usu­
ally done with conscious sedation and topical anesthesia, 
many centers consider the need for TEE during an inter­
ventional procedure an indication for general anesthesia 
with endotracheal intubation to secure the airway because 
of the duration and intensity of the TEE manipulation and 
because the patient is supine. In some cases, the imaging 
needed for a procedure can be obtained with transthoracic 
or intracardiac echocardiography, eliminating the need for 
TEE and thus general anesthesia.
Hemodynamic Monitoring
By definition, ICCL procedures involve insertion and direct 
manipulation of catheters and devices within the heart, 
creating the continuous potential for arrhythmias, perfo­
ration, or rupture, causing sudden hemodynamic changes. 
Monitoring must be continuous and effective. Standard 
American Society of Anesthesiologists monitors are used 
for all cases requiring anesthesia, but additional hemody­
namic monitors are needed as well. Because of the risk for 
arrhythmias, external defibrillator pads should be placed on 
the patient and connected to the defibrillator before starting.
Continuous invasive arterial pressure measurement is 
the most important hemodynamic parameter to monitor 
during ICCL procedures. The beat-to-beat blood pressure 
facilitates the immediate recognition of any significant per­
turbation, allowing an appropriate reaction to follow in a 
timely manner. If the patient has significant cardiovascu­
lar compromise and needs to be anesthetized, the arterial 
monitoring should be established before induction. Arterial 
cannulation for pressure monitoring may be accomplished 
by the anesthesiologist typically with radial artery can­
nulation or the cardiologist with a femoral artery sheath. 
The former allows induction of anesthesia to proceed with­
out delay and has the advantage of being under the con­
trol of the anesthesiologist. A radial arterial cannula may 
be helpful after the procedure if continued monitoring is 
needed. Femoral artery cannulation may be necessary for 
access during the procedure and can provide essentially a 
central aortic pressure, but close communication with the 
Anesthesia in the 
Catheterization 
Laboratory: Valves and 
Devices
JACK S. SHANEWISE
10
10  •  Anesthesia in the Catheterization Laboratory: Valves and Devices
83
cardiologist is needed to prevent the interruption of moni­
toring at a crucial time.
Central venous access during ICCL procedures is not 
as important for monitoring but is needed primarily for 
the rapid administration of vasoactive drugs to respond 
to hemodynamic aberrations. Again, this may be accom­
plished by the anesthesiologist, typically through internal 
jugular venous cannulation, or the cardiologist with a fem­
oral venous sheath. Internal jugular access has the advan­
tages of being under the control of the anesthesiologist and 
less dead space, both in the tubing and in the patient, but it 
may be considered unnecessary if reliable femoral venous 
access is available. Another important use of central venous 
access can be rapid administration of fluids in procedures 
where unexpected blood loss occurs.
If TEE is needed to guide the procedure, it can be used as 
a monitor as well. In patients for whom general anesthe­
sia is planned, TEE may be used as a monitor even if it is 
not needed to guide the intervention. Placement of a pul­
monary artery catheter may be considered helpful in some 
cases, such as patients with severe pulmonary hyperten­
sion or severe ventricular dysfunction, but these decisions 
will be influenced by local experience and practice.
When general anesthesia is anticipated for an ICCL pro­
cedure, the usual expectation is to emerge and extubate the 
patient at the end of the case, so the anesthetic plan is tailored to 
keep this option open whenever possible. On occasion, patients 
present for an interventional cardiology procedure in such 
severe respiratory or cardiovascular distress that it is decided to 
keep them intubated and sedated after the procedure. Patients 
may need to be kept intubated because of complications occur­
ring during the procedure. Short-acting inhalation and intra­
venous anesthetics are available, and either technique may be 
used for ICCL cases, depending on the practitioner’s experience 
and preference and the patient’s needs.
Transcatheter Aortic Valve 
Replacement
Aortic valve replacement (AVR) for calcific aortic stenosis 
remains the most common valvular heart surgery, with 
50,000 procedures performed annually in the United 
States.3,4 Although percutaneous valvuloplasty provides 
temporary relief,5 valvular stenosis and symptoms typically 
return within 6 months,6 making valvular replacement the 
only definitive therapy.7,8 Aortic stenosis prevalence and 
age-related comorbidities will only increase as the popu­
lation ages.9 Health care providers have been developing 
novel techniques for addressing symptomatic aortic steno­
sis, including transcatheter prosthetic valve implantation.10
Despite the clear benefits of AVR for patients with stenotic 
valves,11 open AVR surgery in high-risk patients has an asso­
ciated perioperative mortality of 4% to 18%, depending on 
patient comorbidities.12,13 Consequently, despite the dismal 
prognosis of symptomatic aortic stenosis,14 open-heart sur­
gery is often withheld from high-risk patients. A less invasive 
management for valvular stenosis might benefit this patient 
population. Cribier and colleagues15 first described transcath­
eter AVR (TAVR) after transcatheter valvuloplasty in 2002. 
He chose to approach the aortic valve by femoral venous 
cannulation, transatrial septal puncture, and antegrade 
deployment through the left ventricular outflow tract by way 
of the mitral valve. Since then, prosthetic aortic valves have 
more commonly been deployed retrograde from the aorta by 
cannulation of the femoral artery and antegrade by puncture 
of the left ventricular apex by a small left thoracotomy.16 
The PARTNER (Placement of AoRTic TraNscathetER Valve) 
Trial is a multicenter, randomized study comparing TAVR to 
medical management (including balloon valvuloplasty) in 
patients not considered to be surgical candidates and to con­
ventional AVR in high-risk surgical candidates. Published 
results showed improved survival with TAVR over medical 
management in patients not considered suitable candidates 
for conventional AVR17 and equivalent midterm survival in 
contrast to AVR in high-risk surgical candidates.18 Questions 
have been raised about the findings of these studies and the 
broad application of TAVR in place of conventional AVR.19
In 2011 the FDA approved TAVR in the United States with 
the Edwards SAPIEN valve for patients with severe aortic 
stenosis who are not surgical candidates. Ongoing trials are 
comparing TAVR to conventional AVR in high-risk patients 
with TAVR using two devices: the Edwards SAPIEN valve 
(Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, Calif.) and the Medtronic Core­
Valve (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minn.). In 2007, both devices 
received the quality certificate needed for use in the European 
Union countries, and it is estimated that over 40,000 devices 
have been implanted in patients.19 An expert consensus 
document addressing TAVR was recently published in a col­
laborative effort by the American Heart Association, Ameri­
can Society of Echocardiography, European Association for 
Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Heart Failure Society of America, 
Mended Hearts, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, 
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Soci­
ety for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance.20 It includes an 
extensive review of the development of TAVR and consider­
ations in evaluating patients for the procedure and the team 
approach needed to have a successful TAVR program. TAVR 
is typically performed by a surgeon and an interventional car­
diologist in a room that has imaging capabilities and where 
patients can be anesthetized and undergo surgery, so it is 
often referred to as a hybrid procedure. This may take place in 
the ICCL or an operating room, depending on the institution.
The decision to use the transfemoral, transapical, or 
transaortic approach is based on the size and disease state of 
the femoral and iliac vessels as assessed with preprocedure 
imaging. The transfemoral approach is preferred when pos­
sible, because it avoids the small thoracotomy needed for 
the transapical approach. In patients with vessels unsuit­
able for the transfemoral approach and pathological find­
ings involving the left ventricular apex, such as previous 
thoracotomy or apical aneurysm, the TAVR may be accom­
plished through the mid–ascending aorta through a hemis­
ternotomy, referred to as the transaortic approach.
TRANSFEMORAL APPROACH (Figure 10-1)
Percutaneous femoral venous access is obtained and a pac­
ing catheter placed in the right ventricle. Small doses of 
heparin are used to prevent arterial thrombus formation on 
the arterial catheters. A femoral artery is percutaneously 
accessed, a 20- to 23-mm balloon-tipped catheter is placed 
retrograde across the stenotic aortic valve, and a balloon 
valvuloplasty is performed while rapid ventricular pacing 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
84
(180 to 200 bpm) effectively halts the circulation for a few 
seconds (Figure 10-2). Then the deployment sheath (19 to 
26 F) is percutaneously placed in a femoral artery, and the 
prosthetic valve, which is crimped around a balloon-tipped 
catheter, is advanced over a guidewire through the aorta 
and across the arch and positioned midway at the level of 
the aortic valve annulus. Proper positioning of the device is 
critical; once deployed by expansion of the balloon, it cannot 
be repositioned. Fluoroscopy or TEE can be used to position 
the valve, depending on the preference and experience of 
the operators, but each may provide complementary infor­
mation. If the device is deployed too far into the ventricle, it 
may overexpand in the left ventricular outflow tract and be 
incompetent or not securely seated. If it is deployed too far to 
the aortic side of the annulus, it can interfere with coronary 
blood flow or even embolize into the thoracic aorta. The 
valve is expanded in the native annulus by inflating the bal­
loon while rapid ventricular pacing briefly halts the circula­
tion once again. After deployment, the balloon catheter is 
withdrawn and the deployment sheath removed using arte­
riotomy closure sutures previously placed through the per­
cutaneous access site, and the iliac artery is occluded with 
a balloon catheter advanced from the contralateral femoral 
artery.
TRANSAPICAL APPROACH (Figure 10-3)
With the patient anesthetized and intubated, a small, antero­
lateral thoracotomy is made over the apex of the heart, the 
pericardium opened, and epicardial pacing wires placed in 
the myocardium. Lung isolation with a double-lumen endo­
tracheal tube or bronchial blocker has not been necessary. 
Purse string sutures are placed in the apex of the left ven­
tricle, which is pieced with a hollow needle through which a 
wire is inserted and passed through the ventricle antegrade 
across the aortic valve guided by fluoroscopy or TEE. A 16-F 
sheath is positioned in the left ventricular outflow tract 
over the wire, and a balloon-tipped catheter is advanced 
across the aortic valve, with which a balloon valvuloplasty 
is performed using rapid ventricular pacing. This sheath 
is exchanged for the larger, device sheath (34 F), through 
which the prosthesis, crimped on the deployment balloon 
catheter, is positioned midway at the level of the aortic valve 
annulus and deployed as with the transfemoral approach. 
After deployment, the sheath is removed as the apical purse 
strings are tied down. Rapid ventricular pacing also may be 
used to help control the blood pressure during this maneu­
ver. Bleeding from the apical wound may require institution 
of cardiopulmonary bypass with percutaneous femoral can­
nulation to decompress the left ventricle for control.
The anesthetic considerations of TAVR have been 
reviewed.21-23 Key points are summarized in Figure 10-4. 
We have employed hemodynamic monitoring and general 
anesthesia with endotracheal intubation in all cases, but 
some centers have used conscious sedation for transfemoral 
procedures. Most agree that performing TEE during TAVR 
is an indication for general anesthesia and endotracheal 
intubation. Most cases require some pressor support and 
a few positive inotropic agents during the procedure. 
Double-lumen endotracheal tubes for single-lung venti­
lation have not been necessary for the transapical cases. 
Transcatheter
aortic valve
Aortic stenosis
Transcatheter
aortic valve
Figure 10-1  Transcatheter aortic valve replacement by the retrograde, 
transfemoral approach. (Modified from Smith CR, Leon MB, Mack MJ, 
et al. PARTNER Trial Investigators. Transcatheter versus surgical aortic-valve 
replacement in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2011;364[23]:2187-2198.)
A
II
HR
98
ART
138/50 (83)
PAP
(12)
CVP
(7)
I
V
ART
PAP
CVP
B
II
HR
179
ART
130/46 (76)
PAP
64/19 (37)
CVP
(6)
I
V
ART
PAP
CVP
Figure 10-2  A, Initiation of rapid ventricular pacing. B, Cessation of 
rapid ventricular pacing. (Modified from Billings FT, Kodali SK, Shanewise 
JS. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation: anesthetic considerations. 
Anesth Analg. 2009;108:1453-1462.)
10  •  Anesthesia in the Catheterization Laboratory: Valves and Devices
85
A cardiopulmonary bypass machine and a perfusionist 
team are on standby in the room for transapical cases. We 
have been able to extubate most of the transfemoral cases 
and more than half of the transapical cases in the catheter 
laboratory or operating room at the end of the procedure, 
and our anesthetic is tailored to allow extubation if all 
goes well. As experience has accumulated, the procedures 
are taking less time and having fewer problems.
At my institution, all patients receive TEE monitoring 
during TAVR. The TEE probe is inserted after endotracheal 
intubation and removed at the end of the procedure. A com­
prehensive baseline examination is performed to reconfirm 
the diagnosis, assess baseline ventricular function, and 
detect associated valvular lesions, such as mitral and tri­
cuspid regurgitation. Measurements of the aortic valve 
annulus are made from three-dimensional views to assist 
size selection of the prosthetic valve. The annulus must be 
18 to 21 or 22 to 25 mm in diameter, respectively, for use of 
the 23- or 26-mm Edwards prosthesis. To prevent obscur­
ing the fluoroscopic image during positioning and inflation 
of the valvuloplasty balloon, the TEE probe is withdrawn to 
the level of the aortic arch and then readvanced to assess the 
results, focusing primarily on the severity of aortic regurgi­
tation. The TEE probe is again withdrawn for positioning 
and deployment of the prosthesis under fluoroscopic imag­
ing and then advanced to assess the results. As with any 
major cardiac intervention, we found TEE to be invaluable 
while monitoring procedural cardiac function.
The deployed device is examined with TEE in short-axis 
and long-axis views to assess the position of the device 
within the aortic valve annulus. Deployment too proximal in 
the left ventricular outflow tract may cause overexpansion 
of the device and central regurgitation. Distal deployment 
may cause valve embolization into the aorta or interference 
with coronary blood flow. Color-flow Doppler assesses atrial 
regurgitation. TEE can be particularly helpful in differenti­
ating transvalvular aortic regurgitation from paravalvular 
aortic regurgitation, an important distinction that remains 
difficult to make using aortic root contrast injection and flu­
oroscopy. Paravalvular aortic regurgitation may be treated 
by reinflating the deployment balloon within the prosthesis, 
further expanding the valve within the annulus. Significant 
transvalvular aortic regurgitation suggests overexpansion 
of the prosthesis, which may require deployment of a sec­
ond prosthetic valve within the first. TEE is also helpful in 
detecting potential complications such as aortic dissection, 
myocardial ischemia from coronary artery ostial obstruc­
tion or embolization, hemopericardium, and hypovolemia. 
The application of TEE during TAVR has recently been 
reviewed,24 and guidelines have been published.2
Transcatheter Aortic Valve 
Replacement Procedural 
Complications
PERSISTENT HEMODYNAMIC INSTABILITY
Many reasons exist for hemodynamic compromise during 
TAVR. The patient’s underlying condition, general anes­
thesia, arrhythmias induced by catheters in the ventricle, 
passage of a large deployment catheter through a stenotic 
aortic valve, interruption of the blood flow with rapid pac­
ing for balloon valvuloplasty, and device deployment are 
some reasons that are part of every procedure. Unexpected 
complications such as hemorrhage, cardiac perforation, 
and coronary artery obstruction can contribute to circu­
latory compromise. The key to preventing circulatory col­
lapse during TAVR is to watch closely, recognize when the 
heart is beginning to fail, and intervene before the hemo­
dynamic state is on the verge of collapse. The intensity of 
intervention needed to maintain the blood pressure varies 
widely and is an indication of how well the procedure is 
going. The most important intervention may be informing 
the operators that the hemodynamic state is deteriorating 
and that they need to stop for a while to allow the patient 
to recover before proceeding. Maintaining adequate arte­
rial blood pressure is probably the most important aspect of 
hemodynamic management during TAVR. At our institu­
tion, most patients undergoing TAVR require some pres­
sor support at some point in the procedure, and vasoactive 
infusions and bolus resuscitation drugs should be at hand 
before starting. Going into the interventional portion of 
the procedure, which begins when guidewires are passed 
through the aortic valve into the heart, with a marginal 
blood pressure makes it more difficult to maintain stable 
hemodynamics, so starting with a higher blood pressure 
is probably better than lower in most cases. Global ven­
tricular function, left- and right-sided, should be closely 
watched with TEE. Preemptive inotropic support may be 
helpful in patients with impaired ventricular function, and 
patients with poor ventricular function and significant 
mitral regurgitation seem to be especially likely to have 
hemodynamic problems during TARV. Hemodynamic 
management often changes dramatically once the valve 
is deployed and the patient suddenly has a nonstenotic, 
competent aortic valve. Pressors may be rapidly weaned 
and vasodilators needed to keep the blood pressure in an 
acceptable range.
Figure 10-3  Transcatheter aortic valve replacement by the antegrade, 
transapical approach. (Modified from Walther T, Simon P, Dewey T, et al. 
Transapical minimally invasive aortic valve implantation: multicenter expe­
rience. Circulation. 2007;116[11 suppl]:I240-I245.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
86
Despite all our efforts, there may be circulatory collapse 
during TAVR requiring cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
with chest compressions and large doses of resuscitation 
drugs. When possible, mechanical factors contributing to 
the circulatory collapse should be remedied. It may help 
to rapidly deploy the valve if the arrest occurs before that 
point. If the deployed valve is grossly incompetent, deploy­
ing another valve inside it may make the resuscitation 
successful. Hemopericardium should be identified and 
drained. If the resuscitation does not quickly restore stable 
and adequate hemodynamics, consideration should be 
given to starting mechanical support with cardiopulmo­
nary bypass or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. 
This possibility is best thought out before starting the pro­
cedure, so a clear course of action is agreed on among the 
caregivers and the patient should persistent hemodynamic 
collapse occur.
AORTIC REGURGITATION
Persistent moderate aortic regurgitation was associ­
ated with poor outcome in the 2-year follow-up in the 
Femoral vein or epicardial
GA with intubation
TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement. TEE = transesophageal echocardiography. GA = general anesthesia.
MAC = monitored anesthesia care. bupiv = bupivacaine. paravert = paravertebral. epi = epinephrine. milr = milrinone.
LV = left ventricle. V pacing = ventricular pacing. PAC = pulmonary artery catheter. pul htn = pulmonary hypertension.
Int jug = internal jugular. IV = intravenous. post op = post operative. RV = right ventricle. AV = aortic valve.
AR = aortic regurgitation. ﬂuoro = ﬂuoroscopy. NTG = nitroglycerine.
Transfemoral approach
Transapical or
Transaortic approach
Blood pressure support typically needed with GA.
Consider inotropic drug (e.g., epi or milr) if LV bad.
Tailor GA to allow emergence and extubation if all goes well.
If no TEE, MAC with local/sedation.
If TEE used, GA with intubation.
Femoral vein to RV
Check threshold & rapid V pacing before proceeding.
Pre-induction arterial pressure monitoring.
Consider PAC if LV bad or pul htn.
TEE (requires GA with intubation).
Central venous access for vasoactive drugs
(Int jug vein by anesthesia or femoral vein by cardiology)
Large bore IV with warmer for rapid volume infusion
(crossmatched blood available)
External pads applied and connected before induction.
AV dilated with balloon-tipped catheter during brief burst of rapid V pacing.
Restore stable hemodynamics before proceeding.
Check for worse AR with TEE.
AV annulus at midlevel of device checked with ﬂuoro and/or TEE.
Check position with rapid V pacing and ventilator off.
If possible, restore stable hemodynamics before deployment.
Deploy device with rapid V pacing and ventilator off.
Be prepared to pace after deployment (e.g., heart block).
Check for AR & myocardial ischemia after deployment.
Be prepared to resuscitate after deployment.
Anesthetic
technique
Monitoring
Vascular access
Deﬁbrillator
Balloon aortic
valvuloplasty
Device
positioning
Device
deployment
Postdeployment
Pacing wire
Be prepared to treat hypertension after deployment (e.g., with nicardipine or NTG).
Be prepared for vascular injury (i.e., bleeding).
Check for hemopericardium with TEE if hypotensive.
Check for hemiparesis after emergence.
Consider local inﬁltration of bupiv or paravert
block for post op analgesia.
Figure 10-4  Key anesthesia elements for transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
10  •  Anesthesia in the Catheterization Laboratory: Valves and Devices
87
PARTNER trial.25 Aortic regurgitation after deployment 
should be evaluated for severity and location. This evalu­
ation is best done with TEE, but aortic root injection with 
contrast dye may be used to rule out significant aor­
tic regurgitation. If aortic regurgitation is present, TEE 
can be used to determine whether it is transvalvular or 
paravalvular. Transvalvular aortic regurgitation is usu­
ally caused by overexpansion of the device as a result of 
improper sizing or malpositioning and may be remedied 
by deploying another valve within the first. Guidewires 
may contribute to transvalvular aortic regurgitation and 
should be pulled out of the valve before assessment. The 
prosthesis leaflets may (rarely) be damaged by crimping 
or not open properly after expansion, especially if the 
blood pressure is low and left ventricular function is poor. 
Paravalvular aortic regurgitation is common and may be 
treated with reexpansion of the balloon within the device 
if more than mild. Repeat expansions may increase the 
risk for annular rupture and systemic embolism, so judg­
ment is needed to balance the risk with the potential 
benefit.
NEUROLOGICAL INJURY
TAVR has been associated with a higher incidence of 
neurological injury than conventional aortic valve 
replacement in the PARTNER trial.26 Acute stroke result­
ing from systemic embolization during the procedure 
accounts for some of this, but the increase in risk may 
persist into the postoperative period. Patients should be 
checked for signs of stroke, such as hemiparesis, as soon 
as emerging from anesthesia, and, if present, immediate 
interventions considered such as imaging followed by 
thrombolysis or catheter retrieval of embolus material if 
indicated.
HEART BLOCK
TAVR has a higher incidence of heart block than conven­
tional aortic valve replacement, especially with the self-
expanding CoreValve device (Medtronic). This may occur 
immediately with valve deployment or hours, days, or 
weeks later. In the ICCL, it is treated with temporary pac­
ing but, if persistent, may require permanent pacemaker 
implantation. The onset of a new first-degree heart block or 
bundle branch block after deployment of the valve may be 
a harbinger of more severe conduction problems to come 
and prompt consideration of leaving a temporary pacing 
wire in the patient after the procedure. Continuous moni­
toring of the electrocardiogram (ECG) after the procedure 
is essential.
PERIPHERAL VASCULAR INJURY
Peripheral vascular injury to the femoral and iliac arteries 
is the most common complication of transfemoral TAVR 
because of the size of the deployment sheath and the fre­
quent presence of atherosclerosis in these vessels. This is 
often treated with endovascular stents but may require 
open exploration by a vascular surgeon.27 Important con­
sequences of these injuries may include hypovolemia from 
hemorrhage, both external and internal, and leg ischemia. 
Type crossmatched blood should be available before start­
ing the procedure.
CORONARY ARTERY OBSTRUCTION
Obstruction of the coronary artery ostium during TAVR is 
uncommon but has been reported. This obstruction may be 
somewhat predictable based on the distance measured from 
the aortic valve annulus to the right and left coronary ostia 
with TEE or computed tomography. The prosthesis consists 
of an open wire web that permits flow through the coronary 
arteries if it covers the ostium, but displacement of calcified 
native aortic valve leaflet with deployment may block the 
flow. Coronary artery obstruction is manifested by acute 
ECG ST-T changes and regional wall motion abnormalities 
on echocardiography, usually accompanied by hemody­
namic compromise or collapse. Treatment includes support 
of the circulation as needed and attempts to restore flow 
with percutaneous coronary intervention techniques such 
as stents. In cases thought to be at high risk for coronary 
ostium obstruction, a guidewire may be passed into the 
coronary artery to facilitate access if problems develop with 
valve deployment.
HEMOPERICARDIUM
Perforation of the heart during TAVR may cause hemo­
pericardium and hypotension as a result of acute cardiac 
tamponade. This perforation may be quickly diagnosed if 
TEE is in place; if not, sudden unexplained hypotension 
during TAVR should prompt a rapid echocardiographic 
examination. Initial management in the ICCL usually 
involves subxiphoid pericardiocentesis, aspiration of 
the pericardial blood, and insertion of a drainage cath­
eter, which typically improves the hemodynamics. If the 
bleeding is venous (e.g., from the right ventricular pac­
ing catheter), removal of the catheter, continued aspira­
tion of the pericardial blood, and reversal of heparin may 
resolve the problem. If significant bleeding with hemo­
dynamic compromise persists, more definitive surgical 
exploration of the pericardium and suturing of the perfo­
ration may be needed. Arterial pericardial bleeding after 
valve deployment may indicate aortic valve annular rup­
ture, a rare but catastrophic complication that is difficult 
to overcome.
Transapical Closure of Mitral 
Prosthesis Paravalular 
Regurgitation
Cases of closing prosthetic paravalvular leaks using 
catheter-delivered closure devices have been reported in 
the literature.28 The transapical approach as used with 
TAVR provides more direct access than the previously 
used transfemoral approach with transseptal puncture 
to access the left atrium (Figure 10-5) with invasive arte­
rial pressure monitoring and central venous access.29 
TEE is critical to localize the paravalvular leak and assist 
with positioning and deploying the device and assessing 
the results. The potential advantages of this technique 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
88
include a possibly higher success rate than the more indi­
rect transfemoral approach and the avoidance of a repeat 
sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass with conven­
tional surgery.
Left Atrial Appendage Closure 
Device
An investigational device is being percutaneously 
deployed in the ICCL to ligate the left atrial append­
age (LAA) in patients with atrial fibrillation to prevent 
thromboembolic complications such as stroke (Figure 
10-6).30 General anesthesia with endotracheal intubation 
is required because TEE is used to guide the passage of a 
magnet-tipped endocardial guidewire into the LAA and 
because the epicardial suture ligation device is introduced 
through the pericardial space by a subxiphoid needle stick 
over another magnet-tipped guidewire. In one series of 89 
patients, 2 developed hemopericardium during the proce­
dure, which was successfully managed with pericardio­
centesis and drainage. One was from inadvertent puncture 
of the right ventricle and the other from the transseptal 
puncture.30
Mitral Valve Edge-to-Edge Clip 
Repair
An investigational device has been used to percutaneously 
treat mitral regurgitation by clipping together portions 
of the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets similar 
to the edge-to-edge Alfieri surgical repair (Figure 10-7).31 
The technique is performed through femoral venous access 
with the transseptal approach to the left atrium in the 
ICCL. Because TEE is critical in guiding the procedure and 
assessing the results, patients are anesthetized and intu­
bated. Although results of this procedure have not been 
favorable in contrast to conventional surgical repair of 
the mitral valve, it is being evaluated in high-risk patients 
who are not considered candidates for surgery.32 Many of 
these patients are extremely elderly, frail, and a challenge 
to manage. As with other procedures being performed in 
the ICCL, it is important to monitor the arterial blood pres­
sure beat to beat and to have central venous access to give 
vasoactive drugs.
Conclusion
Development of new catheter-based techniques to treat 
valvular and structural heart disease has been rapid over 
the past 10 years. Many new devices are under investi­
gation, and some will undoubtedly achieve widespread 
application. Many of these procedures call for the involve­
ment of anesthesiologists during the procedure because of 
the need for TEE guidance or because access to the heart 
is obtained through a small apical or subxiphoid incision. 
Although these procedures are less invasive and stress­
ful for the patient than conventional open-heart surgery 
with cardiopulmonary bypass, they nonetheless have the 
potential to cause acute, life-threatening hemodynamic 
disturbances and require the same concern, attention, 
and vigilance on the part of the anesthesiologist. One of 
the keys to success in the anesthetic management is close 
communication with the interventional cardiologist or 
surgeon performing the procedure before and during the 
procedure.
A
B
C
Figure 10-5  A, Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showing preoperative paravalvular leak (PVL). B, TEE showing postoperative PVL. C, Three-
dimensional TEE showing postoperative double device closure (solid and dashed arrows). (From Thourani VH, Smith CM, Guyton RA, et al. Repair of pros­
thetic mitral valve paravalvular leak using an off-pump transapical approach. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94[1]:275-278.)
10  •  Anesthesia in the Catheterization Laboratory: Valves and Devices
89
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 10-6  All images are in the right anterior oblique projection. Left atrial (LA) angiography identifies the ostium and body of the left atrial append­
age (LAA) (A). Attachment of the magnet-tipped endocardial and epicardial guidewires (B) allows for the LARIAT suture delivery device to be guided 
over the LAA by the magnet-tipped epicardial guidewire using an over-the-wire approach (C). After verification of the correct position of the snare with 
the balloon catheter (D), an LA angiogram is performed before release of the pre-tied suture to exclude the existence of a remnant trabeculated LAA 
lobe (E). A final LA angiogram is performed to verify LAA exclusion (F). (From Bartus K, Han FT, Bednarek J, et al. Percutaneous left atrial appendage suture 
ligation using the LARIAT device in patients with atrial fibrillation: initial clinical experience. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:108-118.)
A
B
Figure 10-7  A, Photograph of the clip attached to the delivery system. The clip is covered with polyester fabric. The two arms are opened and closed 
by control mechanisms on the clip delivery system. The arms have an opened span of approximately 2 cm and a width of 4 mm. B, Schematic illustra­
tion of the clip components. On the inner portion of the clip is a U-shaped gripper that matches each arm and helps stabilize the leaflets from the atrial 
aspect as they are captured during closure of the clip arms. Leaflet tissue is secured between the closed arms and each side of the gripper when the 
clip is closed and locked, to effect and maintain coaptation of the two leaflets. (From Silvestry FE, Rodriguez LL, Herrmann HC, et al. Echocardiographic 
guidance and assessment of percutaneous repair for mitral regurgitation with the Evalve MitraClip: lessons learned from EVEREST I. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2007;20[10]:1131-1140.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
90
References
	 1.	 Gross JB, Bailey PL, Connis RT, et  al. Practice guidelines for seda­
tion and analgesia by non-anesthesiologists: an updated report by 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Sedation 
and Analgesia by Non-anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology. 2002;96:
1004–1017.
	 2.	 Zamorano JL, Badano LP, Bruce C, et al. EAE/ASE recommendations 
for the use of echocardiography in new transcatheter interventions 
for valvular heart disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2011;24:937–965.
	 3.	 Passik CS, Ackermann DM, Pluth JR, Edwards WD. Temporal changes 
in the causes of aortic stenosis: a surgical pathologic study of 646 
cases. Mayo Clinic Proc. 1987;62(2):119–123.
	 4.	 Rosamond W, Flegal K, Friday G, et  al. Heart disease and stroke 
statistics—2007 update: a report from the American Heart Associa­
tion Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circula­
tion. 2007;115:e69–e171.
	 5.	 Cribier A, Letac B. Percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty in adults 
with calcific aortic stenosis. Curr Opin Cardiol. 1991;6:212–218.
	 6.	 Lieberman EB, Bashore TM, Hermiller JB, et al. Balloon aortic valvu­
loplasty in adults: failure of procedure to improve long-term survival. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;26(6):1522–1528.
	 7.	 Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Kanu C, et al. ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines 
for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines (writing committee to revise the 1998 
Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Dis­
ease), developed in collaboration with the Society of Cardiovascular 
Anesthesiologists, endorsed by the Society for Cardiovascular Angi­
ography and Interventions and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. 
Circulation. 2006;114:e84–e231.
	 8.	 Otto CM, Mickel MC, Kennedy JW, et al. Three-year outcome after bal­
loon aortic valvuloplasty: insights into prognosis of valvular aortic 
stenosis. Circulation. 1994;89(2):642–650.
	 9.	 Boon NA, Bloomfield P. The medical management of valvar heart dis­
ease. Heart. 2002;87(4):395–400.
	10.	 Leon MB, Kodali S, Williams M, et  al. Transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement in patients with critical aortic stenosis: rationale, device 
descriptions, early clinical experiences, and perspectives. Semin Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;18:165–174.
	11.	 Schwarz F, Baumann P, Manthey J, et al. The effect of aortic valve 
replacement on survival. Circulation. 1982;66:1105–1110.
	12.	 Jamieson WR, Edwards FH, Schwartz M, et al. Risk stratification for 
cardiac valve replacement. National Cardiac Surgery Database. Data­
base Committee of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1999;67:943–951.
	13.	 Powell DE, Tunick PA, Rosenzweig BP, et al. Aortic valve replacement 
in patients with aortic stenosis and severe left ventricular dysfunction. 
Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:1337–1341.
	14.	 Kennedy KD, Nishimura RA, Holmes DR Jr, Bailey KR. Natural history 
of moderate aortic stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;17:313–319.
	15.	 Cribier A, Eltchaninoff H, Bash A, et al. Percutaneous transcatheter 
implantation of an aortic valve prosthesis for calcific aortic stenosis: 
first human case description. Circulation. 2002;106:3006–3008.
	16.	 Ye J, Cheung A, Lichtenstein SV, et al. Transapical aortic valve implan­
tation in humans. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;131:1194–1196.
	17.	 Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack M, et  al. PARTNER Trial Investigators. 
Transcatheter aortic-valve implantation for aortic stenosis in patients 
who cannot undergo surgery. N Engl J Med. 363(17):1597–1607.
	18.	 Smith CR, Leon MB, Mack MJ, et al. PARTNER Trial Investigators. 
Transcatheter versus surgical aortic-valve replacement in high-risk 
patients. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(23):2187–2198.
	19.	 Van Brabandt H, Neyt M, Hulstaert F. Transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation (TAVI): risky and costly. BMJ. 2012;345. e4710 doi: 
10.1136/bmj.e4710.
	20.	 Holmes Jr DR, Mack MJ, Kaul S, et al. 2012 ACCF/AATS/SCAI/STS 
expert consensus document on transcatheter aortic valve replace­
ment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(13):1200–1254.
	21.	 Billings IV FT, Kodali SK, Shanewise JS. Transcatheter aor­
tic valve implantation: anesthetic considerations. Anesth Analg. 
2009;108(5):1453–1462.
	22.	 Klein AA, Webb ST, Tsui S, et al. Transcatheter aortic valve insertion: 
anaesthetic implications of emerging new technology. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;103(6). 792–729.
	23.	 Guinot PG, Depoix JP, Etchegoyen L, et al. Anesthesia and periop­
erative management of patients undergoing transcatheter aor­
tic valve implantation: analysis of 90 consecutive patients with 
focus on perioperative complications. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
2010;24(5):752–761.
	24.	 Jayasuriya C, Moss RR, Munt B. Transcatheter aortic valve implanta­
tion in aortic stenosis: the role of echocardiography [Review]. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr. 2011;24(1):15–27.
	25.	 Kodali SK, Williams MR, Smith CR, et al. PARTNER Trial Investiga­
tors. Two-year outcomes after transcatheter or surgical aortic-valve 
replacement. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(18):1686–1695.
	26.	 Miller DC, Blackstone EH, Mack MJ, et al. PARTNER Trial Investiga­
tors and Patients. PARTNER Stroke Substudy Writing Group and 
Executive Committee. Transcatheter (TAVR) versus surgical (AVR) 
aortic valve replacement: occurrence, hazard, risk factors, and con­
sequences of neurologic events in the PARTNER trial. J Thorac Cardio­
vasc Surg. 2012;143(4):832–843.
	27.	 Genereux P, Webb JG, Svensson LG, PARTNER Trial Investigators, 
et al. Vascular complications after transcatheter aortic valve replace­
ment: insights from the PARTNER (Placement of AoRTic TraNscath­
etER Valve) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60(12):1043–1052.
	28.	 Latson LA. Transcatheter closure of paraprosthetic valve leaks after 
surgical mitral and aortic valve replacements. Expert Rev Cardiovasc 
Ther. 2009;7(5):507–514.
	29.	 Thourani VH, Smith CM, Guyton RA, et al. Repair of prosthetic mitral 
valve paravalvular leak using an off-pump transapical approach. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94(1):275–278.
	30.	 Bartus K, Han FT, Bednarek J, et al. Percutaneous left atrial appendage 
suture ligation using the LARIAT device in patients with atrial fibrilla­
tion: initial clinical experience. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:108–118.
	31.	 Silvestry FE, Rodriguez LL, Herrmann HC, et al. Echocardiographic 
guidance and assessment of percutaneous repair for mitral regur­
gitation with the Evalve MitraClip: lessons learned from EVEREST I. 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2007;20(10):1131–1140.
	32.	 Whitlow PL, Feldman T, Pedersen WR, EVEREST II Investigators, 
et al. Acute and 12-month results with catheter-based mitral valve 
leaflet repair: the EVEREST II (Endovascular Valve Edge-to-Edge 
Repair) High Risk Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(2):130–139.
91
In the electrophysiology laboratory, procedures are 
­performed to diagnose and treat abnormal cardiac 
rhythms. These procedures can be accomplished less inva­
sively and more safely than major surgical procedures 
that were required in the past, especially with higher-risk, 
older, and sicker patients. Procedures commonly per­
formed in electrophysiology laboratories to diagnose and 
treat abnormal cardiac rhythms include catheter-based 
ablations, device implants, lead extractions, noninvasive 
programmed stimulations (NIPS), and cardioversions 
(Table 11-1). A fuller understanding of these procedures 
and their potential complications will provide a better 
framework for planning a more rational and safer anes­
thetic approach. With the exception of cardioversion 
procedures, which are discussed in Chapter 12, the focus 
of this chapter will be the most common interventions, 
issues, and challenges for the anesthesiologist in the elec­
trophysiology laboratory.
Before an anesthesia group considers extending anes­
thesia coverage to the electrophysiology laboratory, a 
review should be made of the availability of anesthesia 
personnel within the practice and the economics of pro­
viding the requested coverage. Procedures in the electro­
physiology laboratory often involve anesthesia hands-on 
attendance for 12 hours or more. Because most of the 
anesthesia revenue will be derived from the relatively poor 
time unit accumulation, the cost of providing anesthesia 
coverage may be significantly more expensive than the 
final reimbursement that is realized. Because the elec­
trophysiology laboratory is usually a positive revenue 
generator for the hospital and anesthesia is critical for 
sustaining this revenue source, a serious discussion needs 
to occur with the hospital administrators concerning the 
hospital’s supplementing anesthesia services to cover any 
shortfall in revenue.
Role of the Anesthesiologist in the 
Electrophysiology Laboratory
In 2011 a statistical review of the incidence of cardiac 
arrhythmias in the United States revealed that over 
14 million people suffered from some form of cardiac 
arrhythmia. Within this group of patients, more than 
881,000 required hospitalization and 40,700 died as a 
result of the arrhythmia or associated comorbidities.1 
With this increase in the patient population diagnosed 
with arrhythmias, as well as the improvements that 
have occurred in the technological approaches for treat­
ing arrhythmias, the number of interventional procedures 
in electrophysiology laboratories has greatly increased 
over the past several years. Included in this increase is 
a trend toward greater use of anesthesiology services in 
the electrophysiology laboratory. A consensus docu­
ment published in 19982 indicated that conscious seda­
tion was standard for arrhythmia-specific procedures, 
particularly catheter ablations in adults. A survey of the 
task force members of a consensus statement group con­
cerning catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation published 
in 20073 found that approximately two thirds of centers 
used conscious sedation for these procedures and reserved 
general anesthesia support for patients at higher risk. A 
more recent publication reported that approximately 50% 
of centers routinely employed general anesthesia for all 
their atrial fibrillation ablation procedures.4
Consistent with this trend, anesthesiology involvement 
in electrophysiology laboratories at the Hospital of the Uni­
versity of Pennsylvania increased significantly over the past 
several years (Figure 11-1). A decade ago, an anesthesi­
ologist would occasionally be called to the electrophysiol­
ogy laboratory for a cardioversion, often as part of a longer 
ablation procedure done mostly with sedation by cardiology 
nurses.
The role of anesthesiologists has rapidly changed in the 
last decade to one of active involvement in nearly every 
procedure except for straightforward venograms and tilt 
table testing. The primary reason mandating the presence 
of anesthesia personnel during nearly every electrophysi­
ology procedure is that the use of anesthesiologists allows 
the electrophysiology procedures to be performed faster 
and more effectively.5 The need for qualified anesthesia ser­
vices is of particular benefit when dealing with an anxious 
patient who is difficult to sedate by ordinary means or a 
patient with airway concerns such as sleep apnea or a his­
tory of difficult intubation. In addition, it is the rare patient 
undergoing an electrophysiological procedure without 
other major comorbidities who would not benefit from the 
input and management of an anesthesiologist. An anes­
thesiologist brings other skill sets to the electrophysiology 
table in addition to airway and sedation management. The 
high-risk procedure of transvenous lead extraction can be 
more effectively and safely directed by an anesthesiologist 
using the findings from real-time transesophageal echocar­
diography (TEE). TEE allows early warning of events such 
as clot embolization, ischemic myocardial changes, and 
tamponade.6
Anesthesia for 
Electrophysiology 
Procedures
JONATHAN W. TANNER, ROGER A. MOORE, and MARK S. WEISS
11
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
92
Considerations in the 
Electrophysiology Laboratory
PREPROCEDURE TESTING
Before an electrophysiological procedure, an echocardio­
gram provides important information for the anesthesi­
ologist concerning planned fluid management and left 
ventricular function, which is critical for determining the 
approach that will be used for induction and maintenance 
of anesthesia. In addition, the echocardiographic evalua­
tion provides important information about the presence or 
absence of a thrombus. TEE is more sensitive than trans­
thoracic echocardiography for determining the presence 
of thrombus. A thrombus can develop in the left atrial 
appendage in patients with atrial fibrillation and can lead 
to an embolic stroke on cardioversion. Therefore ruling 
out the presence of a left atrial thrombus before cardiover­
sion is necessary. Echocardiography also can help define 
abnormal anatomy in patients with congenital heart 
disease who have right-to-left shunting of blood. These 
patients are at risk for systemic air embolization should air 
inadvertently be introduced into the venous circulation. 
Under these circumstances, extreme care must be given to 
ensure that all intravenous fluids provided are free of air 
(Box 11-1). The presence of specific congenital anatomi­
cal abnormalities also may be a root cause for long-term 
dysrhythmias in spite of surgical or electrophysiology 
intervention.
Blood laboratory testing is recommended before most 
electrophysiology procedures. Complications of inva­
sive, as well as “just” percutaneous, procedures can 
include significant hemorrhage, so a baseline hemo­
globin or hematocrit value and blood type and screen 
results should be obtained before all major procedures. 
In cases with a high risk for hemorrhage, such as lead 
extractions, ensuring that blood is crossmatched before 
Table 11-1  Common Electrophysiology Cases and Estimated Anesthesia Times
Category
Procedure
Usual Anesthetic Technique
Time
MAC in recovery 
unit
Cardioversion
A short period of deep sedation usually using a bolus 
dose of propofol (or etomidate if the ejection fraction 
is low)
15 min
—
TEE
Deeper sedation may be required for some patients 
undergoing TEE who are unable to tolerate the procedure 
with conscious sedation by the cardiology team
60 min
—
NIPS
Deep sedation may be required for cardioversion or 
defibrillation
30-45 
min
MAC in 
electrophysiology 
laboratory
Pacemaker placement or battery change
Fentanyl/midazolam or infusions of propofol/
remifentanil/midazolam
3-4 hr
—
ICD or biventricular ICD placements or battery 
changes
Fentanyl/midazolam or infusions of propofol/
remifentanil/midazolam (defibrillator threshold testing 
will require a short period of deeper anesthesia similar 
to that in a cardioversion)
3-4 hr
—
Loop recorder placement in superficial anterior 
chest wall
Fentanyl/midazolam or infusions of propofol/
remifentanil/midazolam
2-3 hr
—
Atrial flutter radiofrequency ablation*
Infusions of propofol/remifentanil/midazolam
6-10 hr
—
Ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation 
or premature ventricular contraction
radiofrequency ablation*
Usually infusions of remifentanil only; discuss additional 
sedatives with cardiologist
6-10 hr
General anesthesia 
in electrophysiol­
ogy laboratory
Atrial fibrillation radiofrequency ablation
General endotracheal anesthesia using jet ventilation 
and TIVA, which predominantly involves propofol and 
remifentanil infusions
Radial arterial lines commonly placed
6-10 hr
—
Lead extraction (especially using laser)
General endotracheal anesthesia
3-4 hr
—
Ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation 
radiofrequency ablation using an epicardial 
approach
General endotracheal anesthesia
6-10 hr
*These cases may require conversion to general anesthesia on short notice.
ICD, Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; MAC, monitored anesthesia care; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; TIVA, total intravenous anesthesia.
3500
Cases in electrophysiology laboratories
Without anesthesia
With anesthesia
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
Number of cases for the year
500
0
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Fiscal year
Figure 11-1  Growth of annual case load at the Hospital of the Uni­
versity of Pennsylvania electrophysiology laboratories over the past 
several years with particular emphasis on the caseload requiring anes­
thesia services.
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
93
the start of the procedure and immediately available is 
recommended. Coagulation studies should be performed 
preoperatively, because many patients undergoing an 
electrophysiology procedure are medicated with antico­
agulants in an attempt to reduce the risk for a throm­
boembolic event such as a stroke. Serum creatinine and 
blood urea nitrogen are good indirect methods for assess­
ing renal function. The status of the kidneys becomes 
especially important in the electrophysiology laboratory 
for the longer ablation procedures because significant 
amounts of fluids are given by the electrophysiologist and 
intravenous contrast dye is often administered. Finally, 
serum electrolytes and thyroid function tests may help 
diagnose the underlying cause of some of the cardiac 
rhythm abnormalities.
A baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) should be obtained, 
with particular attention paid to the rhythm and any exist­
ing ischemic changes. During the ablation process, the 
coronary arteries and their branches, particularly on the 
right, can be harmed, and a baseline ECG for comparison is 
useful when trying to determine the cause for a sudden fall 
in blood pressure. Longer cardiac rhythm studies may have 
been performed on many of the patients undergoing elec­
trophysiology procedures with such modalities as 24-hour 
Holter monitoring. A chest radiograph may be helpful 
in demonstrating cardiomegaly, heart failure, implanted 
devices, and preexisting pulmonary conditions.
ANESTHETIC MANAGEMENT
Procedures in electrophysiology laboratories are performed 
with either monitored anesthesia care (MAC) or general 
anesthesia. Some procedures, such as atrial flutter radio­
frequency ablation, may start out as a MAC case and then 
convert to a general anesthetic (see Table 11-1). One com­
monly accepted approach to general anesthesia is the use 
of continuous infusions of propofol and remifentanil. The 
combination of propofol 50 to 100 mcg/kg/min and remi­
fentanil 0.08 to 0.14 mcg/kg/min usually causes a fall in 
blood pressure, so once the infusions of anesthetics begin, an 
infusion of phenylephrine at a baseline rate of 25 to 75 mcg/
min is also added. The infusion of phenylephrine is adjusted 
based on the patient’s individual response to the anesthet­
ics, but it is rare that phenylephrine is not needed at all. In 
patients with poor left ventricular function, 1 to 2 mcg/min 
of epinephrine may be a better approach than phenyleph­
rine. Succinylcholine is used by some anesthesiologists to 
facilitate endotracheal intubation, but other paralytics are 
not often used. The reason for avoiding long-acting muscle 
relaxation is to allow the electrophysiologist to determine 
the path of the phrenic nerve during the mapping procedure 
on the posterior endocardial wall and thereby avoid harm­
ing it during the ablation process. The reason for avoiding 
an inhalational agent is outlined in the section concerning 
the effect of anesthetics on electrophysiological function.
The anesthesia plan in electrophysiology will depend on the 
nature of the procedure and patient-specific considerations. 
Most procedures performed in electrophysiology laboratories 
are not as painful as invasive surgical procedures. However, 
some parts of the procedures are associated with pain, par­
ticularly if tunneling is necessary, if the patient experiences 
the burning sensation associated with ablation, or if cardio­
version or defibrillation is necessary. Potential hemodynamic 
instability or the length of a procedure may be indications 
for general anesthesia with a secured airway. Although the 
procedures themselves may not be especially painful, patients 
with preexisting skeletal or joint injuries, especially spine 
issues, may have significant postprocedure pain as a result of 
remaining in one position for an extended period.
AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
Airway management in the electrophysiology laboratory 
may be extremely difficult because of the large, bulky equip­
ment in the room. During intubation, it is not uncommon 
for the anesthesiologist to contort his or her body, straddle 
one arm of an x-ray machine, and duck under another arm 
in an effort to gain a reasonable position from which to 
intubate (Figures 11-2 and 11-3).
For intubation, a video laryngoscope may be less trau­
matic than conventional laryngoscopy and reduces the 
number of repeat laryngoscopies.7 Many patients undergo­
ing electrophysiology procedures have received anticoagu­
lation, so minor trauma during airway management can 
result in a major hematoma.8 Likewise, placement of a soft 
bite block between the teeth is recommended to decrease 
Box 11-1  Air Bubble Precautions With 
Right-to-Left Shunting of Blood
Intravenous
Ensure that all injection ports and tubing are free of air. If the 
intravenous is prepared and left in a cold environment for any 
time, recheck before use, because air bubbles can form in the tub­
ing from dissolved air coming out of solution.
Syringe
Air bubbles adhere to the plunger and should be removed before 
giving a bolus of a drug. It is suggested that avoiding use of the 
last half a milliliter of drug in a syringe will prevent the injection of 
micro air bubbles that adhere to the plunger.
Syringe in Stopcock
When connecting a syringe to a stopcock to give a drug, make 
sure the air in the stopcock connector and air in the tip of the 
syringe have been flushed out before connecting the two for giv­
ing medication. Draw back half a milliliter of intravenous fluid into 
syringe to ensure no air is present before injecting.
Syringe in Injection Port
Recheck injection port to ensure it is free of air, and squirt some of 
the drug out of syringe needle to ensure no air in needle before 
putting the needle into the injection port. Draw back half a mil­
liliter of intravenous fluid into syringe to ensure no air is present 
before injecting.
Central Venous Catheter
A central venous catheter is rarely placed by an anesthesiolo­
gist in the electrophysiology laboratory. If one is used during the 
placement procedure, extreme caution should be taken in the 
nonparalyzed patient to never let the catheter be open to room 
air, which would allow entrainment of air into the venous circuit 
should the patient develop a negative intrathoracic pressure with 
inspiration.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
94
the chance of the patient biting the tongue or cheek during 
cardioversion and defibrillation.8
POSITIONING AND PADDING
Procedures in electrophysiology laboratories are generally 
performed with the patient in the supine position with arms 
tucked and padded. This position grants the interventionist 
better access to the patient and facilitates biplane fluoros­
copy, but having the arms tucked makes detecting intra­
venous and arterial catheter problems (e.g., infiltration 
or disconnection) more difficult. Proper positioning and 
­padding are important to avoid patient injury, particularly 
during longer procedures. Procedures in the electrophysiol­
ogy laboratories may last 8 hours or longer. Maintaining 
a well-padded patient who is comfortable throughout the 
procedure is the key to a pain-free postprocedure recovery 
(Figure 11-4). After padding is complete, the arms of the 
patient must be restrained to prevent movement and injury 
during cardioversion and defibrillation. Because patients 
are not usually paralyzed after induction of anesthesia, car­
dioversion during the procedure may produce injury from 
flail movement of the limbs. Restraining the arms is impor­
tant for patients receiving MAC and general anesthesia. If 
an arterial catheter is placed for the procedure, the arm to 
be used may be left unrestrained until the catheter is placed, 
usually after intubation and securing of the airway.
MONITORING
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) standard 
monitoring9 should be used for patients anesthetized in 
Figure 11-2  An illustration of the cramped space at the head of the 
table in the typical electrophysiology laboratory. The equipment 
required for the procedure envelops the patient, often leaving the 
anesthesia provider limited access during intubation. Note the dis­
tance of the anesthesia machine from the patient’s head. In addition, 
the anesthesia provider must be prepared to move the infusion pumps 
out of the way as the cardiology x-ray equipment moves.
Figure 11-3  Another view of the space allowed the anesthesia pro­
vider. Note that it will be necessary to straddle the lower arm of the 
x-ray equipment while ducking under the upper arm during intuba­
tion. Once again, the distance of the anesthesia machine from the 
patient’s head can be appreciated.
A
B
C
D
Figure 11-4  An illustration of the typical techniques used for padding 
the patient. These measures include a headrest (A), a horseshoe-shaped 
roll placed under the shoulders and then covered by soft padding (B), 
arm padding (C), and a large roll or pillow (D) placed under the knees 
to help alleviate pressure on the spine.
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
95
electrophysiology laboratories. For electrophysiology pro­
cedures in which rapid changes in blood pressure might 
occur as a result of changes in cardiac rhythm or bleed­
ing complications, blood pressure should be monitored by 
either a radial artery catheter or a femoral artery catheter. 
In most patients, these catheters may be placed after induc­
tion of anesthesia. An arterial cannula is useful for sam­
pling blood for arterial blood gas, glucose, and electrolyte 
levels; titration of anticoagulation therapy; and helping 
with the differential diagnosis of a hypotensive episode. A 
urinary bladder catheter should be placed for longer proce­
dures to monitor urine output, to guide fluid management, 
and to keep the bladder from becoming distended while the 
patient must remain motionless in the supine position for 
an extended period.
FLUID MANAGEMENT
Intravenous fluids must be actively managed by the anesthe­
siologist for all patients undergoing electrophysiology pro­
cedures. These patients often have a delicate cardiac status, 
and judicious management of fluids is mandatory. Liters of 
fluid may often be infused by the electrophysiologist during 
the ablation process. It is not unusual that by the end of the 
procedure the patient may have a positive fluid balance of 
over 3 L. Many patients undergoing electrophysiology pro­
cedures have cardiomyopathies and are prone to conges­
tive heart failure; thus the anesthesiologist’s attention must 
be directed at both limiting the amount of fluids provided 
during the anesthesia and performing a ­continuous care­
ful evaluation for signs of volume overload. This ongoing 
evaluation of fluids translates into not only monitoring the 
patient’s fluid intake and output but also periodically com­
municating the fluid status to the interventionist. Diuret­
ics are often used when a large positive fluid balance exists, 
especially if signs of congestive failure appear.
TEMPERATURE CONTROL
Electrophysiology laboratories are often cold, and patients 
are within this cold environment for hours under anes­
thesia. To prevent hypothermia, active warming devices 
should be used. However, based on the type of procedure, 
limitations exist concerning modalities such as full-body 
forced air heaters. Often, partial body warmers and fluid 
warmers are the extent to which the anesthesiologist can 
prevent hypothermia. In addition, core temperature mea­
surements using an esophageal probe serve the dual pur­
pose of providing guidance in regard to effectiveness of 
warming devices and providing warning when the ablating 
is being performed near the esophagus.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
Most procedures in electrophysiology laboratories involve 
fluoroscopy, so it is necessary for staff to take protective 
precautions, such as working behind lead shielding and 
wearing lead aprons and protective glasses. Placement and 
orientation of x-ray machines may present a challenge in 
airway management because they can limit access to the 
patient, as discussed earlier. Some electrophysiology labo­
ratories also use a magnetic system for positioning ablation 
catheters. In such laboratories, it is important to keep ferro­
magnetic objects away from the magnetic system to prevent 
common metallic objects from turning into projectiles that 
may harm the patient, staff, or equipment. In addition, special 
magnet-compatible monitoring equipment and anesthesia 
machines may be needed.
COMMUNICATION AND TEAMWORK
Communication between the electrophysiology and anes­
thesiology teams is critical, regardless of whether the case 
proceeds uneventfully or during a time of complicated cri­
sis. Both groups perform actions that affect the patient’s 
heart rate and blood pressure. For example, the electro­
physiologist should be made aware if the anesthesiologist 
needs to administer additional inotropic medications or 
vasopressors, because this may be an early indicator of a 
cardiac chamber perforation. The anesthesiologist needs 
to be informed when drug challenges or rapid pacing is 
being initiated by the electrophysiologist, because these will 
produce significant hemodynamic responses. The electro­
physiologist also should be informed of any changes in the 
patient’s mental status when conscious sedation is being 
used. If the patient is not following verbal commands, all of 
the parties involved in the patient’s care must know if this 
change is related to the patient’s anesthetic medications or 
if it is a change in the patient’s condition that would indi­
cate a neurological insult. The anesthesiologist should com­
municate with the electrophysiologist when the phrenic 
nerve is tested for diaphragm contraction, which is the key 
reason neuromuscular blockade is avoided. Acid-base and 
fluid status should be periodically reviewed to ensure ade­
quate ventilation and the prevention of volume overload. 
Clear communication is most important during times of cri­
sis, such as ventricular perforation or cardiac arrest. Every 
member of the care team needs to work together and com­
municate clearly to improve patient safety and outcome.
Because of the extensive amount of equipment present 
in the typical electrophysiology laboratory (Figure 11-5), 
one method for rapid and clear communication is the use 
of headphones, which allow all parties to hear and under­
stand each other. In this manner, errors based on inaccu­
rate or missed information can be kept to a minimum.
PHARMACOPEIA
The drugs most commonly used for an electrophysiology 
procedure fall into three main categories: anesthetic agents, 
cardiovascular drugs, and medications aimed at improved 
postoperative comfort. Table 11-2 provides a listing of the 
drugs commonly used and the manner in which they are 
provided.
BASIC DRUG EFFECTS
Understanding the concept of electrophysiological actions 
of drugs and how they might affect an electrophysiologi­
cal procedure requires a consideration of the cardiac con­
duction system action potential. Anesthetic drugs may 
act directly on the action potential, indirectly by changing 
sympathetic and parasympathetic tone, or by modulating 
humoral or environmental effects.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
96
THE ACTION POTENTIAL
Although the shape of the action potential changes depend­
ing where it is measured in the cardiac conduction system, 
the basic features remain the same. However, striking differ­
ences exist in the action potentials between those that serve as 
pacemakers and those that serve simply as conductors of the 
impulse. Figure 11-6 illustrates the differences between an 
action potential taken from the pacing cells of the sinoatrial 
node and those taken from an impulse-conducting cell in the 
distal Purkinje fibers. These action potentials are also shown 
in relationship to the timing of a surface electrocardiogram.
The primary characteristics of all action potentials are as 
follows:
   
	□	 Phase 0—depolarization phase: In the sinoatrial node, the 
upstroke is less steep than in the general cardiac con­
duction system represented by the Purkinje fiber action 
potential in Figure 11-6. The primary reason for this dif­
ference is that the upstroke in the sinoatrial node is due 
to a slow inward leak of ionized calcium, whereas the 
upstroke or development of a positive intracellular ionic 
state is due to the more rapid influx of ionized sodium 
throughout the rest of the cardiac conduction system. 
In the general cardiac conduction system without pacer 
activity, the slow upstroke caused by calcium leak is miss­
ing and only the steep upward depolarization from rapid 
sodium influx is observed.
	□	 Phase 1—early repolarization phase: The slight drop in the 
action potential in the Purkinje fiber represents initial 
repolarization mediated by an outward flow of potassium 
ions. This is not seen in cells that serve as pacemakers.
	□	 Phase 2—plateau phase: This phase of the action poten­
tial occurring in nonpacemaker cardiac conduction 
cells ­represents a combination of slow but significant 
exchanges in ions across the cell membrane. The move­
Figure 11-5  An illustration of the 
physical barriers that can obstruct 
oral and visual communication 
in the electrophysiology labora­
tory. Headphones are worn by the 
electrophysiologist, 
anesthesiolo­
gist, and nursing staff to facilitate 
­communication.
Table 11-2  Drugs Commonly Used in Electrophysiology 
Procedures
Category
Concentrations
ANESTHETIC AGENTS
Muscle Relaxants
Succinylcholine
Bolus: 100 mg
Opioids
Remifentanil
Infusion: 0.01-0.2 mcg/kg/min
Fentanyl
Bolus: 50-100 mcg
Induction Agents
Propofol
Bolus: 2 mg/kg
Infusion: 5-150 mcg/kg/min
Etomidate
Bolus: 0.1-0.3 mg/kg
Benzodiazepines
Midazolam
Bolus: 1-2 mg
Alpha-2 (α2) Adrenergic Receptor Agonists
Dexmedetomidine
Loading dose: 1 mcg/kg over 
approximately 10 min
Infusion: 0.2-1 mcg/kg/hr
CARDIOVASCULAR AGENTS
Phenylephrine
Bolus: 100 mcg
Infusion: 10 to 500 mcg/min
Epinephrine
Bolus: 8 mcg
Infusion: 1 to 8 mcg/min
Atropine
Bolus: 0.5 to 1 mg
Isoproterenol
Infusion: 3 to 40 mcg/min
COMFORT AGENTS
Dexamethasone
Bolus: 4 to 10 mg
Ondansetron
Bolus: 4 to 8 mg
Acetaminophen
Bolus: 1 g if normal liver function
Ketorolac
Bolus: 15-30 mg if normal renal 
function
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
97
ment of calcium ions into the cell and potassium ions out 
of the cell and a decrease in sodium ion influx leads to a 
relative steady state. This phase is absent in the action 
potentials of pacemaker cells.
	□	 Phase 3—repolarization phase: The drop in the slope of the 
action potential of impulse conducting cells is due pri­
marily to an outward flow of potassium ions. The same is 
occurring in pacemaker cells but at a slower rate than in 
the conducting cells.
	□	 Phase 4—resting phase: Ionic equilibrium has been 
achieved in impulse-conducting cells. However, no 
period of quiescence occurs in the pacemaker cells; 
rather, a slow flow of calcium ions into the pacer cells will 
again begin the cycle that will trigger depolarization, or 
phase 0.
ACTION POTENTIAL MODULATION
Any variety of factors can affect the action potential, and it 
is not surprising that these factors play a significant role in 
either suppressing or inducing cardiac arrhythmias.
SYMPATHETIC AND PARASYMPATHETIC 
NERVOUS SYSTEMS
The heart has significant innervation by both sympa­
thetic and parasympathetic nerves. The parasympathetic 
system’s effects on the heart are mediated primarily 
by the vagus nerve, with acetylcholine acting as the 
neurotransmitter at muscarinic receptors. Stimulation of 
the vagus nerve slows depolarization of the pacing cells 
within the sinoatrial node, thereby decreasing chronot­
ropy. Similarly, as a result of vagal nerve connections 
to the atrial myocardium and the atrioventricular node, 
negative dromotropic and inotropic effects occur. These 
effects are opposite to those observed with sympathetic 
nerve stimulation. Sympathetic innervation occurs 
throughout the heart, with norepinephrine serving as 
the neurotransmitter. Beta-1 (β1) receptors mediate the 
sympathetic nervous system effects. Sympathetic nerve 
stimulation leads to an increase of chronotropy, dromot­
ropy, and inotropy. As might be expected, drugs used for 
noncardiac reasons, such as anesthetics, which change 
the tone of either the sympathetic or parasympathetic 
nervous systems, can have significant secondary effects 
on impulse conduction in the heart. Studies into whether 
a specific anesthetic drug has a direct effect on inducing or 
suppressing an arrhythmia are confounded by this secon­
dary action, whereby the sedation from the drug may be 
altering the arrhythmia by reducing sympathetic tone or 
stimulating parasympathetic activity.
HUMORAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS ON 
CARDIAC CONDUCTION
In addition to direct innervation of the cardiac conduc­
tion system and secondary effects from the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous systems, a drug’s observed 
action may also be based on humoral influences. The sym­
pathetic nervous system’s transmission is mediated by nor­
epinephrine, and thus a release of humoral norepinephrine 
or epinephrine by the adrenal glands can clearly increase 
sympathetic tone. The myriad factors that cause the adre­
nals to secrete norepinephrine and epinephrine also might 
influence cardiac conduction, with the possibility of either 
suppressing or stimulating the induction of an arrhyth­
mogenic state. Because the adrenal glands react to stress, 
pain, hypercarbia, hypoxia, hypovolemia, and many other 
stimuli within the electrophysiology laboratory, it is diffi­
cult to control all factors that might avoid interference with 
the planned procedure. Although direct effects of anesthetic 
agents are often blamed for the inability to induce prema­
ture ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia, or 
atrial arrhythmias, there is no question that other neuro­
nal, humoral, and environmental conditions serve as com­
pounding factors.
EFFECTS OF ANESTHETIC DRUGS
Much of the clinical research performed to evaluate the car­
diac effects of anesthetic drugs is confounded by the many 
secondary influences that may exist with a specific drug. For 
instance, patients receiving propofol for sedation may have 
decreased arrhythmogenesis, but separating the direct effect 
of propofol from its secondary indirect effects to produce this 
result is difficult. In the electrophysiology laboratory, many 
different types of anesthetic drugs and techniques have 
been used to allow the electrophysiologist to successfully 
perform procedures. Because of the sensitivity of the heart 
to both the direct and indirect effects of a drug, the search 
for the ideal drug for the electrophysiology laboratory 
P Wave QRS
0
0
1
2
3
3
4
4
T Wave
C
B
A
Figure 11-6  The action potential taken from a cell in the sinoatrial 
node (A) and from a Purkinje fiber (B) in relationship to the surface 
electrocardiogram (C). Note that the temporal components of the elec­
trocardiogram differ for the action potentials depending on where the 
action potential originates.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
98
continues. If one could design the perfect ­anesthetic for use 
in these procedures, it would have no effect on the action 
potential originating from either the intrinsic pacemaker or 
any of the arrhythmogenic foci within the heart. The ideal 
drug also should not change the overall autonomic tone or 
refractoriness of the heart.10 Although an ideal drug should 
not prevent an impulse change, it should also not prevent 
the reoccurrence or triggering of reentrant arrhythmias, 
which is required for targeting the active arrhythmogenic 
site during the ablative procedure. At the same time, the 
ideal agents should be both rapidly reversible and have 
minimal residual effects.
Some of the anesthetic agents presently used in the elec­
trophysiology laboratory will be discussed, with emphasis 
on the rarely used inhalational agents, as well as the more 
commonly used propofol, opioids, benzodiazepines, and 
muscle relaxants.
INHALATIONAL AGENTS
Various mechanisms exist by which inhalational agents 
might alter impulse conduction through the heart. Halo­
thane, enflurane, and isoflurane all have been found to 
stimulate activation of wandering atrial pacemakers, as 
well as to allow the induction of ectopic atrial rhythm dis­
orders, which are mediated through the enhancement of 
automaticity in secondary atrial pacemakers.11,12 All inha­
lational agents have varying effects on the atrioventricular 
node and the His-Purkinje system. In general, the volatile 
agents cause both a dose-dependent reduction in myocar­
dial contractility and a prolongation of the Q-T interval.13,14
Halothane, although essentially unavailable in pres­
ent practice, is noted for its significant depressive effect on 
impulse formation within the sinoatrial node. This depres­
sion can result in the development of a junctional or a 
wandering atrial pacemaker.14 Secondarily, halothane 
has a profound central effect in suppressing the release of 
catecholamines from the adrenal glands. This suppression 
of humoral activity leads to the parasympathetic predomi­
nance, which in turn can result in the occurrence of sinus 
bradycardia and junctional rhythms.15-17 Further effects 
of halothane are mediated by a reduction of automatic­
ity (phase 4 depolarization [see Figure 11-6]) in the atrio­
ventricular node and His-Purkinje system.15-17 Finally, 
while decreasing the release of humoral catecholamines, 
halothane also sensitizes the heart to catecholamines. This 
increased sensitivity, combined with the observed decrease 
of automaticity, may facilitate atrioventricular nodal reen­
try arrhythmias. In fact, the potentiation of atrioventricu­
lar nodal reentry may be the primary mechanism by which 
halothane produces tachydysrhythmias.18-20
Isoflurane has been observed to differ from halothane by 
not inducing bradycardia. In contrast to the intravenous 
anesthetic agent propofol, isoflurane causes faster atrioven­
tricular nodal conduction while also producing a slower 
repolarization, at least in one group of pediatric patients 
undergoing electrophysiological procedures.21 The conclu­
sion was that both propofol and isoflurane could be used 
without suppression of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). 
The ability of isoflurane to maintain a relatively steady 
heart rate is due primarily to its lack of impulse conduc­
tion suppression through the atrioventricular node.22-24 
Others have substantiated the lack of significant clinical 
difference between propofol and isoflurane on sinoatrial 
or atrioventricular node function, although the findings 
are not conclusive, because an anesthetic base of alfen­
tanil and midazolam had been provided before the evalu­
ations.25 However, others have found isoflurane or other 
inhalational anesthetic agents to suppress the occurrence 
of supraventricular reentrant tachycardia, so they argue 
against their use in situations in which induction of atrial 
or supraventricular reentry is needed to identify a focus for 
ablation.22
Sevoflurane has been found in some studies to be suit­
able for use in electrophysiology studies because of minimal 
observed effects on sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node, 
or accessory pathways conduction. In spite of the lack of 
direct effects on impulse generation or conduction, sevo­
flurane has secondary effects, as do all inhalational agents, 
through suppression of the autonomic nervous system.26,27 
In addition, sevoflurane has been observed to increase the 
corrected QT interval in the normal pediatric population.28
Nitrous oxide causes mild sympathetic activation, which 
in turn can sensitize a myocardium at risk for catechol­
amine stimulation to the development of a dysrhythmia. 
In spite of the potential for inducing a dysrhythmia with 
nitrous oxide, clinical studies indicate that this is rarely a 
problem.29-31
In regard to atrioventricular node refractoriness within 
accessory pathways, it has been demonstrated that enflu­
rane, followed by isoflurane and then halothane, has the 
greatest effect. Therefore if these agents are used for elec­
trophysiology ablation studies, the evaluation of the trigger 
sites of reentry needed to direct the ablation procedure may 
be problematic. The one exception may be sevoflurane, but 
further evaluation needs to be directed at the electrophysio­
logical effects of this agent before recommendations for rou­
tine use can be made. In addition, one study has found that 
both sevoflurane and desflurane have a suppressive effect 
on postinfarction arrhythmias; this could interfere with 
locating the ablation targets during ventricular tachyar­
rhythmia ablation procedures.32 In patients with preexci­
tation syndrome requiring a general anesthetic, all volatile 
agents, because of their effect on refractoriness, should be 
avoided.33
PROPOFOL
Propofol is widely used in many electrophysiology laborato­
ries because of the reduced effect it has on impulse conduc­
tion. Another advantage of propofol is that patients rapidly 
recover from its effects; this makes it ideal for both short pro­
cedures, such as cardioversion, and lengthy interventions, 
such as atrial ablations. In the electrophysiology laboratory 
it is mainly used as one component of a total intravenous 
anesthetic (TIVA). Propofol is associated with inducing 
both bradycardia and tachycardia.34-39 Some have found 
no effect from propofol on cardiac conduction, whereas oth­
ers have observed it to produce slowing in a dose-dependent 
manner as a result of conduction delays or depression of 
sinoatrial nodal, atrioventricular nodal, and His-Purkinje 
system functions.40-42 Propofol has been noted to enhance 
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in a dose-dependent 
manner in dogs.43 The hypotension associated with propofol 
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
99
use is thought to be a result of impaired ­regulation of the 
baroreflex—part of its overall inhibition of the sympathetic 
nervous system.44
Of significance for the electrophysiology laboratory, 
propofol infusions seem to have little or no direct effect on 
accessory pathway conduction, nor on normal atrioven­
tricular nodal or accessory pathway conduction in patients 
with Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.27 Propo­
fol does not appear to trigger SVT or ventricular tachyar­
rhythmias in the electrophysiology laboratory. At least in 
children undergoing radiofrequency ablations for SVTs, 
propofol does not appear to alter sinoatrial or atrioventricu­
lar node function.25 However, significant concerns do exist 
for using propofol in the presence of the long QT syndrome, 
because it can result in cardiac standstill.45
OPIOIDS
Opioids generally produce bradycardia, especially if given 
in large doses.46-49 The observed bradycardia is a result of 
a central vagotonic effect. These drugs prolong the action 
potential by affecting both the potassium and calcium ion 
channels in the heart. The prolonged action potential is 
similar to the action of class 3 antiarrhythmic agents.50-52 
Opioids prolong the Q-T interval, but whether this is due to 
a direct effect on the myocardial membrane or to actions 
from myocardial opioid receptors in the heart has not been 
demonstrated.10
Remifentanil has properties that allow a rapid change in 
the depth of anesthesia, thus making it well suited for cases 
in the electrophysiology suite. This drug has a rapid time 
to peak effect of approximately 90 seconds and a half-life of 
3 to 4 minutes, regardless of how long it has been admin­
istered.53 Remifentanil, like the other mu-opioid (µ-opioid) 
agonists, acts synergistically with other sedatives to poten­
tiate anesthetic effects. This synergy allows lower doses of 
midazolam or propofol to be used, with the key advantage 
being a more rapid return to consciousness once the drugs 
are discontinued.54 For cardioversion, remifentanil has 
allowed the use of a lower dose of hypnotic drugs such as 
propofol and midazolam.
However, like other opioids, remifentanil can produce 
bradycardia, although it has relatively little effect on 
arrhythmogenesis.55 Remifentanil has been demonstrated 
to prolong the impulse conduction from the atrium to the 
His bundle and increase both the QRS duration and the 
sinoatrial node recovery time.56,57 Significant bradycardia 
is often seen with remifentanil use for this reason.58 One 
very positive aspect of remifentanil in the electrophysiology 
laboratory is that it does not appear to alter the ability to 
induce ventricular tachycardia that results from structural 
heart disease. For instance, in one study in dogs, the dose 
of epinephrine required to induce ventricular dysrhythmias 
was not affected by remifentanil.58,59 In children, remifen­
tanil appears to slow both sinoatrial and atrioventricular 
nodal function in patients undergoing ablation of SVT. 
Therefore it may not be the best drug of choice in pediatric 
patients undergoing electrophysiology procedures in which 
atrioventricular nodal function must be preserved.60 Bolus 
doses of remifentanil have been associated with attenua­
tion of a corrected QT interval prolongation under sevoflu­
rane anesthesia, although the clinical significance of this 
observation is yet to be defined.61 One fascinating area of 
current research is directed at evaluating variations in indi­
vidual patient electrophysiological responses to anesthetic 
agents based on genetic variations. For instance, remifen­
tanil will provide a positive synergistic anesthetic effect 
when used with propofol for patients with one genetic vari­
ation but will have minimal synergistic effects for patients 
without this genetic variation.62 As future studies better 
define the genetic factors influencing the anesthetic and 
electrophysiological effects of each drug used in the electro­
physiology laboratory, the decisions made in regard to the 
best drug selections for any particular patient undergoing a 
specific procedure will be more rational but decidedly more 
complex.
Hypotension associated with remifentanil use is most 
likely due primarily to noncardiac factors.55 Remifentanil 
was found to directly vasodilate arterial beds in the forearm; 
this resulted in increased regional blood flow.63 Thus hypo­
tension associated with remifentanil is due to a combination 
of bradycardia and vasodilation, conditions easily remedied 
in the electrophysiology suite. Because of its unique profile, 
remifentanil is a reasonable anesthetic choice for use in 
adults.
BENZODIAZEPINES
All benzodiazepines reduce blood pressure by decreasing 
both cardiac contractility and peripheral vascular resis­
tance. As a result of the decreased contractility and vaso­
dilation, a reflex tachycardia may result. These effects are 
dose-dependent but similar in overall effect for all benzodi­
azepines, varying only in the speed of onset and the dura­
tion of action. Other than the hemodynamic responses, this 
class of drugs has no known specific direct effects on cardiac 
conduction, including the QT interval.64
As a result of the slower onset of action and the higher 
doses needed to provide sedation, benzodiazepines in the 
electrophysiology laboratory may not be the best choice. In 
a retrospective review of patients undergoing electrophysi­
ology procedures, 40% of the patients receiving a benzodi­
azepine for sedation required advanced airway support.65 
For most ventricular arrhythmia interventions, ventricular 
tachycardias or ventricular fibrillation may be induced, 
and sedation for the cardioversion or defibrillation must 
be provided on very short notice. Drugs used for sedation 
must have a rapid onset but at the same time be rapidly 
metabolized to allow assessment of the patient’s neuro­
logical function. Benzodiazepines are not suitable for this 
situation. In addition, during ventricular tachyarrhythmia 
ablation procedures when ventricular tachycardia is being 
initiated as part of the procedure, suppression of the auto­
nomic nervous system by the benzodiazepines can interfere 
with the induction of the ventricular arrhythmias. A retro­
spective study of midazolam and diazepam use for elective 
cardioversion during atrial ablation procedures showed 
that the time needed to provide adequate sedation for the 
electric shock averaged 5 minutes.66 In addition, hypoten­
sion occurred in 20% of these patients. The dose to achieve 
adequate sedation averaged 12.5 mg of midazolam, a dos­
age that would negate rapid recovery. In the electrophysi­
ology laboratory, even without the hypotensive instability, 
a 5-minute delay for performing cardioversion in a patient 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
100
with an atrial arrhythmia is impractical and is more so for 
the patient with a ventricular tachyarrhythmia.
ETOMIDATE
Etomidate has a rapid onset and a rapid recovery; these are 
both highly desirable features for the provision of sedation in 
the electrophysiology laboratory. Its ability to maintain the 
blood pressure also makes it desirable for patients in a com­
promised cardiac state or with low left ventricular ejection 
fraction. In fact, etomidate serves as an excellent substitute 
for propofol as an anesthesia induction agent in the presence 
of cardiovascular instability. Nearly 40% of patients may 
experience myoclonic jerking after administration, and 
concern has been expressed that this could interfere with 
interpretation of the ECG during elective cardioversion,67 
but in practice this is rarely a problem. Although relatively 
free of adverse hemodynamic effects, etomidate has been 
used to suppress electrical storm in a patient; however, sepa­
rating out the contribution of any direct electrophysiological 
effects from secondary autonomic nervous system effects 
was not determined.68
DEXMEDETOMIDINE
Dexmedetomidine has been considered a possible anes­
thetic agent for adults and children undergoing electro­
physiology procedures. The drug has attractive properties 
in that it is short-acting and preserves respiratory function. 
However, bradycardia associated with the use of dexmed­
etomidine has been reported. The incidence of bradycardia 
is unknown when dexmedetomidine is used in infants and 
children. However, Hammer et al69 reported that dexmed­
etomidine significantly decreased sinus and atrioventricu­
lar nodal function in pediatric patients and resulted in the 
unusual combination of bradycardia and increased arterial 
blood pressure. Because of this result, it was suggested that 
the use of dexmedetomidine may not be desirable for elec­
trophysiology studies in pediatric patients. In studies that 
focused on adults, bradycardia has been cited to occur in 
9% to 40% of the population.70-73 Although Peden et al74 
reported sinus arrest after a patient received an initial dose 
of dexmedetomidine over 15 minutes, the bradycardia 
noted in the majority of adults was rarely hemodynamically 
significant and usually well-tolerated.
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKERS
Neuromuscular blockers can affect cardiac impulse con­
duction through several mechanisms. As with sedative 
and hypnotic anesthetic agents, muscle relaxants can 
have indirect effects on the sympathetic and parasym­
pathetic nervous systems, and, depending on the agent, 
this effect may be stimulatory or depressive to impulse 
conduction. The muscle relaxants may act directly at 
sympathetic nerve terminals and as a result increase 
heart rate. In addition, an increased heart rate might be 
an indirect effect caused by vasodilation from histamine, 
which results in reflex tachycardia.75 Succinylcholine has 
acetylcholine-like activity on receptors mediated by cho­
linergic neurotransmission, as found in the parasympa­
thetic nervous system. The value of succinylcholine in the 
electrophysiology laboratory primarily rests with its short 
duration of action. Because phrenic nerve assessment 
during the ablation procedure requires a nonparalyzed 
patient, the advantage of using succinylcholine for anes­
thesia induction and intubation is obvious. Pancuronium 
increases the heart rate both by its vagolytic properties and 
by releasing norepinephrine at cardiac sympathetic nerve 
terminals. Vecuronium and atracurium may produce bra­
dycardias, especially when other vagotonic drugs such as 
propofol and opioids have been given.76-78 Mivacurium 
and rocuronium have been found to be essentially free of 
cardiac conduction effects.10
The Physiology of Cardiac 
Arrhythmias
Cardiac rhythm disturbances are typically described in 
terms of the speed of cardiac impulse generation and con­
duction. By definition, any cardiac rhythm slower than 
60 beats per minute is a bradyarrhythmia. Similarly, any 
rhythm over 100 beats per minute is a tachyarrhythmia. 
Although hemodynamic instability can be observed with 
both bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias, similar 
instability can be observed even in sinus rhythms when the 
heart rate is not stable (see Box 11-279 for a listing of com­
mon bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias).
Many types of arrhythmias are seen and treated in the 
electrophysiology laboratory. A bradyarrhythmia is seen 
either when the sinoatrial node is malfunctioning with an 
impulse being generated less than 60 times/min or from a 
defect in the conduction of a properly generated impulse 
leading to less than 60 beats/min. The most common type 
of bradyarrhythmia seen by electrophysiologists is a sinus 
bradyarrhythmia, which is due to disease of the sinus node. 
Many sinus bradyarrhythmias are asymptomatic and 
require no treatment, but some may progress to a point 
at which cardiac function and hemodynamic stability are 
Box 11-2  Common Bradyarrhythmias and 
Tachyarrhythmias
Bradyarrhythmias
	1.	 Abnormal sinoatrial impulse formation: Sick sinus syndrome
	2.	 Abnormal impulse conduction: Atrioventricular block
Tachyarrhythmias
	1.	 Normal complex QRS
	
a.	 Sinus tachycardia
	
b.	 Atrial flutter
	
c.	 Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia
	2.	 Narrow complex QRS
	
a.	 Atrial fibrillation
	
b.	 Multifocal atrial tachycardia
	3.	 Wide complex QRS
	
a.	 Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
	
b.	 Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
	
c.	 Supraventricular tachycardia with bundle branch block
From Chua J, Patel K, Neelankavil J, Mahajan A. Anesthetic management 
of electrophysiology procedures. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2012;25(4):
470-481.
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
101
threatened. When severe sinus bradycardia, known as sick 
sinus syndrome, becomes symptomatic from significant 
cardiac compromise, an artificial pacemaker is needed to 
stimulate an impulse distal to the sinoatrial node.
The other primary category of bradyarrhythmia is due to 
a malfunction in conducting an impulse through the heart 
once it is generated in the sinoatrial node. These conduc­
tion blocks are further characterized as first-degree, second-
degree, or third-degree heart blocks. A first-degree block 
occurs when the impulse is delayed in passage through the 
normal conduction system but differs from the other two 
conduction bradyarrhythmias in that all impulses even­
tually pass through the atrioventricular node to reach the 
ventricle. First-degree block is recognized on the ECG by the 
presence of a prolonged P-R interval. Patients with first-
degree heart block are typically asymptomatic and require 
no intervention.
Second-degree block occurs when not all the impulses 
generated by the sinoatrial node are transmitted to the 
ventricle. In other words, some of the impulses are blocked, 
and others pass through. There are two varieties of second-
degree block. If the blockade occurs at the atrioventricular 
node, the rhythm is classified as Mobitz type I second-degree 
block. The electrocardiographic finding with Mobitz type I 
block is a series of relatively normal QRS complexes with 
equal PR intervals followed suddenly by a dropped beat. 
Mobitz type I arrhythmias usually do no harm to the 
patient, and do not require electrophysiological interven­
tion unless symptomatic. The other second-degree heart 
block is a Mobitz Type II block, which occurs when there is 
impairment of the impulse propagation below the AV node. 
The electrocardiographic finding is a widening PR interval 
until a QRS complex is dropped completely. Mobitz type II 
blockade can progress to complete heart block, in which 
no impulses reach the ventricle. Mobitz II patients may 
be asymptomatic, or they may be severely compromised, 
depending on the severity of the block. If a patient becomes 
symptomatic, emergent placement of a permanent pace­
maker is warranted.
Third-degree heart block, or complete heart block, occurs 
when no impulses pass to the ventricle. Patients survive on 
an ectopic focus in the ventricle that takes over the role of 
a natural cardiac pacemaker. This arrhythmia can be life-
threatening, and the placement of an artificial pacemaker 
on an emergent basis may be life-saving.
Tachyarrhythmias are caused by impulses generated 
above the atrioventricular node occurring and being trans­
mitted at a rate faster than 100 beats per minute. Three 
mechanisms determine the type of tachyarrhythmia that 
exists, and this directs the therapeutic approach by the elec­
trophysiologist. The categorization is based on the size of 
the QRS complex. The most common of the normal-width 
QRS complex tachycardias is sinus tachycardia. Basically, 
in this rhythm, the sinus node fires at a rate faster than 
expected as a result of suppression of the parasympathetic 
nervous system or activation of the sympathetic nervous 
system. No therapy is usually required except for consid­
eration of a ­catecholamine-secreting tumor if tachycardia 
persists. The next most common normal-width QRS com­
plex tachyarrhythmia is due to the presence of an abnormal 
secondary conduction pathway, which is either anatomi­
cal or functional. An impulse is propagated around an area 
of myocardial tissue that is relatively less excitable (Figure 
11-7). Anatomic reentry is responsible for many types of 
SVTs, such as WPW syndrome and classic atrial flutter.
Narrow QRS complex tachycardias include atrial fibrilla­
tion, which is also a form of reentrance tachycardia. In atrial 
fibrillation, functional reentry of the impulse occurs where 
an impulse travels around a relatively less excitable core. A 
second, less common, narrow QRS complex tachyarrhyth­
mia (<10%) is due to abnormal automaticity. Automaticity 
occurs when cardiac tissue other than the sinoatrial node 
spontaneously depolarizes and becomes an alternative site 
of pacing activity. Spontaneous automaticity of cardiac 
cells may occur because of metabolic disturbances such as 
acid-base imbalances, ischemia, or increased sympathetic 
tone. If the abnormal pacemaker is located in atrial tissue, 
the QRS complex is typically narrow. However, if the abnor­
mal pacemaker arises from ventricular tissue, the result is a 
wide QRS complex. These can be polymorphic (many pac­
ers) or monomorphic (a single pacer).
Another concern with tachyarrhythmias is that some 
can arise from abnormal fluctuations in the membrane 
potential after depolarization. Although some oscillations 
in membrane potential may occur normally, abnormal 
oscillations leading to depolarization on a frequent basis 
produce a tachyarrhythmia. Oscillations occurring early 
after depolarization (EAD) are often seen when there is a 
delay in repolarization or in a prolonged QT interval syn­
drome. Patients with EAD are at high risk for the onset of 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardias and sudden death. 
These are frequently some of the sickest patients to emer­
gently come to the electrophysiology laboratory for ablative 
intervention, as well as placement of internal cardioverter 
defibrillators (ICD). Oscillations that occur delayed after 
Reentrant
impulse
A
B
Initial impulse
Figure 11-7  Schematic of the typical reentrant pathway. Conduc­
tion pathway A has a slow conduction velocity but a short refractory 
period; pathway B has a slow conduction velocity but a longer refrac­
tory period. The initial impulse is blocked in pathway B, which is in its 
nonconducting refractory period. The slow conduction of the initial 
impulse down pathway B allows pathway B to recover in time to let ret­
rograde conduction of the impulse up pathway B to occur. This impulse 
then serves as the reentrant impulse down pathway A and serves to 
produce the reentrance arrhythmia. (Redrawn from Chua J, Patel K, Nee­
lankavil J, Mahajan A. Anesthetic management of electrophysiology pro­
cedures. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2012;25[4]:470-481.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
102
depolarization are for the most part iatrogenic, with high 
calcium or digoxin levels often being the cause.
Catheter-Based Ablations
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION ABLATION
Catheter ablations can be used to treat ventricular and 
supraventricular tachycardias, including atrial fibrillation, 
atrial flutter, WPW syndrome, and AV nodal reentry. Dur­
ing these procedures, the electrophysiologist injects local 
anesthetic, usually into the groin, and then introduces 
catheters into the vasculature, using fluoroscopic guidance 
to direct them to the heart. Much of the discussion here will 
focus on atrial fibrillation, because it is presently the most 
common tachyarrhythmia and the most frequent catheter-
based ablation procedure.80
To identify the source of the dysrhythmia and specify the 
precise location for ablation, these procedures require com­
plex mapping of the heart. Techniques to do this include 
activation mapping, pace mapping, entrainment mapping, 
intracardiac echocardiography–guided anatomical map­
ping, and anatomical fluoroscopy–based three-dimensional 
electroanatomical mapping (Figure 11-8).81
Once an arrhythmia is diagnosed and mapped to pin­
point its origin, energy sources may be applied to destroy 
the arrhythmogenic focus. Radiofrequency is the most com­
mon energy source, but cryothermic energy, ultrasound, 
laser, and microwave also can be used for ablation.81 The 
ablation procedure for atrial fibrillation usually involves 
pulmonary vein isolation (Figure 11-9), in which the pul­
monary veins are electrically isolated from the rest of the 
heart so that the abnormal electrical patterns coming from 
them no longer can generate an arrhythmia.
Ablation procedures for atrial fibrillation can take 6 to 8 
hours to complete. The patient must lie still on an uncom­
fortable procedure table. Patients frequently report back 
pain or discomfort. Many patients need medication for this 
pain. Patients may also report a painful burning sensation 
in the chest due to ablation at the site of the arrhythmia ori­
gin. Electrical cardioversion is often necessary during the 
case, and if the patient is not already under general anes­
thesia the same anesthetic approach to a cardioversion in a 
patient who is awake must be taken.
If moderate-to-deep sedation is used for the ablation 
rather than general anesthesia, partial airway obstruction, 
accompanied by snoring, can present a problem during 
ablation procedures. The rocking motion of the chest that 
accompanies this partial obstruction makes it difficult for 
the electrophysiologist to accurately map and ablate the 
foci of the arrhythmia. Many of these patients are obese 
and have sleep apnea, which are risk factors for atrial 
fibrillation.82
Although catheter-based ablations can be accom­
plished with local anesthesia and sedation, the ability to 
perform the procedures in a faster manner and with better 
results is driving the increased usage of general anesthe­
sia for the duration of these cases. In a recent study, 257 
consecutive patients having pulmonary vein isolation for 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation were randomized to moder­
ate sedation with fentanyl or midazolam or with general 
anesthesia with endotracheal intubation.5 No complica­
tions from general anesthesia were reported. Fluoroscopy 
and procedure times were approximately 50% longer in 
the sedation group. In addition, follow-up studies a year 
after the ablation procedure revealed that almost 90% of 
the patients who had general anesthesia were free from 
atrial arrhythmias and off all antiarrhythmic medications, 
whereas only 70% of the patients who had conscious 
sedation were free of their atrial arrhythmias without 
their antiarrhythmic medications. These findings demon­
strate that with regular respirations of equal tidal volumes 
and otherwise generalized immobility under anesthesia, 
conditions for ablation are more favorable for a success­
ful outcome. These improvements are most likely due to 
improved catheter stability and more accurate ablation 
energy delivery.
If the regular respirations provided under general 
anesthesia are able to improve the success rate of atrial 
ablations, even less respiratory movement might have 
additional advantages. In addition, a recent study indi­
cates that for procedures lasting more than 2 hours, using 
lower tidal volumes with conventional ventilation may 
have long-term protective effects on pulmonary function.83 
Figure 11-8  Left ventricular electroanatomical mapping in a patient 
with ventricular tachycardia. This figure demonstrates a “cast” of the 
left ventricle in a right anterior oblique view. The map is constructed 
by recognition of the physical location of points in contact with the left 
ventricular endocardial surface (white dots) using a global positioning 
system type of technology (in this case, generated by intersection of 
three low-strength magnetic fields). In addition, at each point, infor­
mation about electrophysiological characteristics is also saved and 
demonstrated by a color schema. In this example, the characteristic is 
the bipolar electrogram voltage at each point: purple is normal and red 
is markedly reduced. As ventricular arrhythmias arise from scar tissue, 
voltage mapping aids in understanding the source of ventricular tachy­
cardias. In this patient with prior extensive anterior myocardial infarc­
tion, the “topography” of the infarct can be appreciated. (Photograph 
courtesy of David Callans, MD.)
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
103
Even with smaller tidal volumes, conventional mechanical 
ventilation is still associated with translational movement 
of the patient’s chest and thus the potential for interfering 
with the mapping and ablating process of an electrophysi­
ological case. An alternative method for ventilating these 
patients, proposed in a 2006 publication from the Univer­
sity of Pittsburgh, combined the use of general anesthesia 
with high-frequency jet ventilation.84 This retrospective 
study was performed on 36 patients who underwent atrial 
ablation using high-frequency jet ventilation and an addi­
tional 36 patients who received conventional intermittent 
positive-pressure ventilation. The jet ventilator was set 
at 100 cycles/min with an inspiratory time of 30% of the 
cycle. Driving pressure was initially set between 15 and 20 
psi and increased if indicated by blood gases. The ablation 
procedure time was significantly shorter in the jet ventila­
tion group because of fewer incidences of ablation electrode 
dislodgment. Changes in left atrial volume and pressure 
and pulmonary venous flow velocity and motility were 
significantly less with use of jet ventilation in contrast to 
conventional ventilation. The benefit of jet ventilation was 
immediately apparent, and the authors discontinued the 
study based on a belief that jet ventilation was significantly 
better for patient care.
A more recent publication from our institution confirmed 
the benefits of high-frequency jet ventilation on outcome 
for atrial fibrillation ablation.85 Adoption of this technique 
improved the rate of freedom from atrial fibrillation at 1 year 
after a single ablation procedure from 66% to 74%, despite 
the 100 patients in the group in whom it was used having 
significantly more nonparoxysmal atrial fibrillation, larger 
left atria, and higher body mass index. Fluoroscopy time 
was also significantly decreased in patients treated with 
high-frequency jet ventilation. This was attributed to the 
profound stabilizing effect of this ventilation mode on the 
ablation catheter.
When jet ventilation is used, TIVA, such as infusions of 
propofol and remifentanil, should be used, because inhaled 
anesthetic concentrations cannot be accurately delivered. 
A vasopressor infusion is often needed to offset the vaso­
dilation of the intravenous anesthetic agents. Phenyleph­
rine often can be used for maintenance of blood pressure, 
although in certain circumstances epinephrine, dopamine, 
dobutamine, or a combination may be more appropriate in 
patients with poor cardiac function. Additionally, end-tidal 
carbon dioxide is not an accurate measurement of systemic 
carbon dioxide levels, so periodic arterial blood gases (usu­
ally hourly) are necessary to ensure adequate ventilation. 
The electrophysiologist will need to have blood drawn for 
the evaluation of activated clotting time measurements, 
allowing for an arterial blood gas sample to also be drawn 
at a fairly regular interval. Jet ventilation may be less effec­
tive in patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, and the anesthesiologist may need to revert to con­
ventional ventilation in these patients.
In the course of a procedure, the hemodynamic status 
of the patient may fluctuate wildly. It is not uncommon 
to see rapid changes in heart rate from a bradycardia of 
30 bpm to a tachycardia with a rate over 200 bpm. Blood 
pressure readings also may fluctuate similarly. It is impor­
tant to understand and anticipate these changes by com­
municating with the electrophysiology team. Also, the 
Figure 11-9  Image integration and three-dimensional mapping for ablation of atrial fibrillation. Preacquired reconstructed tomographical images are 
imported to a three-dimensional mapping system, which allows the ablation catheter to be operated within the context of the preacquired image set. 
In the left image, a posteroanterior view is demonstrated, showing the posterior location of the four pulmonary veins as they course from the left atrium. 
In the right image, a cross-sectional cut-away of the right superior and inferior pulmonary veins is shown. Each of the dots (blue signifying low energy 
output and white high energy) represents the location of the catheter when an individual ablation lesion is delivered. The pulmonary veins are electri­
cally isolated from the surrounding atrium by the circular lesion set. This prevents interaction of the triggers that initiate atrial fibrillation (originating 
from inside the pulmonary veins) with the atrium. (Photograph courtesy of David Callans, MD.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
104
reaction to these changes by the anesthesiologist is not 
the same as would occur in a normal operating room. 
Although blood pressure in the electrophysiology labora­
tory often rises and falls with changes in cardiac rhythm, 
other reasons such as slow cardiac tamponade with punc­
ture of the atrium or ventricle by the electrophysiologist 
are also considerations. An echocardiogram is easily done 
to evaluate the pericardial sac for tamponade. Raising the 
amount of pharmacological support, such as with an ino­
trope or a vasoconstrictor, may only mask the symptoms 
of these conditions. It is imperative to communicate any 
changes in hemodynamic status to the electrophysiolo­
gist, as well as changes in the amount of pharmacological 
support needed.
ISOPROTERENOL CHALLENGE
Medications such as isoproterenol are used by electrophys­
iologists to induce tachyarrhythmias. The “isoproterenol 
challenge” is performed at a point in the procedure when 
the electrophysiologist wishes to evaluate the induction 
of a tachyarrhythmia by incrementally raising the dose of 
isoproterenol. Isoproterenol is started at a baseline rate of 
3 mcg/min and raised incrementally until the desired effect 
is achieved. Occasionally, isoproterenol infusion rates can 
be increased to more than 40 mcg/min. Isoproterenol 
is a pure beta agonist, so that along with increasing the 
heart rate and cardiac output, increased propensity for the 
induction of dysrhythmias, such as ventricular tachycar­
dia or ventricular fibrillation, also occur. The electrophysi­
ologist is mostly interested in seeing if an arrhythmia can 
be induced and mapped where it is originating from in the 
heart.
Another important physiological effect from the beta 
stimulation associated with isoproterenol is a rapid drop in 
peripheral vascular resistance. As the dose of isoproterenol 
is increased, the blood pressure can precipitously decrease. 
This drop in blood pressure is anticipated by adding or 
increasing a phenylephrine infusion to prevent a steep fall 
in the blood pressure. The phenylephrine dosage is titrated 
to maintain and support a systolic blood pressure at a 120 
to 140 torr systolic level.
The use of isoproterenol is a difficult and challenging 
point in the procedure. The isoproterenol challenge must 
be not only met but anticipated if wild fluctuations in blood 
pressure are to be prevented. Perhaps even more trying 
than support of the blood pressure during the challenge 
itself is preventing the severe rebound hypertension that 
occurs once isoproterenol is discontinued. As with the chal­
lenge itself, the key to maintaining the blood pressure in a 
normal range is anticipation.
OTHER DRUG CHALLENGES
Other drug challenges, such as the use of adenosine (to slow 
or stop the heart) or atropine and propranolol (atropine to 
establish a peak heart rate followed by propranolol to slow 
the heart rate), are used by the electrophysiologist to evalu­
ate the heart during the procedure. Although it is important 
to communicate to the electrophysiologist the actions of the 
heart during these challenges, often no other intervention 
is needed by the anesthesia team.
Continued
Protocol for Anesthesia for Ablation of 
Atrial Fibrillation
	A.	 Preprocedural assessment of the patient
	
1.	 Verify patient identity and procedure consent
	
2.	 Assess airway, verify NPO (nothing by mouth) status
	
3.	 Previous cardiac interventions
	
a.	 Diagnostic catheterization
	
b.	 Stent placement and location
	
c.	 Left- and right-sided cardiac pressures
	
d.	 Surgical interventions
	
e.	 Arrhythmia interventions
	
f.	 Ablations
	
4.	 Electrocardiogram
	
a.	 Rate
	
b.	 Rhythm
	
c.	 Ischemic diseases
	
d.	 Conduction disease
	
e.	 Pacing
	
f.	 Ectopy
	
5.	 Echocardiogram
	
a.	 Chamber size
	
b.	 Ejection fraction
	
c.	 Valve disease
	
d.	 Presence or absence of thrombus (transesophageal 
echocardiogram)
	
6.	 Chest radiograph
	
7.	 Allergies and medication regimen, particularly the following:
	
a.	 Antiarrhythmics
	
b.	 Antihypertensives, diuretics
	
c.	 Anticoagulants
	
d.	 Hypoglycemics
	
8.	 Laboratory results, particularly coagulation profile
	
9.	 Obtain consent for anesthesia
	B.	 Airway checklist
	
1.	 Anesthesia machine checked out
	
2.	 Oxygen sources (wall/tank) verified
	
3.	 Suction available with Yankauer catheter
	
4.	 Mapleson circuit
	
5.	 Working end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor with gas 
­sampling tubing
	
6.	 Appropriate size endotracheal tube and mask
	
7.	 Appropriate size oral and nasal airways
	
8.	 Stylet
	
9.	 Conventional laryngoscopes
	
10.	 Video laryngoscope available
	
11.	 Laryngeal mask airways available, in case of difficult airway
	
12.	 Soft bite blocks
	
13.	 Jet ventilation system with appropriate tubing
	
14.	 Esophageal temperature probe
	
15.	 Viscous lidocaine (to lubricate laryngoscope and 
­endotracheal tube)
	C.	 Medication checklist
	
1.	 Lidocaine
	
2.	 Propofol or etomidate
	
3.	 Succinylcholine (also possibly a non–long-acting 
­nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocker)
	
4.	 Remifentanil
	
5.	 Phenylephrine
	
6.	 Epinephrine
	
7.	 Atropine
	
8.	 Ephedrine
	D.	Induction
	
1.	 Standard monitors (electrocardiograph, blood pressure 
cuff, pulse oximeter)
	
2.	 Confirm freely flowing intravenous line (preferably at least 
18 gauge)
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
105
HYBRID ABLATION PROCEDURE
A hybrid “convergent” procedure for ablation of atrial fibril­
lation has recently been developed, in which a surgeon does 
epicardial ablation using an endoscopic, closed-chest, sub­
thoracic approach (Figures 11-10 and 11-11) to the beat­
ing heart and the electrophysiologist ablates endocardially 
similar to standard electrophysiology procedures.86 The com­
bined effort can greatly reduce the overall length of the proce­
dure, but if the surgeon works in the operating room and the 
cardiologist in the electrophysiology laboratory, transporting 
an anesthetized, intubated patient from one location to the 
other is required. Furthermore, more analgesic medication 
may be needed than for a strictly endovascular procedure.
COMPLICATIONS OF ATRIAL FIBRILLATION 
ABLATION FROM DAMAGE TO ADJACENT 
STRUCTURES
Potential complications of atrial fibrillation ablation proce­
dures are listed in Table 11-3. Some relate to injury from 
structures adjacent to the heart, such as the phrenic nerve 
and esophagus.
The phrenic nerve may sustain damage during an abla­
tion procedure because of its close proximity to the area 
being ablated on the posterior surface of the atrium. The 
risk for damage to the nerve increases as the distance to 
the ablated area decreases. To identify the phrenic nerve 
for decreasing the risk for damage, the electrophysiolo­
gist will often stimulate the posterior surface of the right 
atrium and check for diaphragm motion on fluoroscopy. 
Neuromuscular blockade is undesirable at this point in the 
Figure 11-10  Placement of an endoscope for epicardial catheter abla­
tion technique using a closed subthoracic approach.
Figure 11-11  Epicardial lesions seen endoscopically between the peri­
cardium and the atrium during a subthoracic epicardial catheter abla­
tion. (Courtesy of nContact, Morrisville, NC, with hjhjhj.)
	
3.	 Confirm Yankauer suction, airway supplies, medications 
(listed earlier)
	
4.	 Connect intravenous line to multiport manifold (for 
infusion of propofol, remifentanil, phenylephrine, 
epinephrine)
	
5.	 Pad and secure patient’s arms, with attention to pressure 
points
	
6.	 Denitrogenate the patient with 100% oxygen by mask
	
7.	 Induction typically with intravenous lidocaine (1 to 2 mg/
kg), propofol (∼2 mg/kg) or etomidate (0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg), 
fentanyl (1 to 2 mcg/kg), and succinylcholine (1 mg/kg)
	
8.	 Intubate patient (video laryngoscope may be used if 
patient has received anticoagulation therapy or in an­
ticipated difficult laryngoscopy); cardiologist can check 
endotracheal tube position fluoroscopically
	
9.	 Esophageal temperature probe; cardiologist can check 
position fluoroscopically
	
10.	 Bite block
	
11.	 Forced-air warming blanket
	
12.	 Foley catheter placed typically by cardiology nurse
	
13.	 Place arterial catheter
	E.	 Maintenance
	
1.	 Typical drug infusions
	
a.	 Propofol (50 to 75 mcg/kg/min)
	
b.	 Remifentanil (∼0.12 mcg/kg/min)
	
c.	 Phenylephrine (20 to 100 mcg/min) to maintain blood 
pressure
	
2.	 Jet ventilation (coordinate with the cardiologist). If initi­
ated, an arterial blood gas (ABG) sample should be sent 
to the laboratory approximately 30 minutes later. The jet 
ventilator settings should be adjusted on the basis of the 
laboratory results to achieve a normal Paco2; ABGs should 
be checked 30 minutes after each adjustment or at least 
every 2 hours if no adjustment is made.
	
3.	 Once atrial fibrillation ablation has occurred, the cardiolo­
gist may wish to test ablation with an infusion of isopro­
terenol. Phenylephrine infusion should be immediately 
available to treat isoproterenol-induced hypotension.
	F.	 After the procedure
	
1.	 Consider antiemetic prophylaxis
	
2.	 Consider analgesic longer-acting than remifentanil (e.g., 
fentanyl, hydromorphone, ketorolac, or meperidine)
	
3.	 Extubation may proceed when criteria have been met. 
Infusion of vasopressor(s) may be discontinued based on 
the hemodynamic status of the patient.
	
4.	 Patient should be transported to cardiology recovery unit 
with appropriate monitors and oxygen.
	
5.	 Appropriate report (including medications given, fluid bal­
ance, etc.) must be made to the recovery nurse.   
Protocol for Anesthesia for Ablation of 
Atrial Fibrillation—cont’d
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
106
procedure. This can be accomplished by avoiding long-
acting muscle relaxants to facilitate tracheal intubation 
and instead using succinylcholine or an intubating dose 
of a short-acting muscle relaxant. Communication should 
be initiated with the electrophysiologist before induction 
of anesthesia concerning the use of any muscle relaxant 
that might have residual effects during the evaluation of 
phrenic nerve function.
The cardiologist will also ablate near the esophagus. 
Thermal injury to the esophagus resulting in ulceration 
or atrioesophageal fistula is another potential complica­
tion. Monitoring esophageal temperature may help avoid 
this complication in the patient under general anesthesia. 
A rapid increase recorded by the esophageal temperature 
probe should be communicated to the cardiologist.
Another major complication in the electrophysiology 
laboratory is the uncommon but not rare perforation of 
the atrium or ventricle that can lead to a cardiac tampon­
ade. Once the diagnosis is established, usually by echo­
cardiography, the patient may be stabilized by increasing 
preload and use of vasoconstrictors. Inotropic support may 
be necessary to maintain adequate blood pressure. If the 
patient becomes unstable and the blood pressure cannot 
be maintained, subxyphoid drainage of the tamponade 
may be needed. If that fails, emergency surgical interven­
tion is required.
OTHER COMPLICATIONS OF ATRIAL 
FIBRILLATION ABLATION
Major complications of ablation can arise from attempting 
to gain femoral access, such as retroperitoneal bleeding, 
arteriovenous fistulas, and pseudoaneurysms. Transient 
ischemic attacks or cerebrovascular accidents can occur, 
because the procedure involves a transseptal puncture 
through the fossa ovalis membrane to cross into the left 
atrium. It is imperative during these transseptal proce­
dures to avoid air bubbles in the intravenous lines because 
of potential air embolism (see Box 11-1). Embolism of 
particulate matter formed by heat coagulation is even 
more common. Other major complications include myo­
cardial infarction (most commonly along the right coro­
nary artery distribution), pulmonary vein stenosis, and 
anaphylaxis.
The risk for major complications of ablation, as listed in 
Table 11-3, is approximately 2%. Treatment of these com­
plications varies according to each case. Treatment can 
range from supportive to pharmacologic, all the way up 
to major surgical intervention. It is important to plan for 
emergencies. The ability to call for and obtain help is essen­
tial. A well-stocked code cart should be nearby, as well as a 
rapid infuser. Resuscitation scenarios need to be in place. 
Surgical backup must be available. The method of transpor­
tation, monitoring, and transfer of care of the patient from 
the electrophysiology laboratory to the operating room 
should be in place before the start of any procedure.
When deciding the value of performing an atrial abla­
tion, the risks for potential complications must be balanced 
against the risks to the patient of continued atrial fibrilla­
tion. Complications of atrial fibrillation include heart fail­
ure, decreased quality of life, increased risk for stroke, and 
death. The first line of treatment of atrial fibrillation is the 
use of a variety of medications, but they often fail over time. 
This failure has led to the rise in ablation procedures.
ABLATION OF OTHER DYSRHYTHMIAS
Catheter ablation of dysrhythmias other than atrial fibrilla­
tion is usually performed with sedation, rather than general 
anesthesia. It is important to consider the impact of certain 
drugs for patients presenting for an electrophysiology study 
to diagnose dysrhythmias, such as supraventricular or ven­
tricular tachycardia and premature ventricular contrac­
tions. For example, drugs affecting the autonomic nervous 
system should be avoided, because they may affect the abil­
ity of the cardiologist to reproduce the offending arrhyth­
mia. Some sedatives may also suppress arrhythmias (see 
the earlier discussion on the effects of anesthetic drugs).
Patients who present for ablation of ventricular tachy­
cardia in the setting of structural heart disease can be 
severely compromised, with poor cardiac output result­
ing in multiorgan failure. Inotropic or mechanical support 
such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, intraaor­
tic balloon pump, or an Impella device (AbioMed, Dan­
vers, Massachusetts) may be necessary for the patient to 
tolerate the procedure. Cardioversion may be necessary if 
organ perfusion is compromised by ventricular arrhyth­
mia. The hemodynamic effects of ventricular dysrhythmias 
are easily evaluated with arterial catheter monitoring. The 
Table 11-3  Potential Complications of Catheter Ablation 
of Atrial Fibrillation
Complication
How to Detect and/or Avoid
Phrenic nerve damage
Avoid neuromuscular blockade so that 
the electrophysiologist can iden­
tify the nerve by stimulating it and 
looking for diaphragm contraction 
by fluoroscopy; damage could cause 
hemidiaphragm paralysis.
Esophageal thermal injury 
(ulceration, atrioesopha­
geal fistula)
Monitor esophageal temperature in 
patient under general anesthesia; 
monitor for severe chest pain in 
patients not under general anesthesia.
Complications of femoral 
access (retroperitoneal 
bleeding, arteriovenous 
fistula, pseudoaneurysm)
May manifest with back pain, anemia, 
hypotension; computed tomography 
helps diagnose; may need surgery.
Transient ischemic attack or 
cerebrovascular accident
Usually embolic; avoid air bubbles in 
intravenous line with transseptal 
puncture; neurological deficit will 
probably not be apparent until emer­
gence from general anesthesia.
Myocardial infarction
Monitor for electrocardiogram changes, 
most commonly in right coronary 
distribution.
Pulmonary vein stenosis
Typically presents months after the 
procedure; may be diagnosed with 
computed tomography, treated with 
balloons and/or stents.
Anaphylaxis
Hypotension, wheezing; not unique to 
electrophysiology
Tamponade from cardiac or 
aorta perforation
Hypotension; pericardial effusion can be 
seen on echocardiogram; effusion can 
be tapped, anticoagulation reversed; 
sometimes requires surgery.
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
107
anesthesia provider typically works near the patient’s head, 
so is often the person best able to assess the patient’s mental 
status as an indicator of cerebral perfusion. Cerebral oxim­
etry also can be used as a surrogate measurement of cere­
bral perfusion, particularly in patients whose mental status 
is already compromised by sedative or anesthetic medica­
tions. It can be challenging to avoid oversedation with a 
resultant suppression of arrhythmias but at the same time 
provide adequate sedation so that the patient can tolerate 
the procedure.
The cardiologist’s approach for ventricular tachycardia 
can be endocardial, as described earlier, or epicardial, in 
which catheters are inserted through the chest wall. The 
latter can be particularly painful. Temporary suspension of 
respiration is sometimes desirable during this procedure, so 
general anesthesia with an endotracheal tube may be the 
preferred anesthesia plan for epicardial ablations. However, 
at least one case of successful use of remifentanil and mid­
azolam for sedation for this procedure in a young patient 
has been reported.55
Device Implantation
Electrophysiologists will place pacemakers and defibrillators 
in patients when indicated. Anesthesia is not necessarily 
needed for pacemaker implants, so the present discussion 
will focus only on ICD implantation. Patients presenting for 
ICD placement often have cardiomyopathy with a low left 
ventricular ejection fraction (typically ≤35%), with pub­
lished guidelines87 recommending ICD therapy for such 
patients. Studies have shown that long-term mortality is 
reduced when ICDs are implanted in these patients with 
either ischemic88 or nonischemic89 cardiomyopathies. Pro­
phylactic ICD placement is warranted in these patients, as a 
primary preventive measure, even if no previous ventricu­
lar tachyarrhythmia has been identified. Although some 
of these patients may have nonischemic cardiomyopathy, 
many of them will have coronary disease, so it is important 
to consider the risk for myocardial ischemia and its sequelae 
as part of the anesthesia plan. Many patients are having an 
ICD placed for secondary prevention; in other words, they 
have already had a ventricular tachycardia or ventricular 
fibrillation arrest. These patients have multiple comorbidi­
ties and will usually have physical status of ASA 3 or greater.
The device implant can usually be performed with local 
anesthesia and mild to moderate sedation.90-93 Rarely is 
general anesthesia required.94 One suggested anesthetic 
approach is the use of a thoracic epidural, but experience 
with this technique is limited.95 The cardiologist typically 
tests the ICD near the end of the procedure, and testing 
may require deeper sedation or brief general anesthesia.96 
For testing, the ICD is programmed to deliver a shock on 
a T-wave, to induce ventricular fibrillation. If the new 
device works properly, it will discharge and defibrillate; if 
not, external pads are used for defibrillation. The shock is 
painful. Cardiologists usually wait 5 minutes after a test 
before performing a second test, although in patients with 
sicker hearts they may test only once or not at all. Person­
nel should be clear of any contact with the patient before 
electrical discharge to avoid getting shocked.
Protocol for Anesthesia for Defibrillator 
Implantation
	A.	 Preprocedural assessment of the patient
	
1.	 Verify patient identity and procedure consent.
	
2.	 Assess airway, verify NPO status
	
3.	 Cardiac status
	
a.	 Arrhythmias
	
b.	 Left ventricular function
	
c.	 Pacing, previous defibrillator
	
d.	 Ischemic heart disease
	
e.	 Congenital heart disease
	
4.	 Chest radiograph
	
5.	 Allergies and medication regimen
	
6.	 Laboratory results
	
7.	 Obtain consent for anesthesia
	B.	 Airway checklist
	
1.	 Anesthesia machine checked out
	
2.	 Oxygen sources (wall/tank) verified
	
3.	 Suction available with Yankauer catheter
	
4.	 Mapleson circuit
	
5.	 Masks, soft bite blocks
	
6.	 Working end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor with gas 
­sampling tubing
	
7.	 Emergency supplies
	
a.	 Laryngoscopes
	
b.	 Endotracheal tubes
	
c.	 Stylets
	
d.	 Laryngeal, oral, and nasal airways
	C.	 Medication checklist
	
1.	 Etomidate or propofol
	
2.	 Succinylcholine
	
3.	 Midazolam
	
4.	 Fentanyl or remifentanil
	
5.	 Phenylephrine
	
6.	 Atropine
	
7.	 Ephedrine
	
8.	 Antibiotic (typically cefazolin, if the patient is not allergic)
	D.	Induction
	
1.	 Standard monitors (electrocardiograph, blood pressure cuff, 
pulse oximeter)
	
2.	 Confirm freely flowing intravenous line (preferably at least 
18 gauge)
	
3.	 Confirm Yankauer suction, airway supplies, medications 
(listed earlier)
	
4.	 Pad and secure patient’s arms, with attention to pressure points
	
5.	 “Cage” is helpful to protect patient’s face, though may 
­impede airway access
	
6.	 Supplemental oxygen to patient (mask or cannula), end-
tidal carbon dioxide monitoring
	
7.	 Consider risk for fire from high oxygen concentration, 
­electrocautery, and alcohol-based skin preparation
	
8.	 Give antibiotic
	
9.	 Usually mild-to-moderate intravenous sedation (midazolam, 
fentanyl, and/or low-dose propofol and/or remifentanil infu­
sions) for device placement, to supplement local anesthetic 
infiltrated by cardiologist
	E.	 If device is to be tested
	
1.	 Place soft bite block before device testing
	
2.	 Titrate intravenous agent to loss of consciousness (eyelash 
reflex) before testing
	
3.	 Notify cardiologist to proceed when titration is complete
	
4.	 Avoid contact with patient when shocks are delivered
	
5.	 Check pulse oximeter or carotid pulse after sinus rhythm is 
restored
	
6.	 Often testing will be repeated after 5 minutes
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
108
Potential complications of ICD placement include pneu­
mothorax; tamponade, which can result from coronary 
sinus or cardiac perforation; and embolic events, such as 
a transient ischemic attack or stroke. These patients tend 
to have low ejection fractions, and putting them in and out 
of ventricular fibrillation can further compromise cardiac 
output. After the test, promptly check for a pulse to make 
sure that the patient has not suffered an episode of pulseless 
electrical activity.
Lead Extractions
Pacemaker or defibrillator leads may need to be removed 
because of infection, breakage, or other problems. Lead 
extraction carries a risk because of the potential for per­
foration of the heart or major blood vessel when the lead 
is removed. The difficulty in removing the lead often 
depends on the amount of scarring that holds the lead to 
the patient’s tissue. The degree of scarring in turn depends 
on multiple factors, including how long the wire has been 
in place and the age of the patient. Younger patients scar 
faster and more thoroughly. The ease of extraction can 
range from simply pulling out a loose wire to the use of a 
laser to remove a wire surrounded by heavy scar tissue. 
The use of a laser indicates a higher risk for complications 
for a lead removal, and the electrophysiologist may pru­
dently request that general anesthesia be given with an 
endotracheal tube. The electrophysiologist will typically 
place a femoral arterial line for continuous blood pres­
sure measurement and a femoral venous line for access in 
case blood and vasopressors are required. Crossmatched 
blood and a rapid infuser, as well as surgical instruments 
and an echocardiographic machine, should be readily 
available.
Because of the potential for hemorrhage as a result of 
rupture of a blood vessel, this procedure is done in a cardiac 
or hybrid operating room at many institutions, although 
some institutions continue to perform lead extractions 
in the catheterization or electrophysiology laboratory. 
Regardless, a cardiothoracic surgical team should be on call 
for backup. Constant attention must be paid to the patient’s 
arterial blood pressure during the lead extraction. A rapid 
fall in blood pressure may indicate a complication. Echo­
cardiography is useful for determining the cause of hypo­
tension, such as hypovolemia resulting from bleeding from 
a major vessel or tamponade from cardiac perforation. In 
case of a major bleed, the patient should go to the operating 
room immediately.
Protocol for Anesthesia for Lead Extraction
	A.	 Preprocedural assessment of the patient
	
1.	 Verify patient identity and procedure consent.
	
2.	 Assess airway, verify NPO status
	
3.	 Patient status
	
a.	 Is the patient septic because of infected lead? If so, 
hemodynamic support?
	
b.	 Left ventricular function
	
c.	 Is the patient pacemaker-dependent?
	
d.	 Ischemic heart disease
	
e.	 Congenital heart disease
	
4.	 Chest radiograph
	
5.	 Allergies and medication regimen
	
6.	 Laboratory results (starting hemoglobin and hematocrit, 
coagulation studies)
	
7.	 Obtain consent for anesthesia
	B.	 Airway checklist
	
1.	 Anesthesia machine checked out
	
2.	 Oxygen sources (wall/tank) verified
	
3.	 Suction available with Yankauer catheter
	
4.	 Mapleson circuit
	
5.	 Working end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor with gas 
­sampling tubing
	
6.	 Appropriate-size endotracheal tube and mask
	
7.	 Appropriate-size oral and nasal airways
	
8.	 Stylet
	
9.	 Laryngoscopes
	
10.	 Laryngeal mask airways
	
11.	 Temperature probe
	C.	 Medication checklist
	
1.	 Lidocaine
	
2.	 Propofol or etomidate
	
3.	 Neuromuscular blocker to facilitate intubation
	
4.	 Anesthesia maintenance agent (e.g., inhaled)
	
5.	 Phenylephrine
	
6.	 Epinephrine
	
7.	 Dopamine, dobutamine, and/or norepinephrine, depend­
ing on patient’s condition
	
8.	 Ephedrine
	
9.	 Atropine
	D.	Induction
	
1.	 Standard monitors (electrocardiograph, blood pressure 
cuff, pulse oximeter)
	
2.	 Confirm freely flowing intravenous line (preferably at least 
18 gauge)
	
3.	 Confirm Yankauer suction, airway supplies, medications 
(listed above)
	
4.	 Pad and secure patient’s arms, with attention to pressure 
points
	
5.	 Discuss anticipated ease of procedure with cardiologist; if the 
lead has been in a long time and the patient is young, extrac­
tion may be more difficult because of scarring, and general 
anesthesia with an endotracheal tube may be appropriate so 
that the airway is secured in case of hemodynamic collapse.
	
6.	 In case of general anesthesia
	
a.	 Standard induction is appropriate, subject to the 
­patient’s condition
	
b.	 Intubate patient’s trachea; cardiologist can check tube 
position fluoroscopically
	
c.	 Insert temperature probe
	E.	 Prepare for possible perforation of heart or major vessel
	
1.	 Arterial and central venous lines
	
2.	 Crossmatched blood and a rapid infuser
	
3.	 Surgical backup, instruments
	
4.	 Echocardiography machine
	F.	 After the procedure
	
1.	 Patient should be transported to cardiology recovery unit 
with appropriate monitors and oxygen.
	
2.	 Appropriate report (including medications, fluid balance, 
etc.) must be made to the recovery nurse.   
Protocol for Anesthesia for Defibrillator 
Implantation—cont’d
Continued
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
109
The risk for major complications, such as myocardial 
avulsion, vascular tear, pneumothorax, hemothorax, pul­
monary embolism, cardiac tamponade, arteriovenous 
fistula, and death, is approximately 1.9%. Other complica­
tions, including pericardial effusion, hematoma, venous 
thrombosis, and arrhythmia also may occur.
Noninvasive Programmed 
Stimulation
In the NIPS procedure, the cardiologists program the ICD 
to stimulate the patient’s heart to see if ventricular tachy­
cardia can be elicited and then determine whether the ICD 
fires appropriately. Anesthetic considerations are similar 
to those for cardioversion, although the patients usually 
have a more severe cardiomyopathy, and these procedures 
can be longer than simple cardioversion. In cardioversion, 
typically a single shock lasting a fraction of a second is all 
that is required, whereas a NIPS procedure can last for 20 
minutes or more, while the electrophysiologist tries a vari­
ety of different patterns of electrical stimulation. Oxygen by 
face mask and short-acting intravenous agents are usually 
appropriate. Etomidate may be a better choice than pro­
pofol in patients with poor left ventricular function. Many 
electrophysiologists prefer to avoid use of intravenous lido­
caine given before propofol or etomidate to reduce the burn­
ing sensation during injection, because lidocaine may affect 
the ventricular arrhythmia threshold.
Postoperative Care and Pain 
Management
Anesthesia personnel should remain with the patient until 
the patient’s care is transferred to the recovery nursing staff. 
Patients who use a continuous positive airway pressure 
machine for sleep apnea at home may benefit from using it in 
the recovery unit. Most patients having undergone femoral 
arterial cannulation will need to have supine bed rest for sev­
eral hours. Considering that they have been in that position 
for some 6 to 12 hours, significant discomfort may result.
Many of the patients are in the electrophysiology labora­
tory for many hours, so those with preexisting back, shoul­
der, or joint ailments will often awaken in significant pain. 
In addition, the groin catheters removed after the patient 
emerges from anesthesia are another source for significant 
postprocedure pain. Therefore planning for postproce­
dure pain should begin before the patient enters the elec­
trophysiology laboratory. Adequate padding of the neck, 
arms, back, knees, and heels will help reduce the pain from 
prolonged skeletal inactivity (see Figure 11-4). In addition, 
sensitivity to the level of postprocedure pain that many 
of these patients experience should direct the anesthetic 
Protocol for Anesthesia for Lead 
Extraction—cont’d
	F.	 Maintenance
	
1.	 Standard maintenance is appropriate
	
2.	 Monitor blood pressure closely; communicate with 
­cardiologist immediately in case of decline
	G.	 After extraction
	
1.	 Extubation may proceed when criteria have been met.
	
2.	 Patient should be transported to cardiology recovery unit 
with appropriate monitors and oxygen.
	
3.	 Appropriate report (including medications given, fluid 
­balance, etc.) must be made to the recovery nurse.
Protocol for Anesthesia for Noninvasive 
Programmed Stimulations
	A.	 Preprocedural assessment of the patient
	
1.	 Verify patient identity and procedure consent
	
2.	 Assess airway, verify NPO status
	
3.	 Cardiac evaluation
	
a.	 Device
	
b.	 Arrhythmia and ablation history
	
c.	 Left ventricular function
	
d.	 Ischemic heart disease
	
e.	 Congenital heart disease
	
4.	 Allergies and medication (particularly antiarrhythmic) 
­regimen
	
5.	 Laboratory and chest radiograph results
	
6.	 Obtain consent for anesthesia
	B.	 Airway checklist
	
1.	 Oxygen sources (wall/tank) verified
	
2.	 Suction available with Yankauer catheter
	
3.	 Mapleson circuit
	
4.	 Masks, soft bite blocks
	
5.	 Working end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor with gas 
­sampling tubing
	
6.	 Emergency supplies
	
a.	 Laryngoscopes, endotracheal tubes, stylets
	
b.	 Laryngeal, oral, and nasal airways
	C.	 Medication checklist
	
1.	 Etomidate or propofol
	
2.	 Emergency medications: succinylcholine, lidocaine, 
­phenylephrine, epinephrine, atropine, ephedrine
	D.	Induction and maintenance
	
1.	 Standard monitors (electrocardiograph, blood pressure 
cuff, pulse oximeter)
	
2.	 Confirm freely flowing intravenous line (preferably at least 
18 gauge)
	
3.	 Confirm Yankauer suction, airway supplies, medications 
(listed above)
	
4.	 Supplemental oxygen to patient (mask or cannula), 
­end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring
	
5.	 Place soft bite block
	
6.	 Titrate intravenous agent to loss of consciousness (eyelash 
reflex)
	
7.	 Notify cardiologist to proceed when titration is complete
	
8.	 Avoid contact with patient when shocks are delivered
	
9.	 Check pulse oximeter or carotid pulse after defibrillation if 
it occurs
	
10.	 Titrate additional intravenous anesthetic agent as needed 
until the procedure is completed
	E.	 After the procedure, appropriate report (including medica­
tions given, fluid balance, etc.) must be made to the recovery 
nurse. 
 
Protocol for Anesthesia for Noninvasive 
Programmed Stimulations—cont’d
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
110
management near the end of the procedure. Ketorolac 15 
to 30 mg should be given routinely, if no renal or other 
contraindication exists. Intravenous acetaminophen 1 g 
should be considered for patients with normal liver func­
tion. In addition, because remifentanil is very short acting, 
consideration should be given to incorporating a longer-
acting opioid, such as hydromorphone or morphine, as part 
of the emergence sequence. Finally, frequent postextuba­
tion assessments of the patient’s pain level should be per­
formed as the anesthetic agents continue to wear off.
Conclusion
The number of patients treated in the electrophysiology 
laboratory continues to grow nationwide. Improvements 
in noninvasive medical technology allow sick patients, 
who just a few years ago would have been excluded from 
care, to be treated effectively with decreased risk in the 
electrophysiology laboratory. Opinions65,97-99 and prac­
tices100 differ as to the extent to which anesthesiologists 
should be involved in cases in electrophysiology labora­
tories and whether those anesthesiologists should be car­
diac anesthesiologists,101 but as the procedures in that 
venue become more complex for patients who are sicker, 
the trend of increasing anesthesiology involvement will 
undoubtedly continue.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Drs. David Callans, Lee Fleisher, and 
Sean Kennedy for their comments on a draft of this chapter.
References
	
1.	 Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM, et al. Heart disease and stroke sta­
tistics 2011 update: a report from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2011;123:e18–e209.
	
2.	 Bubien RS, Fisher GD, Gentzel JA, et  al. NASPE expert consensus 
document: use of IV (conscious) sedation/analgesia by nonanesthe­
sia personnel in patients undergoing arrhythmia specific diagnostic, 
therapeutic, and surgical procedures. PACE. 1998;21:375–385.
	
3.	 Calkins H, Brugada J, Packer DL, et  al. HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert 
consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial 
fibrillation: recommendations for personnel, policy, procedures and 
follow-up. Heart Rhythm. 2007;4:816–861.
	
4.	 Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato R, et al. 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert 
consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial 
fibrillation: recommendations for patient selection, procedural tech­
niques, patient management and follow-up, definitions, endpoints, 
and research trial design. Heart Rhythm. 2012;9:632–696.
	
5.	 DiBiase L, Conti S, Mohanty P, et al. General anesthesia reduces the 
prevalence of pulmonary vein reconnection during repeat ablation 
when compared with conscious sedation: results from a randomized 
study. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:368–372.
	
6.	 Shillcutt SK, Schulte TE. Transesophageal echocardiography find­
ings associated with transvenous lead extraction. Anesth Analg. 
2012;115(6):1282–1285.
	
7.	 Kory P, Guevarra K, Mathew JP, et al. The impact of video laryngos­
copy use during urgent endotracheal intubation in the critically ill. 
Anesth Analg. 2013;117(1):144–149.
	
8.	 Yan Z, Tanner JW, Lin D, et al. Airway trauma in a high patient vol­
ume academic cardiac electrophysiology laboratory center. Anesth 
Analg. 2013;116(1):112–117.
	
9.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Standards for basic anes­
thetic 
monitoring. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.asahq.org/For-
Members/∼/media/For%20Members/documents/Standards%20
Guidelines%20Stmts/Basic%20Anesthetic%20Monitoring%20
2011.ashx.
	 10.	 Renwick J, Kerr C, McTaggart R, Yeung J. Cardiac electro­
physiology and conduction pathway ablation. Can J Anaesth. 
1993;40(11):1053–1064.
	 11.	 Bosnjak ZJ, Kampine JP. Effects of halothane, enflurane, and isoflu­
rane on the SA node. Anesthesiology. 1983;58(4):314–321.
	 12.	 Marshall BE, Longnecker DE. General anesthetics. In: Gilman AG, 
Rail TW, Nies AS, Taylor R, eds. The pharmacological basis of thera­
peutics. 8th ed. New York, NY: Permagon; 1990:285–310.
	 13.	 Riley DC, Schmeling WT, AI-Wathiqui MH, Kampine JP, Warltier 
DC. Prolongation of the QT interval by volatile anesthetics in chroni­
cally instrumented dog. Anesth Analg. 1988;67(8):741–749.
	 14.	 Atlee III JL, Alexander SC. Halothane effects on conductivity of 
the AV node and His-Purkinje system in the dog. Anesth Analg. 
1977;56(3):378–386.
	 15.	 Eger II EI, Smith NT, Stoelting RK, et al. Cardiovascular effects of 
halothane in man. Anesthesiology. 1970;2(3):396–409.
	 16.	 Lynch III C, Vogel S, Sperelakis N. Halothane depression of myocar­
dial slow action potentials. Anesthesiology. 1981;55(4):360–368.
	 17.	 Polic S, Atlee III JL, Laslo A, Kampine JP, Bosnjak ZJ. Anesthetics and 
automaticity in latent pacemaker fibers. II. Effects of halothane and 
epinephrine or norepinephrine on automaticity of dominant and 
subsidiary atrial pacemakers in the canine heart. Anesthesiology. 
1991;75(2):298–304.
	 18.	 Reynolds AK. On the mechanism of myocardial sensitization to cat­
echolamines by hydrocarbon anesthetics. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 
1984;62(2):183–198.
	 19.	 Maze M, Smith CM. Identification of receptor mechanism mediating 
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias during halothane anesthesia in 
the dog. Anesthesiology. 1983;59(4):322–326.
	 20.	 Gallagher JD, McClernan CA. The effects of halothane on ven­
tricular tachycardia in intact dogs. Anesthesiology. 1991;75(5):
866–875.
	 21.	 Erb TO, Kanter RJ, Hall JM, et al. Comparison of electrophysiologic 
effects of propofol and isoflurane-based anesthetics in children 
undergoing radiofrequency catheter ablation for supraventricular 
tachycardia. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(6):1386–1394.
	 22.	 Atlee 3rd JL, Yeager TS. Electrophysiologic assessment of the effects 
of enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane on properties affecting 
supraventricular re-entry in chronically instrumented dogs. Anes­
thesiology. 1989;71(6):941–952.
	 23.	 Blitt CD, Raessler KL, Wightman MA, et  al. Atrioventricular con­
duction in dogs during anesthesia with isoflurane. Anesthesiology. 
1979;50(3):210–212.
	 24.	 Skovsted P, Sapthavichaikul S. The effects of isoflurane on arterial 
pressure, pulse rate, autonomic nervous activity, and barostatic 
reflexes. Can Anaesth Soc J. 1977;24(3):304–314.
	 25.	 Lavoie J, Walsh EP, Burrows FA, et al. Effects of propofol or isoflurane 
anesthesia on cardiac conduction in children undergoing radiofre­
quency catheter ablation for tachydysrhythmias. Anesthesiology. 
1995;82(4):884–887.
	 26.	 Pérez ER, Bartolomé FB, Carretero PS, et  al. Electrophysiologi­
cal effects of sevoflurane in comparison with propofol in children 
with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim. 
2008;55(1):26–31.
	 27.	 Sharpe MD, Cuillerier DJ, Lee JK, et  al. Sevoflurane has no effect 
on sinoatrial node function or on normal atrioventricular and 
accessory pathway conduction in Wolff-Parkinson-White syn­
drome during alfentanil/midazolam anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 
1999;90(1):60–65.
	 28.	 Whyte SD, Booker PD, Buckley DG. The effects of propofol and sevo­
flurane on the QT interval and transmural dispersion of repolariza­
tion in children. Anesth Analg. 2005;100(1):71–77.
	 29.	 Eisele JH, Smith NT. Cardiovascular effects of 40 percent nitrous 
oxide in man. Anesth Analg. 1972;51(6):956–963.
	 30.	 Smith NT, Eger 2nd EI, Stoelting RK, et al. The cardiovascular and 
sympathomimetic responses to the addition of nitrous oxide to halo­
thane in man. Anesthesiology. 1970;32(5):410–421.
	 31.	 Lampe GH, Donegan JH, Rupp SM, et al. Nitrous oxide and epineph­
rine-induced arrhythmias. Anesth Analg. 1990;71(6):602–605.
	 32.	 Novalija E, Hogan QH, Kulier AH, et al. Effects of desflurane, sevoflu­
rane and halothane on postinfarction spontaneous dysrhythmias in 
dogs. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1998;42(3):353–357.
	 33.	 Sharpe MD, Dobkowski WB, Murkin JM, et al. The electrophysiologic 
effects of volatile anesthetics and sufentanil on the normal atrioven­
tricular conduction system and accessory pathways in Wolff-Parkin­
son-White syndrome. Anesthesiology. 1994;80:63–70.
11  •  Anesthesia for Electrophysiology Procedures
111
	 34.	 Thomson SJ, Yate PM. Bradycardia after propofol infusion. Anaesthe­
sia. 1987;42(4):430.
	 35.	 Colson P, Barlet H, Roquefeuill B, Eledjam JJ. Mechanism of propofol 
bradycardia. Anesth Analg. 1988;67(9):906–907.
	 36.	 Guise PA. Asystole following propofol and fentanyl in an anxious 
patient. Anaesth Intensive Care. 1991;19(1):116–118.
	 37.	 Dorrington KL. Asystole with convulsion following a subanesthetic 
dose of propofol plus fentanyl. Anaesthesia. 1989;44(8):658–659.
	 38.	 Ebert TJ, Muzi M, Berens R, Goff D, Kampine JP. Sympathetic 
responses to induction of anesthesia in humans with propofol or 
etomidate. Anesthesiology. 1992;76:725–733.
	 39.	 Muñoz R, Goldberg ME, Cantillo J, Subramoni J, Nemiroff MS. Periop­
erative arrhythmias with a propofol-based anesthetic. J Clin Anesth. 
1991;3(2):149–152.
	 40.	 Ikeno S, Akazawa S, Shimizu R, et al. Propofol does not affect the 
canine cardiac conduction system under autonomic blockade. Can J 
Anaesth. 1999;46(2):148–153.
	 41.	 Liu Q, Chen R, Quin C, et al. Propofol and arrhythmias: two sides of 
the coin. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2011;32(6):817–823.
	 42.	 Pires LA, Haung SK, Wagshal AB, Kulkami RS. Electrophysiological 
effects of propofol on the normal cardiac conduction system. Cardiol­
ogy. 1996;87(4):319–324.
	 43.	 Kamibayashi T, Hayashi Y, Sumikawa K, et al. Enhancement by pro­
pofol of epinephrine-induced arrhythmias in dogs. Anesthesiology. 
1991;75(6):1035–1040.
	 44.	 Cullen PM, Turtle M, Prys-Roberts C, Way WL, Dye J. Effect of pro­
pofol anesthesia on baroreflex activity in humans. Anesth Analg. 
1987;66(11):1115–1120.
	 45.	 Nathan AT, Antzelevitch C, Montenegro LM, Vetter VL. Case sce­
nario: anesthesia-related cardiac arrest in a child with Timothy syn­
drome. Anesthesiology. 2012;117(5):1117–1126.
	 46.	 Gautret B, Schmitt H. Cardiac slowing induced by periph­
eral kappa-opiate receptor stimulation in rats. Eur J Pharmacol. 
1984;102(1):159–163.
	 47.	 Maryniak JK, Bishop VA. Sinus arrest after alfentanil. Br J Anaesth. 
1987;59(3):390–391.
	 48.	 Sebel PS, Bovill JG, van der Haven A. Cardiovascular effects of alfen­
tanil anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 1982;54(11):1185–1190.
	 49.	 Schmeling WT, Bernstein JS, Vucins EJ, Cody R. Persistent brady­
cardia with episodic sinus arrest after sufentanil and vecuronium 
administration: successful treatment with isoproterenol. J Cardiotho­
rac Anesth. 1990;4(1):89–94.
	 50.	 Pruett JK, Blair JR, Adams RJ. Cellular and subcellular actions of opi­
oids in the heart. In: Estafanous FG, ed. Opioids in anesthesia. Boston: 
Butterworth-Heinemann; 1991.
	 51.	 Blair JR, Pruett JK, Introna RP, Adams RJ, Balser JS. Cardiac electro­
physiologic effects of fentanyl and sufentanil in canine cardiac Pur­
kinje fibers. Anesthesiology. 1989;71(4):565–570.
	 52.	 Dashwood MR, Spyer KM. Autoradiographic localization of alpha-
adrenoceptors, muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and opiate recep­
tors in the heart. Eur J Pharmacol. 1986;127(3):279–282.
	 53.	 Glass PS, Gan TJ, Howell S. A review of the pharmacokinetics and phar­
macodynamics of remifentanil. Anesth Analg. 1999;89(4 suppl):S7–S14.
	 54.	 Yildirim V, Doganci S, Bolcal C, et al. Combination sedoanalgesia 
with remifentanil and propofol versus remifentanil and midazolam 
for elective cardioversion after coronary artery bypass grafting. Adv 
Ther. 2007;24(3):662–670.
	 55.	 Mandel JE, Hutchinson MD, Marchlinski FE. Remifentanil-mid­
azolam sedation provides hemodynamic stability and comfort dur­
ing epicardial ablation of ventricular tachycardia. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol. 2010;22:464–466.
	 56.	 Leite SS, Firme EBP, Bevilaqua MS, Pereira LS, Atié J. Prospective 
study on the repercussions of low doses of remifentanil on sinoatrial 
function and in cardiac conduction and refractory period. Rev Bras 
Anestesiol. 2007;57(5):465–475.
	 57.	 Fujii K, Iranami H, Nakamura Y, Hatano Y. High dose remifentanil 
suppresses sinoatrial node conduction and sinus node automaticity 
in pediatric patients under propofol-based anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 
2011;112(5):1169–1173.
	 58.	 Zaballos M, Jimeno C, Almendral J, et al. Cardiac electrophysiologi­
cal effects of remifentanil: study in a closed-chest porcine model. Br J 
Anaesth. 2009;103(2):191–198.
	 59.	 Garofalo NA, Teixeira-Neto FJ, Schwartz DS, Vailati Mdo C, Stea­
gall PV. Effects of the opioid remifentanil on the arrhythmogenic­
ity of epinephrine in halothane-anesthetized dogs. Can J Vet Res. 
2008;72(4):362–366.
	 60.	 Niksch A, Liberman L, Clapcich A, et al. Effects of remifentanil anes­
thesia on cardiac electrophysiologic properties in children under­
going catheter ablation of supraventricular tachycardia. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2010;31(7):1079–1082.
	 61.	 Kim ES, Chang HW. The effects of a single bolus of remifentanil on 
corrected QT interval changes during sevoflurane induction. Yonsei 
Med J. 2011;52(2):333–338.
	 62.	 Borrat X, Troconiz IF, Valencia JF, et al. Modeling the influence of the 
A118G polymorphism in the OPRM! gene and the noxious stimula­
tion on the synergistic relation between propofol and remifentanil. 
Anesthesiology. 2013;118(6):1395–1407.
	 63.	 Noseir RK, Ficke DJ, Kundu A, Arain SR, Ebert TJ. Sympathetic and 
vascular consequences from remifentanil in humans. Anesth Analg. 
2003;96(6):1645–1650.
	 64.	 Michaloudis DG, Kanakoudis FS, Petrou AM, et al. The effects of mid­
azolam or propofol followed by suxamethonium on the QT interval 
in humans. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 1996;13(4):364–368.
	 65.	 Trentman TL, Fassett SL, Mueller JT, Altemose GT. Airway interven­
tions in the cardiac electrophysiology laboratory: a retrospective 
review. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2009;23(6):841–845.
	 66.	 Mitchell AR, Chalil S, Boodhoo L, et  al. Diazepam or midazolam 
for external DC cardioversion (the DORM Study). Europace. 
2003;5(4):391–395.
	 67.	 Schulman MS, Edelmann R. Use of etomidate for elective cardiover­
sion. Anesthesiology. 1988;68:656.
	 68.	 King S, Banker D. Etomidate as an antiarrhythmic. Br J Anesth. 
2005;95(3):425.
	 69.	 Hammer GB, Drover DR, Cao H, et  al. The effects of dexmedeto­
midine on cardiac electrophysiology in children. Anesth Analg. 
2008;106(1):79–83.
	 70.	 Bhana N, Goa KL, McClellan KJ. Dexmedetomidine. Drugs. 
2000;59(2):263–268.
	 71.	 Aho M, Erkola O, Kallio A, Scheinin H, Korttila K. Dexmedetomi­
dine infusion for maintenance of anesthesia in patients undergoing 
abdominal hysterectomy. Anesth Analg. 1992;75:940–946.
	 72.	 Scheinin H, Jaakola ML, Sjövall S, et al. Intramuscular dexmedeto­
midine as premedication for general anesthesia: a comparative mul­
ticenter study. Anesthesiology. 1993;78(6):1065–1075.
	 73.	 Taittonen MT, Kirvelä OA, Aantaa R, Kanto JH. Effect of clonidine and 
dexmedetomidine premedication on perioperative oxygen consump­
tion and haemodynamic state. Br J Anaesth. 1997;78(4):400–406.
	 74.	 Peden CJ, Cloote AH, Stratford N, Prys-Roberts C. The effect of intra­
venous dexmedetomidine premedication on the dose requirement of 
propofol to induce loss of consciousness in patients receiving alfent­
anil. Anaesthesia. 2001;56(5):408–413.
	 75.	 Harrah MD, Way WL, Katzung BG. The interaction of d-tubocurarine 
with antiarrhythmic drugs. Anesthesiology. 1970;33(4):406–410.
	 76.	 Saarnivaqara L, Klemola UM, Lindgren L. QT interval of the ECG, heart 
rate and arterial pressure using five non-depolarizing muscle relaxants 
for intubation. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1988;32(8):623–628.
	 77.	 Hardy PA. Atracurium and bradycardia. Anaesthesia. 1985;40(5): 
504–405.
	 78.	 Cozanitis DA, Lindgren L, Rosenberg PH. Bradycardia in patients 
receiving atracurium or vecuronium in conditions of low vagal stim­
ulation. Anaesthesia. 1989;44(4):303–305.
	 79.	 Chua J, Patel K, Neelankavil J, Mahajan A. Anesthetic manage­
ment of electrophysiology procedures. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2012;25(4):470–481.
	 80.	 Neumar RW, Otto CW, Link MS, et al. 2010 American Heart Asso­
ciation guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care science. VIII. Adult advanced cardiovascular life 
support. Circulation. 2010;122:S729–S767.
	 81.	 Faillace RT, Kaddaha R, Bikkina M, et al. The role of the out-of-oper­
ating room anesthesiologist in the care of the cardiac patient. Anes­
thesiol Clin. 2009;27(1):29–46.
	 82.	 Needleman M, Calkins H. The role of obesity and sleep apnea in atrial 
fibrillation. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2011;26(1):40–45.
	 83.	 Severgnini P, Selmo G, Lanza C, et al. Protective mechanical ventilation 
during general anesthesia for open abdominal surgery improves post­
operative pulmonary function. Anesthesiology. 2013;118:1307–1321.
	 84.	 Goode JS, Taylor RL, Buffington CW, Klain M, Schwartzman D. 
High-frequency jet ventilation: utility in posterior left atrial catheter 
ablation. Heart Rhythm. 2006;3(1):13–19.
	 85.	 Hutchinson MD, Garcia FC, Mandel JE, et  al. Efforts to enhance 
catheter stability improve atrial ﬁbrillation ablation outcome. Heart 
Rhythm. 2013;10(3):347–353.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
112
	 86.	 Gersak B, Pernat A, Robic B, Sinkovec M. Low rate of atrial fibril­
lation recurrence verified by implantable loop recorder monitoring 
following a convergent epicardial and endocardial ablation of atrial 
fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2012;23:1059–1066.
	 87.	 Epstein AE, DiMarco JP, Ellenbogen KA, et al. ACA/AHA/HRS 2008 
guidelines for device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: 
executive summary. Circulation. 2008;117:2820–2840.
	 88.	 Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al. Prophylactic implantation of a 
defibrillator in patients with myocardial infarction and reduced ejec­
tion fraction. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(12):877–883.
	 89.	 Desai AS, Fang JC, Maisel WH, Baughman KL. Implantable defibril­
lators for the prevention of mortality in patients with nonischemic 
cardiomyopathy: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
J Am Med Assoc. 2004;292(23):2874–2879.
	 90.	 Tung RT, Bajaj AK. Safety of implantation of a cardioverter-defibril­
lator without general anesthesia in an electrophysiology laboratory. 
Am J Cardiol. 1995;75(14):908–912.
	 91.	 Pacifico A, Cedillo-Salazar FR, Nasir Jr N, Doyle TK, Henry PD. 
Conscious sedation with combined hypnotic agents for implanta­
tion of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1997;30(3):769–773.
	 92.	 Bollmann A, Kanuru NK, DeLurgio D, et  al. Comparison of three 
different automatic defibrillator implantation approaches: pectoral 
implantation using conscious sedation reduces procedure times and 
cost. J Intervent Card Electrophysiol. 1997;1:221–225.
	 93.	 Manolis AS, Maounis T, Vassilikos V, Chiladakis J, Cokkinos DV. 
Electrophysiologist-implanted transvenous cardioverter defibrilla­
tors using local versus general anesthesia. PACE. 2000;23:96–105.
	 94.	 Conlay LA. Special concerns in the cardiac catheterization lab. Int 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2003;41:63–67.
	 95.	 Gilbert TB, Kent JL, Foster AH, Gold MR. Implantable cardiover­
tor/defibrillator placement in a patient with amiodarone pulmo­
nary toxicity under thoracic epidural anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 
1993;79:608–611.
	 96.	 Shook DC, Savage RM. Anesthesia in the cardiac catheteriza­
tion laboratory and electrophysiology laboratory. Anesthesiol Clin. 
2009;27(1):47–56.
	 97.	 Geiger MJ, Wase A, Kearney MM, Brandon MJ, Kent V, et al. Evalu­
ation of the safety and efficacy of deep sedation for electrophysiol­
ogy procedures administered in the absence of an anesthetist. PACE. 
1997;20(7):1808–1814.
	 98.	 Kezerashvili A, Fisher JD, DeLaney J, et  al. Intravenous sedation 
for cardiac procedures can be administered safely and cost-effec­
tively by non-anesthesia personnel. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 
2008;21(1):43–51.
	 99.	 Goldner BG, Baker J, Accordino A, et al. Electrical cardioversion of 
atrial fibrillation or flutter with conscious sedation in the age of cost 
containment. Am Heart J. 1998;136(6):961–964.
	100.	 Gaitan BD, Trentman TL, Fassett SL, Mueller JT, Altemose GT. Seda­
tion and analgesia in the cardiac electrophysiology laboratory: a 
national survey of electrophysiologists investigating the who, how, 
and why? J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2011;25:647–659.
	101.	 Elkassabany NM, Mandel JE. Con: a general anesthesiologist with a 
certain skill set is qualified to provide services in the interventional 
cardiology and electrophysiology laboratory. J Cardiothorac Vasc 
Anesth. 2011;25:557–558.
113
Direct-current cardioversion is a common cardiological 
procedure, consisting of delivering an electric shock to 
the patient’s heart with the goal of restoring normal sinus 
rhythm. The common indication for the procedure is atrial 
fibrillation or flutter and less commonly other supraventric­
ular arrhythmias or ventricular tachycardia. The shock is 
usually delivered by a pair of conductive pads applied to the 
patient’s skin on the anterior and posterior chest or, if the 
patient already has an implanted cardioverter-­defibrillator 
(ICD), by discharge from the internal device. In either case, 
the electric shock is painful and provokes anxiety in con­
scious patients. An anesthetic is usually administered in 
conjunction with the cardioversion. The main challenge to 
the anesthesiologist involved with a cardioversion is that 
although the procedure is simple and short, the patient 
often has comorbid cardiac and pulmonary conditions that 
require careful titration of anesthetic depth and duration 
against circulatory and respiratory embarrassment. Trans­
esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) is often obtained just 
before direct-current cardioversion to discern the presence 
of a left atrial (LA) thrombus, which may be dislodged by the 
shock or subsequent resumption of synchronized atrial con­
tractions. Both procedures are performed under the same 
anesthetic at many institutions, significantly extending its 
length and the likelihood of hypotension, hypoventilation, 
or oxygen desaturation episodes.
Cardioversion became a method of restoring normal 
sinus rhythm in the early 1960s after Lown and colleagues1 
published a report of successful treatment of patients with 
atrial fibrillation with a synchronized direct-current shock 
by a device they termed a cardioverter. Their innovation 
featured the synchronization of the discharge to the R-wave 
of the electrocardiogram (ECG) to avoid inducing ventricu­
lar fibrillation during the vulnerable portion of the cardiac 
cycle.2 In the years since, electric cardioversion has been 
accepted for use as a treatment of all cardiac arrhythmias 
except ventricular fibrillation, which requires asynchro­
nous defibrillation. More recently, devices using biphasic 
current waveform have supplanted the older monopha­
sic cardioverters, allowing greater success rates at lower 
energies.3 TEE has an excellent ability to visualize the left 
atrium and atrial appendage in detail to exclude the pres­
ence of atrial thrombus. Such information is valuable in 
patients with symptomatic arrhythmia or hemodynamic 
compromise but uncertain duration of atrial fibrillation and 
inadequate state of anticoagulation. For this reason, TEE 
extended the therapeutic reach of cardioversion to patients 
who would otherwise face a delay in treatment of several 
weeks to establish proper anticoagulation.4 The proportion 
of TEE-guided cardioversions is growing and now exceeds 
30% in some large centers.5
Over the last half century, the majority of intravenous 
sedative-hypnotic drugs, alone and in combination, have 
been used for procedural sedation and anesthesia in con­
junction with direct-current cardioversion with or without 
TEE. Overall, anesthetic goals have remained the same—
elimination of pain from the shock and blunting of recall of 
this unpleasant event. Early observations6,7 led to specula­
tion whether electric shock might be tolerated by patients 
without anesthesia, but subsequent experience convinced 
physicians this was not the case. Considering the need in 
many patients for repeat cardioversions over their lifetime, 
the anxiety engendered by recalling a prior painful shock 
likely would act as a deterrent to obtaining the necessary 
treatment. Many patients with atrial dysrhythmias cur­
rently receive cardioversion on an outpatient basis, on a 
prearranged date after a 3- to 4-week period of anticoagu­
lant therapy, and with emphasis on the briefest duration 
of preprocedure stay and prompt discharge thereafter. In 
this setting, sedative premedication is usually impractical, 
the use of all but the shortest-acting opiates is inadvisable, 
and neuromuscular blockade is contraindicated. There­
fore the intravenous anesthetics suitable for the procedure 
are the short-acting barbiturate methohexital, etomidate, 
and, most commonly today, propofol. However, prospec­
tive studies supporting a decisive advantage for any of these 
agents during cardioversion are lacking.8
Preoperative Assessment
In addition to the usual preanesthetic history, full review 
of systems, and a physical examination, several issues typi­
cally need to be addressed. First, the anesthesiologist should 
inquire about prior cardioversion attempts and the patient’s 
satisfaction with the associated anesthetic. Old anesthetic 
records are a good guide to selecting anesthetic medica­
tions and dosages and can help anticipate postprocedure 
cardiorespiratory problems. Physicians’ stated concern for 
suppressing recall is reassuring to most patients, but a pos­
sibility of recall should be frankly discussed with patients 
with complex cardiac or pulmonary problems.
Second, patients should be questioned about their com­
pliance with an anticoagulation regimen, if any. For 
patients on warfarin, the absence of weekly International 
Normalized Ratio (INR) measurements in the therapeutic 
range (usually 2-3 or over >2.5 in the presence of mechani­
cal heart valves9) over 3 to 4 weeks is an indication for pre-
cardioversion TEE to exclude LA thrombus or sludge. Many 
patients on newer anticoagulants will not have a record of 
INR measurements and do not need TEE if they are com­
pliant. These medications include the oral direct thrombin 
Anesthesia for 
Cardioversion
MAX KANEVSKY
12
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
114
inhibitor dabigatran (Pradaxa)10 and direct factor Xa inhib­
itors rivaroxaban (Xarelto)11 and apixaban.12
Third, a careful review of medications may point to poten­
tial issues arising during the procedure. Many patients will 
be on antiarrhythmic and heart rate control medications. 
Among them, those taking calcium-channel and beta-
adrenergic blockers will exhibit an early tendency toward 
hypotension and bradycardia with the restoration of sinus 
rhythm. Patients in atrial fibrillation on the newer antiar­
rhythmic drug dronedarone (Multaq) also may become bra­
dycardic after cardioversion. Additionally, concern exists 
over QT prolongation if these patients are given some of the 
common antiemetic drugs, such as ondansetron (Zofran).
Fourth, a history of cardiomyopathy, congestive heart 
failure, ischemic heart disease, or dyspnea with mild exer­
tion should alert the anesthesiologist to the need for a 
cautious induction of anesthesia with ample time for circu­
lating the drug between incremental bolus doses. Patient 
history of obstructive sleep apnea correlates with the need 
to provide positive-pressure mask ventilation during the 
anesthesia. Head and neck and airway examinations will 
predict the difficulty of mask ventilation and prepare the 
physician for a potentially challenging intubation.
Necessary laboratory data include a recent potassium 
level; significant hypokalemia will need correction before 
cardioversion. If the patient is on warfarin, the INR over the 
preceding 3 to 4 weeks should be reviewed. In patients on 
digoxin (now uncommon), its levels must not exceed thera­
peutic range because of concern for cardioversion triggering 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. The patient’s electrocardio­
graphic activity on the monitor should be reviewed just 
before starting the anesthetic. Not infrequently, patients 
can undergo spontaneous reversion to sinus rhythm dur­
ing preparations for cardioversion.
Intraoperative Management
Cardioversions take place in established outpatient proce­
dure areas, emergency wards, and at the bedside of hos­
pitalized patients. Anesthesia machines typically are not 
available in these locations, and the anesthesiologist is 
usually expected to bring in the supplies and medications—
both those likely to be used during the procedure and those 
reserved for emergency treatment. Regardless of location, 
the patient should be monitored according to the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists guidelines. Cuff blood pressure 
measurements must be reliably obtained. Insertion of an 
arterial line is rarely necessary. Audible variable-tone pulse 
oximetry is most helpful, because a monitor may not be 
directly facing the anesthesiologist. A primary and a backup 
supply of oxygen and a working suction line must be pres­
ent. A single reliable intravenous catheter is sufficient for 
the procedure. If multiple clinical services are involved—for 
example, one for TEE and another performing the cardio­
version—all practitioners must be on hand before induc­
tion of anesthesia to minimize the duration of anesthetic.
Echocardiographers skilled in TEE often have a routine for 
topical administration of local anesthetics in the oropharynx 
and conscious sedation before insertion of the TEE probe. 
For TEE expected to be followed immediately by a cardiover­
sion, the anesthesiologist has two alternatives. The first is the 
topical and conscious sedation routine of the echocardiog­
rapher during the TEE portion, followed by the induction of 
a brief general anesthetic for the cardioversion portion. The 
advantages of this approach are potentially avoiding general 
anesthesia altogether, if TEE finding of a thrombus precludes 
immediate cardioversion, and minimizing the duration and 
depth of general anesthesia in high-risk patients. Patients 
with significantly compromised myocardial function, pulmo­
nary diseases, morbid obesity, a history of obstructive sleep 
apnea, and especially the combination of several of these 
conditions, will benefit from the first approach. The second 
approach is the induction of a general anesthetic of some­
what longer duration and sufficient depth to cover both por­
tions of the combined procedure. Patients with intact cardiac 
and pulmonary reserve and reassuring airway features are 
best served by receiving general anesthesia from the begin­
ning, because this option is more comfortable to the patient, 
it does not impair protective airway reflexes during recovery 
secondary to topical anesthesia of the tongue and hypophar­
ynx, and the procedure is briefer and less labor-intensive.
For direct-current cardioversion, as for all surgical proce­
dures, a time-out protocol is a useful tool for avoiding pre­
ventable errors in treatment. At time-out, the patient and 
procedure are identified, all staff make their introductions, 
and the presence of adequate rescue supplies is confirmed. 
For both external and internal (by ICD) cardioversion, posi­
tioning is the same: conductive pads are placed anteriorly 
and posteriorly (or laterally) on the patient’s chest, such 
that the vector of the current passes maximally through 
the atria (for atrial fibrillation or flutter); the patient is posi­
tioned supine, with all pressure points padded; and the arms 
are lightly tucked next to the body to avoid being thrown in 
the air by the energy of the shock.
General anesthesia is induced, after several minutes of 
thorough preoxygenation by tight-fitting mask at fraction of 
inspired oxygen (Fio2) 1.0, by gradual titration of an intra­
venous hypnotic agent, typically propofol (initial bolus dose 
1 mg/kg). Further 10- to 20-mg boluses of propofol may be 
given until the eyelash reflex is abolished. These are timed 
at longer intervals for patients with impaired myocardial 
performance. Patient readiness for the shock (or TEE probe 
introduction, if done under the same general anesthetic) 
can be ascertained by an absence of response to a firm man­
dibular thrust. If precardioversion TEE is performed under 
general anesthesia, the examination is typically brief and 
focused on excluding LA thrombus. The midesophageal 
two-chamber view (near 90 degrees) usually affords the 
best visualization of the left atrial appendage, but additional 
views should be sought by changing the probe angle from 
0 to 120 degrees and by withdrawing and advancing the 
probe to scan the full height of the left atrium. The finding 
of spontaneous echo contrast (“smoke”) in the left atrium 
and measuring pulsed-wave Doppler velocities less than 
40 cm/second in the LA appendage further increase the 
suspicion for thrombus or sludge.
Once the patient is sufficiently deeply anesthetized and 
the decision is made to proceed with the cardioversion, the 
device’s capacitor is charged and everyone at the bedside 
is reminded to stay clear and not touch the patient. The 
only exception is the person who will (optionally) apply 
firm pressure to the anterior chest pad through a dry towel, 
which serves to decrease the chest wall impedance and 
12  •  Anesthesia for Cardioversion
115
enable higher energy delivery to the myocardium for a 
given cardioverter setting. If the anesthesiologist is provid­
ing positive-pressure ventilation to the patient, the device 
discharge should take place after allowing a full exhalation 
to minimize impedance due to pulmonary air. The presence 
of a groan or a grimace in the patient receiving a shock, 
while often disconcerting to the physicians and nurses pres­
ent at cardioversion, does not correlate with the recall of the 
event.13 After the direct-current shock, the patient’s ECG is 
closely monitored for the return of sinus rhythm. Failure 
to convert may necessitate another attempt at a higher 
energy setting or with a different pad position. In this case, 
care must be taken to provide adequate respiratory support 
between the shocks, assess hemodynamic stability, and 
reconfirm the depth of anesthesia before proceeding.
If cardioversion is successful, the uncomfortable step of 
removing the conductive pads is best performed while the 
patient is still under general anesthesia. Whereas some 
patients will maintain a patent airway and spontaneous 
respirations under adequate general anesthesia, a large 
proportion will need maneuvers to open the airway and 
require intermittent positive-pressure ventilation. This is 
quite problematic during the TEE portion of the procedure, 
when bag-mask ventilation of the patient is not an option. 
The three-pronged approach to this problem is to (1) thor­
oughly preoxygenate the patient; (2) communicate to the 
echocardiographer the need for a speedy, highly focused 
examination; and (3) use an oral airway device compat­
ible with TEE. Especially promising are the multifunctional 
devices now becoming available that combine the features 
of a bite block, an oral airway, and a conduit for oxygen 
insufflation. The use of a nasopharyngeal airway is rela­
tively contraindicated because of the possibility of epistaxis 
resulting from the anticoagulated state in most patients.
Postoperative Course
The cardioversion is, by itself, very brief, and therefore the 
induction medications, with minimal repeated boluses, 
will provide for the maintenance of anesthesia and have 
a strong bearing on the postoperative course. The most 
common challenge to the anesthesiologist is to manage 
cardiac depression in the wake of general anesthesia, exac­
erbated by temporary myocardial stunning as a result of the 
direct-current shock. The foundation for a stable postop­
erative course and timely discharge is laid by the judicious 
administration of a short-acting hypnotic drug, taking into 
account the patient’s cardiopulmonary reserve. Imme­
diately after cardioversion, the first step is to ascertain an 
appropriate rhythm and rate on the monitor. New-onset 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias must be treated according to 
the Advanced Cardiac Life Support protocols. Sinus brady­
cardia may initially emerge after cardioversion. Typically, 
an improved heart rate response occurs spontaneously; if 
delayed, it can be obtained with a dose of the vagolytic drug 
glycopyrrolate of 0.2 to 0.4 mg intravenously. Patients with 
pacemakers, particularly ICDs, should have their device 
interrogated after cardioversion for possible malfunction.14 
If the patient’s heart rhythm and rate are reassuring, hypo­
tension often will resolve in response to an administration of 
an intravenous fluid bolus of normal saline 250 mL, because 
many patients are hypovolemic from fasting. A steep head-
up position should be avoided because it impedes venous 
return and exacerbates hypovolemia. Until fully awake, 
in many patients the vasomotor tone may be low, worsen­
ing hypotension. Treat cautiously with a vasopressor (e.g., 
phenylephrine 50 to 100 mcg). Note that with phenyleph­
rine, sinus bradycardia may worsen unless already treated 
with a vagolytic. Infrequently, high-energy shocks produce 
significant myocardial stunning and globally depressed 
contractility. This may be assessed rapidly in unstable 
patients with transthoracic echo (TTE) if the machine is still 
at the bedside. A single dose of the indirect-acting inotrope 
ephedrine 5 to 10 mg intravenously will support cardiac 
output and blood pressure during myocardial recovery from 
stunning. Support the patient’s airway and breathing until 
full wakeup to ensure optimal myocardial oxygen delivery.
Emergence from general anesthesia is usually rapid in 
neurologically intact patients given only a short-acting 
hypnotic without premedication. The areas of concern for 
the anesthesiologist are to ensure a stable cardiac rhythm 
and hemodynamics, which are a precondition for a speedy 
wakeup. In patients who are unexpectedly very slow to 
wake or emerge with new abnormal neurological findings, 
the physician must suspect a neurological event resulting 
from cerebral embolization of an intracardiac thrombus. 
Stroke specialists must be contacted immediately and stroke 
workup initiated. Most patients will experience only mild, if 
any, myalgia from the cardioversion, making opioid admin­
istration unnecessary and counterproductive to the goal of 
rapid emergence.
Conclusion
Most anesthesiologists will be called on to care for a patient 
who is to have a cardioversion. Careful preparation, 
including thoughtful preoperative examination, adequate 
monitoring, and judicious selection of drugs, help ensure 
successful treatment of the patient.
References
	 1.	 Lown B, Perlroth MG, Kaidbey S, Abe T, Harken DE. “Cardioversion” 
of atrial fibrillation: a report on the treatment of 65 episodes in 
50 patients. N Engl J Med. 1963;269:325–331.
	 2.	 Lown B, Amarasingham R, Neuman J. New method for terminating 
cardiac arrhythmias: use of synchronized capacitor discharge. JAMA. 
1962;182:548–555.
	 3.	 Mittal S, Ayati S, Stein KM, et al. Transthoracic cardioversion of atrial 
fibrillation: comparison of rectilinear biphasic versus damped sine 
wave monophasic shocks. Circulation. 2000;101(11):1282–1287.
	 4.	 Grewal GK, Klosterman TB, Shrestha K, et  al. Indications for TEE 
before cardioversion for atrial fibrillation: implications for appropri­
ateness criteria. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5(6):641–648.
	 5.	 Yarmohammadi H, Klosterman T, Grewal G, et  al. Transesophageal 
echocardiography and cardioversion trends in patients with atrial fibril­
lation: a 10-year survey. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2012;25(9):962–968.
	 6.	 Lown B, Bey SK, Perlroth MG, Abe T. cardioversion of ectopic tachy­
cardias. Am J Med Sci. 1963;246:257–264.
	 7.	 Usubiaga JE, Sardinas AA. Cardioversion and the anesthesiologist: 
anesthesia and analgesia. 1970;49(5):818–826.
	 8.	 Wood J, Ferguson C. Best evidence topic report: procedural sedation 
for cardioversion. Emerg Med J. 2006;23(12):932–934.
	 9.	 Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused 
updates incorporated into the ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for the 
management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2011;123(10):e269–e367.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
116
	10.	 Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, et al. Dabigatran versus warfarin in 
patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(12):1139–1151.
	11.	 Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, et al. Rivaroxaban versus warfarin in 
nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. New Engl J Med. 2011;365(10):883–891.
	12.	 Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, et  al. Apixaban ver­
sus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation. New Engl J Med. 
2011;365(11):981–992.
	13.	 Swann A, Williams J, Fatovich DM. Recall after procedural sedation in 
the emergency department. Emerg Med J. 2007;24(5):322–324.
	14.	 Crossley GH, Poole JE, Rozner MA, et al. The Heart Rhythm Soci­
ety (HRS)/American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) expert 
consensus statement on the perioperative management of patients 
with implantable defibrillators, pacemakers and arrhythmia moni­
tors: facilities and patient management. Document was developed 
as a joint project with the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA), and in collaboration with the American Heart Association 
(AHA), and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS). Heart Rhythm. 
2011;8(7):1114–1154.
117
As imaging technology improves, it is increasingly possible 
to perform procedures with noninvasive or minimally inva­
sive techniques that would have once required an operating 
room. Specialized suites such as cardiac electrophysiology, 
interventional radiology, and radiation oncology have 
arisen to support these new approaches. A common fea­
ture of these techniques is the desire for a motionless field 
that allows the proceduralist to perform his or her tasks. 
As anesthesiologists, we are called on to assist in providing 
immobility. Although lack of voluntary movement is eas­
ily produced with general anesthesia, safely eliminating 
respiratory movement for extended periods requires high-
frequency ventilation (HFV).
This chapter will review the physics and physiology of 
HFV, with emphasis on the most commonly employed 
modality—high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV). It will 
discuss the practical aspects of anesthetic management and 
examine some of the previous uses of HFV in non–operating 
room anesthesia (NORA). Finally, it will consider some of 
the emerging areas of use of the technique.
Uses of High-Frequency 
Ventilation for Respiratory 
Immobilization
Respiration imparts motion to numerous structures that 
proceduralists wish to maintain in their crosshairs. One of 
the earliest examples is extracorporeal shockwave litho­
tripsy. The initial reports were presented as American Soci­
ety of Anesthesiologists abstracts,1,2 but subsequent reports 
provided greater detail and demonstrated significantly 
lower stone movement and shock requirements in contrast 
to conventional mechanical ventilation3 and spontaneous 
ventilation.4 Canty and Dhara5 described successful use of 
HFJV by a laryngeal mask airway (LMA).5 The applicability 
of HFJV with narrow blast path lithotripters was described 
by our group.6 Although it is clear from multiple reports 
that stone movement is markedly reduced and permits 
stone fragmentation with fewer shocks, the full implica­
tions of this have not been studied. It is known that renal 
oxidative stress is correlated with shock wave number,7 
but no studies have addressed whether HFJV results in less 
renal injury.
Another important application of respiratory immobi­
lization is in pulmonary vein isolation for atrial fibrilla­
tion. The technique was first described by Goode et  al.8 
We adopted the technique at the University of Pennsylva­
nia in 2007 and have expanded our practice to over 500 
cases annually. In an analysis of the impact of measures to 
improve catheter stability,9 100 consecutive patients were 
identified in three groups—our baseline practice, the addi­
tion of steerable sheaths and electroanatomical mapping, 
and the addition of HFJV. The addition of all three measures 
improved freedom from atrial fibrillation at 1 year from 52% 
to 74%, as depicted in Figure 13-1. This improvement was 
seen despite significant increases in body mass index, atrial 
dimension, the proportion of persistent versus paroxysmal 
atrial fibrillation, all of which are independent predictors of 
failure of atrial fibrillation ablation.
HFJV was also associated with a significant decrease in 
fluoroscopy time. HFJV has been embraced by the electro­
physiology community. More than half of the Monsoon 
ventilators sold in the United States since 2010 have been 
placed in electrophysiology laboratories (Travis Schaz­
tberger, Susquehana Micro, personal communication, 
2011), suggesting that the technique is becoming more 
prevalent.
Imaging of the coronary arteries and pulmonary circu­
lation can be affected by respiratory motion. We reported 
a case in which HFJV was used to eliminate respiratory 
motion in a patient whose respiration was too chaotic 
to permit imaging of the coronary arteries.10 This tech­
nique may hold promise for computed tomography (CT) 
and magnetic resonance angiography; although not 
approved for use in the United States, the Hayek MRI-
RTX system (United Hayek Medical Industries) is avail­
able in Europe.
Respiratory motion may affect the cerebral circulation 
as well. Chen et al11 described a case in which respiratory 
motion made coiling of a cerebral aneurysm problematic 
and suggested that HFJV may have been beneficial.
Liver movement also can be problematic during abla­
tive procedures. Yin et al12 demonstrated a 75% reduction 
in movement of implanted clips in the livers of dogs with 
HFJV in contrast to conventional ventilation. Fritz et al13 
implanted gold markers in proximity to liver tumors in 10 
patients and demonstrated that motion was restricted to 3 
mm during HFJV. Biro et al14 reported use of HFJV to mini­
mize tumor movement during CT-guided radiofrequency 
ablation of hepatic metastases and also found a 75% reduc­
tion in movement from 1.2 cm to 3 mm, in contrast to 
positive-pressure ventilation. This group also reported a 
significant reduction in fluoroscopic exposure during radio­
frequency ablation of hepatic and renal masses using HFJV 
High-Frequency 
Ventilation for Respiratory 
Immobilization
JEFF E. MANDEL
13
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
118
rather than conventional ventilation.15 HFJV is not as com­
monly employed during ablation of liver masses, although 
it is clearly an area poised for growth.
Finally, the lung is the organ most affected by respira­
tory motion. Lara-Guerra et  al,16 in an ex  vivo porcine 
lung model, demonstrated equivalent detection of artificial 
lesions averaging 6 mm with HFJV in contrast to inflation 
to 20 cm H2O or total deflation. Fritz et al17 found a 25% 
reduction in planned treatment volume for stereotactic 
irradiation of small lung lesions with HFJV in contrast to 
spontaneous ventilation. With advances in technologies 
such as stereotactic body radiation therapy and proton 
beam therapy, reduction of respiratory motion in radiation 
oncology is another promising area.
Types of Ventilators
Respiratory rates above 60 breaths per minute are consid­
ered to constitute HFV.18 Although conventional anesthe­
sia ventilators can deliver rates of 30 breaths per minute, 
corrugated anesthesia circuits are not capable of transmit­
ting higher rates, because most of the tidal volume sim­
ply expands the circuit rather than being delivered to the 
patient. Small variations in airway resistance and lung 
compliance will alter the fraction of delivered gas that 
reaches the patient, making consistent ventilation at high 
respiratory rates with conventional systems problematic. 
The following types of HFV were developed to address this 
issue:
   
	1.	 High-frequency jet ventilators. These ventilators use a 
high-pressure source, typically the oxygen supply line, 
to generate a brief pulse of high-velocity gas during 
inspiration with expiration typically being passive. The 
Acutronic Monsoon Universal Ventilator (Susquehanna 
Micro, Windsor, Pa.) (Figure 13-2) is an example of this 
class of ventilator.
	2.	 Dual-frequency jet ventilators. This HFJV and low-fre­
quency jet19 modality provides more efficient carbon 
dioxide elimination but causes larger fluctuations in lung 
volume. The Carl Reiner TwinStream ventilator (Wien, 
Austria) (Figure 13-3) is an example of this class of venti­
lator. It has never been marketed in the United States.
	3.	 High-frequency oscillators. Oscillators use a piston or 
loudspeaker to create a bidirectional flow in the air­
way. The Sensormedics 3100B (CareFusion, San Diego, 
Calif.) (Figure 13-4) is an example of this class of ven­
tilator. Although this ventilator has been employed in 
NORA settings, the higher cost of consumables may be a 
barrier to wide acceptance.
	4.	 High-frequency percussive ventilators. The Percussionaire 
line of ventilators (Sandpoint Idaho) (Figure 13-5) uses 
a valve termed the Phasitron to create high-frequency 
oscillations that are superimposed on conventional vol­
ume control, principally for lung recruitment.20
Figure 13-2  The Acutronic Mon­
soon 3 Universal Ventilator.
No SS, EAM, HFJV
SS, EAM, HFJV
SS, EAM
50
75
100
AF free (%)
25
0
0
365
Days
Figure 13-1  Kaplan-Meir survival plot for freedom from atrial fibrilla­
tion. Blue depicts baseline practice (conscious sedation without steer­
able sheaths or electroanatomical mapping), red indicates the addition 
of steerable sheaths and electroanatomical mapping, and green shows 
the addition of high-frequency jet ventilation.
13  •  High-Frequency Ventilation for Respiratory Immobilization
119
	5.	 Negative-pressure high-frequency oscillators. These venti­
lators use an external shell with an oscillating pressure 
imposed into the space surrounding the patient’s chest, 
as was done with the “iron lung” but at high frequen­
cies. The Hayek RTX oscillator is an example of this class 
of ventilator.
   
The initial focus of HFV was in care of patients with 
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and devices 
such as the Percussionaire that are well suited to alveolar 
recruitment may be ill-suited to respiratory immobilization 
because they impose slow phasic changes in lung volume. 
Another early application was in tubeless ventilation dur­
ing laryngotracheal surgery. Devices employing modali­
ties such as superimposed HFJV to improve the efficiency 
of carbon dioxide elimination produce tidal oscillations in 
lung volume. Respiratory immobilization exists to mini­
mize changes in lung volume, thus discussion of HFV will 
focus on the most commonly employed modality for lung 
immobilization—HFJV.
The following types of jet ventilators have been 
developed:
   
	1.	 Manually operated pneumatic devices. The Sanders injec­
tor is a manually operated valve with pressure reduction 
that is connected to a high-pressure source such as wall 
oxygen or an oxygen cylinder. VBM Medical manufac­
tures the Manuject III (Noblesville, Ind.) (Figure 13-6), 
which is approved for “transtracheal ventilation in spe­
cific emergency situations of upper airway obstruction, 
used in conjunction with a transtracheal catheter, or 
a cricothyrotomy needle, which is inserted through the 
Figure 13-3  Carl Reiner Twin­
Stream ventilator.
Figure 13-4  Sensormedics 3100B 
ventilator.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
120
­cricothyroid membrane.”* Although it is possible to 
use a Sanders injector as a high-frequency device, use 
beyond a few minutes is challenging, and producing 
stable lung volumes is difficult.
	2.	 Fluidic valve devices. Fluidic valves were used in early 
ventilators such as the Bird Mark II, now produced by 
JD Medical (Phoenix, Arizona), shown in Figure 13-7. 
* See http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf11/K112783.pdf. Ac­
cessed April 21, 2013.
All that is necessary is a source of compressed gas. The 
ventilator consists of two parallel channels, with one 
output channel of each valve being connected to the 
switching channel of the other. This creates a bistable 
oscillator. Tuning is achieved by adjusting three valves 
that control overall flow and the flow through the two 
switching channels. Achieving consistent results with 
fluidic valved devices can be challenging, but the por­
tability and low cost of the device may be a compelling 
factor.
Figure 
13-5  The 
Percussionaire 
VBR-4 ventilator.
Figure 13-6  The VBM Manuject III.
13  •  High-Frequency Ventilation for Respiratory Immobilization
121
	3.	 Electronically controlled devices. Electronically controlled 
devices, such as the Acutronic Monsoon Universal 
Ventilator (see Figure 13-2), use a microprocessor-
controlled solenoid valve. The device has built-in safety 
features to prevent barotrauma and has the capacity to 
add humidity to the inspired gas.
Physics of High-Frequency Jet 
Ventilation
The attraction of HFJV is its ability to eliminate carbon diox­
ide with lung excursions that are close to the anatomical 
dead space. Carbon dioxide is eliminated by the following 
combination of effects21:
   
	1.	 Convection. Convection is simple bulk flow of gas back 
and forth down the large airways. It is responsible for 
the majority of carbon dioxide elimination in frequen­
cies employed clinically.
	2.	 Axial dispersion. Axial dispersion is the result of different 
flow profiles during inspiration and expiration that permit 
net flow to occur in opposite directions within the airway, 
as illustrated in Figure 13-8. These effects make the actual 
dead space smaller than the anatomical dead space.
	3.	 Pendelluft. Pendelluft is the to-and-fro movement of gas 
between adjacent lung segments of different time con­
stants. It brings carbon dioxide closer to the large air­
ways, where convection can remove it, as illustrated in 
Figure 13-9.
	4.	 Diffusion. Diffusion is the result of Brownian motion of 
gas and will also bring carbon dioxide closer to the large 
airways where convection can remove it.
   
These effects operate in different areas of the lung, with 
convection dominating the large airways and diffusion 
most prominent in the alveoli. Carbon dioxide is eluted from 
the lung by the combination of these effects, albeit less effi­
ciently than with conventional ventilation.
Entrainment
Entrainment of side stream gas is commonly seen during 
HFJV. This phenomenon has been erroneously labeled the 
Venturi effect,22 which is depicted in Figure 13-10. Entrain­
ment is simply the effect of friction of the fast-moving jet 
stream acting to accelerate adjacent gas. It requires no 
Figure 13-7  The JD Medical Mark 2 ventilator.
Right flow ends; left flow begins
Cycle completed
Initial; right flow begins
Dispersion of gas
Figure 13-8  Axial dispersion of gas in an airway. An initial plug of gas 
in the airway (upper panel) is carried to the right by a high-velocity jet, 
resulting in a parabolic profile (center panel). Exhalation carries gas to 
the left in a plug flow pattern (bottom panel), resulting in opposing 
flow within a single airway. (Redrawn from Chang HK. Mechanisms of gas 
transport during ventilation by high-frequency oscillation. J Appl Physiol. 
1984;56[3]:553-563.)
–
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
A
B
Figure 13-9  When two adjacent lung units are ventilated at high 
rates, flow is dominated by resistance. A represents early inspiration, 
and the unit on the left has emptied more completely because of its 
larger bronchiole and is filled partially by the unit on the right. B repre­
sents end inspiration, and the unit on the left has completely filled and 
now empties into the smaller unit on the left. (Redrawn from Chang HK. 
Mechanisms of gas transport during ventilation by high-frequency oscilla­
tion. J Appl Physiol. 1984;56[3]:553-563.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
122
special geometry and thus is not correctly described as the 
Venturi effect. When entrainment occurs in a tube, this 
increase in velocity down the tube will result in a decrease 
in transmural pressure because of the same laws of phys­
ics responsible for the Venturi effect. The amount of gas 
entrained is highly dependent on the site of entrainment 
and is significantly greater at the entrance to the tube than 
within the tube (Figure 13-11).
Entrainment is also affected by airway resistance and 
lung compliance. Although entrainment of volatile agents 
into the jet stream has been described,23 the efficiency of 
agent delivery is low, can be expected to vary as conditions 
change, and thus has not been pursued. Entrainment can 
be from ambient air, an open blow-by system, or a semi-
closed circle system. The latter permits conservation of 
inspiratory humidity, as will be discussed later, and offers 
the ability to add positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 
and rapidly convert to conventional ventilation. These 
features are useful despite the increased dead space such 
systems impose.
Carbon Dioxide Elimination
Elimination of carbon dioxide from the lung is the result of 
total minute ventilation (the sum of delivered and entrained 
volume) and respiratory efficiency. It is not possible to pre­
cisely predict the arterial carbon dioxide that will result 
from a particular set of conditions, but it is possible for car­
bon dioxide to change over time. Several factors influence 
the rate of carbon dioxide elimination, as follows:
   
	1.	 Driving pressure. Driving pressure affects the amount of 
gas delivered by the ventilator, the entrained volume, 
and the lung volume. Driving pressures of 20 pounds 
per square inch (psi) are typically adequate, and pres­
sures above 30 psi are rarely required to achieve nor­
mocarbia but may be useful in expanding an atelectatic 
lung.
	2.	 Respiratory rate. As respiratory rates increase above 30 
breaths per minute, efficiency of carbon dioxide elimina­
tion decreases.24 Rates above 120 breaths per minute 
are rarely required to eliminate perceived respiratory 
motion, and carbon dioxide elimination is generally 
adequate at this frequency.
	3.	 Inspiratory fraction. Efficiency tends to be highest at an 
inspiratory fraction of 0.4. Higher fractions favor larger 
lung volume, and lower fractions favor lower volume. 
Although desaturation during HFJV for respiratory 
immobilization is only rarely noted, reasons do exist for 
why a large lung would be particularly advantageous 
during radiation therapy.
	4.	 Catheter position. Catheter position affects efficiency; a 
more distal position yields more efficient elimination.25 
With distal injection, the ventilator must work against 
a higher resistance in the delivery system and thus a 
lower tidal volume will be achieved for a given ventila­
tor ­setting.
	5.	 Mechanical load. Respiratory mechanical load affects effi­
ciency, principally by reducing the entrained volume.26 
Both changes in airway resistance, as is seen with bron­
chospasm, and changes in lung compliance, as seen 
with pulmonary edema or externally applied pressure, 
can affect entrainment.
Breath Stacking
The other concern during HFJV is that of breath stacking, 
which may result in pulmonary barotrauma. Expiration is 
usually passive during mechanical ventilation, consisting 
of exponentially decreasing flow governed by the airway 
resistance and lung compliance. As expiratory time drops, 
the volume remaining in the lung at the start is increas­
ing. Inspiration is active and less sensitive to resistance 
and compliance, and lung volume will thus increase until 
the increased volume produces an expiratory flow equal 
to the inspiratory flow. This phenomenon is termed breath 
stacking, or auto-PEEP. It should be noted that this is a 
normal physiological process and atelectasis would ensue 
without it. Auto-PEEP can be seen in conventional ven­
tilation but is more associated with HFJV,27 because it is 
more easily employed in cases of tracheal stenosis. Breath 
stacking during conventional and HFJV can be seen in 
Figure 13-12, with lung volumes measured by respiratory 
inductance plethysmography.
Breath stacking is influenced by both extrinsic and 
intrinsic factors. Much of our understanding of the extrin­
sic factors comes from simple mechanical analogs and 
may not adequately represent actual patients. The most 
important factor is airway diameter; with endotracheal 
tube sizes above 4.5 mm internal diameter, driving pres­
sures in excess of 30 psi are typically required to obtain 
significant breath stacking.28 Use of endotracheal tubes of 
7 mm internal diameter or greater may largely avoid sig­
nificant breath stacking. The larger diameter of the LMA 
A
B
C
Figure 13-10  The Venturi effect. Gas moving down a tube at point A 
encounters a constriction at point B. The forward velocity increases, but 
because mean velocity in all directions is proportional to temperature, 
velocity in the direction of the wall decreases. Transmural pressure is 
proportional to velocity of gas hitting the wall, so as transmural pres­
sure drops, a pressure gradient allows inflow from the side channel.
Jet
Distal entrainment
Jet
Proximal entrainment
Figure 13-11  Entrainment. In the upper panel, the tip of the jet can­
nula is placed distally. Frictional forces along the wall of the tube limit 
entrainment. In the lower panel, the tip is in the proximal position and 
frictional forces do not limit entrainment.
13  •  High-Frequency Ventilation for Respiratory Immobilization
123
may further reduce the potential for breath stacking. The 
position of the jet catheter also affects breath stacking. The 
proximal position may result in twice the effect of the dis­
tal position29 because of greater entrainment, as depicted 
in Figure 13-11.
Intrinsic factors include tracheal stenosis and high lung 
compliance. The location of the catheter influences breath 
stacking in stenosis. Caution should be exercised when plac­
ing the jet catheter close to the stenosis,30 although jet ven­
tilation distal to the site of obstruction can be employed31 
with appropriate caution. Lung compliance is increased with 
severe emphysema, and breath stacking is more likely. Again, 
HFJV can be safely employed with an abundance of caution.32
When setting the jet ventilator, it is preferable to pursue 
strategies that result in more breath stacking rather than 
more efficient removal of carbon dioxide and to favor hyper­
carbia over atelectasis. Although it may comfort the clini­
cian to unwaveringly maintain the arterial carbon dioxide 
at 40 mm Hg, evidence demonstrates that transient hyper­
carbia is not deleterious and may be beneficial.33 Atelectasis 
and hypoxia, however, are generally bad. Thus the author 
favors a proximal location for the jet catheter and uses a 
semi-closed circle system for entrainment.
Monitoring of High-Frequency Jet 
Ventilation
During HFJV, an undiluted alveolar sample is not available 
between breaths. In most situations, it is possible to inter­
rupt jet ventilation, deliver three tidal breaths, and measure 
the end tidal carbon dioxide on the third breath. Transcuta­
neous carbon dioxide measurement has been demonstrated 
to have a correlation of 0.94 when measured by arterial 
blood gas.34 Newer units that employ lower temperature 
on the earlobe have simplified transcutaneous measure­
ment.35 In settings such as the electrophysiology labora­
tory, arterial access is commonly available. Monitoring of 
carbon dioxide may be useful in identifying the minority of 
patients in whom hypercarbia is unanticipated, approxi­
mately 10% of patients in the author’s experience.36 It is 
unknown whether correcting hypercarbia alters outcome.
Monitoring airway pressure during HFJV can be accom­
plished in several ways. A useful feature of the Acutronic 
Monsoon is the pause pressure, the pressure in the jet tubing 
100 ms after the solenoid valve has closed. Under conditions 
typically employed in respiratory immobilization, this pres­
sure has good correlation with changes in functional residual 
capacity (FRC) assessed with respiratory inductance pleth­
ysmography.37 Pressure can also be measured via a second 
lumen of a catheter such as the Biro catheter.38 A limitation 
of measuring pressure in the central airway is that as respi­
ratory frequency increases, the gradient between central 
airway pressure and alveolar pressure increases,39 and thus 
central airway pressures do not precisely measure auto-PEEP.
Several methods have been described in a research con­
text but have not yet been developed as commercial prod­
ucts. Respiratory inductance plethysmography employs 
elastic bands that contain wires through which a mag­
netic field is induced. The magnetic inductance reflects the 
encircled cross section, which is related to tidal volume. Our 
group has demonstrated that respiratory inductance pleth­
ysmography can accurately detect HFJV.40 Measurement of 
gas flow during HFJV is complicated, because any detector 
placed within the jet stream will disrupt flow, and measure­
ments made in the expiratory path are affected by entrained 
Figure 13-12  Thoracic volume mea­
sured by respiratory inductance pleth­
ysmography under high-frequency jet 
ventilation at 20 psi (blue) and positive-
pressure ventilation at 600 mL tidal 
volume (red), each producing similar 
carbon dioxide elimination.
Time (sec)
Relative volume (ml)
PPV 600 ml
HFJV 20 PSI
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
124
volume. This problem can be addressed by excluding this 
flow from the calculation of volume.41
Although transcutaneous monitoring may be worth 
pursuing in some settings, capnometry is readily avail­
able in anesthetizing locations and suffices for most 
applications.
Humidification of Inspired Gas
During open HFJV, humidification is necessary for all but 
the shortest of durations, because the high volume of dry 
gas will rapidly desiccate the airway.42 Various approaches 
to humidification of the jet stream have been described.43,44 
Nebulization of water into the jet stream was the approach 
taken with the Monsoon 2, whereas the Monsoon 3 uses 
steam generation to provide humidification. When using a 
semi-closed circle system, some humidification is provided 
by entrainment of moist gas from the circuit, and water 
from the jet ventilator may accumulate in heat-moisture 
exchange filters and rain out along the anesthesia circuit. 
When higher levels of humidification are desired, such as 
in patients with chronic bronchitis, use of an open sys­
tem with blow-by entrainment may be warranted, but 
for normal patients, circuit entrainment is generally well 
tolerated.
Hemodynamic Effects of High-
Frequency Jet Ventilation
Much of the information on hemodynamic effects of HFV 
was gleaned from patients with ARDS, in whom HFV was 
employed to reduce intrapulmonary pressure. The princi­
pal benefit of HFJV is to permit the FRC to be maintained 
with lower mean intrathoracic pressure, which reduces the 
pulmonary vascular resistance.45 This is less of an issue in 
patients who do not have ARDS.
The Physiology of Apnea
The intent of respiratory immobilization is to eliminate 
tidal breathing. Although administration of neuromus­
cular blocking agents to awake patients can certainly do 
this, it is unlikely that this elimination would be embraced. 
HFV can sustain normocarbia, but it alone is not sufficient 
to produce prolonged apnea in most awake patients.46 
Chemical drive is only one component of respiratory drive; 
the action of HFV may be mostly exerted through activa­
tion of pulmonary stretch receptors.47 Lung volume and 
respiratory frequency have been shown to independently 
modulate the apneic threshold.48 The state of conscious­
ness is also central to the ability to produce sustained 
apnea, with quiet wakefulness and non–rapid eye move­
ment (REM) sleep far more susceptible than REM sleep.49 
Opioids will certainly raise the apneic threshold. Apnea 
thus seems to be the norm in anesthetized patients who are 
normocarbic and receiving significant doses of opioids, and 
in the author’s experience with several thousand cases, 
muscle relaxants are not required to ablate spontaneous 
ventilation.
Anesthetic Management
As previously noted, volatile agents can be entrained dur­
ing HFJV but would be wasteful and unreliable. The author 
can attest to the difficulty of this approach from efforts to use 
HFJV for extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy before the 
introduction of propofol, although Warner et al3 reported 
use of entrained isoflurane with a ventilator driven by an 
oxygen and nitrous oxide blender.3 With the advent of reli­
able intravenous agents such as propofol and remifentanil, 
there seems little motivation to pursue volatile agents.
Anesthetic requirements during these procedures may be 
fairly low, because of the minimally invasive nature of the 
procedures. During pulmonary vein isolation for atrial fibrilla­
tion, we often maintain patients on propofol 50 mcg/kg/min 
and remifentanil 0.1 mcg/kg/min. Over 95% of our patients 
require phenylephrine infusions to maintain normotension.36
Muscle relaxants are rarely required in maintenance of 
anesthesia for respiratory immobilization, particularly during 
pulmonary vein isolation, in which identification of the course 
of the phrenic nerve by high-output pacing is often required.50
During these procedures, patients are typically placed on 
fluoroscopy tables intended for brief procedures. Patients 
unsurprisingly develop back and neck pain after several 
hours immobilized on a rigid surface. It is advisable to pro­
vide analgesia, including ketorolac and longer-acting opi­
oids, before emergence.
Future Directions
As previously mentioned, the production of prolonged 
apnea requires more than normocarbia. Conversely, HFJV 
can be applied via the natural airway in awake patients. 
Advances in the understanding of respiratory neurobiology 
may someday provide drugs that permit awake patients 
undergoing peroral HFJV to sustain apnea during mini­
mally invasive procedures such as diagnostic imaging and 
radiation therapy. Anesthesiologists are uniquely qualified 
to perform such respiratory maneuvers safely. The time to 
master these techniques is upon us, for if we do not, others 
surely will.
References
	 1.	 Carlson CA, Roysen PG, Banner MJ, Gravenstein JS. Conventional vs 
high frequency jet ventilation for extracorporeal shock-wave litho­
tripsy. Anesthesiology. 1985;63:A530.
	 2.	 Schulte AM, Esch J, Kochs E, Meyer WH. Improved efficiency of extra­
corporal shock wave lithotripsy during high frequency jet ventilation. 
Anesthesiology. 1985;63(6):A177.
	 3.	 Warner MA, Warner ME, Buck CF, Segura JW. Clinical efficacy of high 
frequency jet ventilation during extracorporeal shock wave litho­
tripsy of renal and ureteral calculi: a comparison with conventional 
mechanical ventilation. J Urol. 1988;139(3):486–487.
	 4.	 Cormack JR, Hui R, Olive D, Said S. Comparison of two ventilation 
techniques during general anesthesia for extracorporeal shock wave 
lithotripsy: high-frequency jet ventilation versus spontaneous ventila­
tion with a laryngeal mask airway. Urology. 2007;70(3):7–10.
	 5.	 Canty DJ, Dhara SS. High frequency jet ventilation through a supra­
glottic airway device: a case series of patients undergoing extra-corpo­
real shock wave lithotripsy. Anaesthesia. 2009;64(12):1295–1298.
	 6.	 Mucksavage P, Mayer WA, Mandel JE, Van Arsdalen KN. High-
frequency jet ventilation is beneficial during shock wave lithotripsy 
utilizing a newer unit with a narrower focal zone. Can Urol Assoc J. 
2010;4(5):333–335.
13  •  High-Frequency Ventilation for Respiratory Immobilization
125
	 7.	 Clark DL, Connors BA, Evan AP, Handa RK, Gao S. Effect of shock 
wave number on renal oxidative stress and inflammation. BJU Int. 
2011;107(2):318–322.
	 8.	 Goode JS, Taylor RL, Buffington CW, Klain MM, Schwartzman D. 
High-frequency jet ventilation: utility in posterior left atrial catheter 
ablation. Heart Rhythm. 2006;3(1):13–19.
	 9.	 Hutchinson MD, Garcia FC, Mandel JE, et  al. Efforts to enhance 
catheter stability improve atrial fibrillation ablation outcome. Heart 
Rhythm. 2012;10(3):347–353.
	10.	 Mandel JE, Perry I, Boonn WW, Litt H. Use of high-frequency jet venti­
lation for respiratory immobilization during coronary artery CT angi­
ography. J Clin Anesth. 2009;21(8):599–601.
	11.	 Chen JX, Gottschalk A, Kathuria S, Gandhi D. Undulating microcath­
eter tip motion with respiratory cycle during intracranial aneurysm 
embolization: description of a case and strategy for its mitigation. 
J Neurointerv Surg. 2012;4(3):e8.
	12.	 Yin F, Kim JG, Haughton C, et al. Extracranial radiosurgery: immo­
bilizing liver motion in dogs using high-frequency jet ventila­
tion and total intravenous anesthesia. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2001;49(1):211–216.
	13.	 Fritz P, Kraus HJ, Dölken W, et al. Technical note: gold marker implants 
and high-frequency jet ventilation for stereotactic, single-dose irradia­
tion of liver tumors. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2006;5(1):9–14.
	14.	 Biro P, Spahn DR, Pfammatter T. High-frequency jet ventilation for 
minimizing breathing-related liver motion during percutaneous 
radiofrequency ablation of multiple hepatic tumours. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;102(5):650–653.
	15.	 Abderhalden S, Biro P, Hechelhammer L, Pfiffner R, Pfammatter T. 
CT-guided navigation of percutaneous hepatic and renal radiofre­
quency ablation under high-frequency jet ventilation: feasibility 
study. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2011;22(9):1275–1278.
	16.	 Lara-Guerra H, Kalloger SE, Powell T, et al. Tomographic comparison 
of ventilation techniques for CT-guided thoracoscopic staple excision 
of subcentimeter lung nodules. J Invest Surg. 2006;19(3):185–191.
	17.	 Fritz P, Kraus HJ, Mühlnickel W, et al. High-frequency jet ventilation 
for complete target immobilization and reduction of planning target 
volume in stereotactic high single-dose irradiation of stage I non-small 
cell lung cancer and lung metastases. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2010;78(1):136–142.
	18.	 Sjöstrand UH, Smith RB. Overview of high frequency ventilation. Int 
Anesthesiol Clin. 1983;21(3):1–10.
	19.	 Kraincuk P, Kepka A, Ihra G, Schabernig C, Aloy A. A new prototype 
of an electronic jet-ventilator and its humidification system. Crit Care. 
1999;3(4):101–110.
	20.	 Allan PF, Osborn EC, Chung KK, Wanek SM. High-frequency percus­
sive ventilation revisited. J Burn Care Res. 2010;31(4):510–520.
	21.	 Chang HK. Mechanisms of gas transport during ventilation by high-
frequency oscillation. J Appl Physiol. 1984;56(3):553–563.
	22.	 Ihra G, Aloy A. On the use of Venturi’s principle to describe entrain­
ment during jet ventilation. J Clin Anesth. 2000;12(5):417–419.
	23.	 Gravenstein N, Weber W, Banner MJ. Entrainment of anesthetic 
agents from the circle system during high frequency jet ventilation 
and anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 1986;65:A148.
	24.	 Fletcher R, Malmkvist G, Lührs C, et al. Isocapnic high frequency jet 
ventilation: dead space depends on frequency, inspiratory time and 
entrainment. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1991;35(2):153–158.
	25.	 Benhamou D, Ecoffey C, Rouby JJ, Spielvogel C, Viars P. High fre­
quency jet ventilation: the influence of different methods of injection 
on respiratory parameters. Br J Anaesth. 1987;59(10):1257–1264.
	26.	 Berdine GG, Strollo PJ. Effect of mechanical load on tidal volume dur­
ing high-frequency jet ventilation. J Appl Physiol. 1988;64(3):1217–
1222.
	27.	 Beamer WC, Prough DS, Royster RL, Johnston WE, Johnson JC. 
High-frequency jet ventilation produces auto-PEEP. Crit Care Med. 
1984;12(9):734–737.
	28.	 Dworkin R, Benumof JL, Benumof R, Karagianes TG. The effective tra­
cheal diameter that causes air trapping during jet ventilation. J Cardio­
thorac Anesth. 1990;4(6):731–736.
	29.	 Spackman DR, Kellow N, White SA, Seed PT, Feneck RO. 
High frequency jet ventilation and gas trapping. Br J Anaesth. 
1999;83(5):708–714.
	30.	 Ihra GC, Heid A, Pernerstorfer T. Airway stenosis-related increase of 
pulmonary pressure during high-frequency jet ventilation depends on 
injectors position. Anesth Analg. 2009;109(2):461.
	31.	 Atkins JH, Mirza N, Mandel JE. Case report: respiratory inductance 
plethysmography as a monitor of ventilation during laser ablation 
and balloon dilatation of subglottic tracheal stenosis. J Otorhinolaryn­
gol Relat Spec. 2009;71(5):289–291.
	32.	 Myles PS, Evans AB, Madder H, Weeks AM. Dynamic hyperinfla­
tion: comparison of jet ventilation versus conventional ventilation in 
patients with severe end-stage obstructive lung disease. Anaesth Inten­
sive Care. 1997;25(5):471–475.
	33.	 Kregenow A, Swenson R. The lung and carbon dioxide: implica­
tions for permissive and therapeutic hypercapnia. Eur Respir J. 
2002;20(1):6–11.
	34.	 Simon M, Gottschall R, Gugel M, et  al. Comparison of transcu­
taneous and end-tidal CO2-monitoring for rigid bronchoscopy 
during high-frequency jet ventilation. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2003;47(7):861–867.
	35.	 Eberhard P. The design, use, and results of transcutaneous car­
bon dioxide analysis: current and future directions. Anesth Analg. 
2007;105(6 Suppl):S48–S52.
	36.	 Elkassabany N, Garcia F, Tschabrunn C, et al. Anesthetic manage­
ment of patients undergoing pulmonary vein isolation for treatment 
of atrial fibrillation using high-frequency jet ventilation. J Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth. 2012;26(3):433–438.
	37.	 Bourgain JL, Desruennes E, Cosset MF, et  al. Measurement of end-
expiratory pressure during transtracheal high frequency jet ventila­
tion for laryngoscopy. Br J Anaesth. 1990;65(6):737–743.
	38.	 Biro P. Jet ventilation for surgical interventions in the upper airway. 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2010;28(3):397–409.
	39.	 Simon BA, Weinmann GG, Mitzner W. Mean airway pressure and 
alveolar pressure during high-frequency ventilation. J Appl Physiol. 
1984;57(4):1069–1078.
	40.	 Atkins JH, Mandel JE, Weinstein GS, Mirza N. A pilot study of 
respiratory inductance plethysmography as a safe, noninvasive 
detector of jet ventilation under general anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 
2010;111(5):1168–1175.
	41.	 Young JD, Sykes MK. A method for measuring tidal volume during 
high frequency jet ventilation. Br J Anaesth. 1988;61(5):601–605.
	42.	 Circeo LE, Heard SO, Griffiths E, Nash G. Overwhelming necrotizing 
tracheobronchitis due to inadequate humidification during high-fre­
quency jet ventilation. Chest. 1991;100(1):268–269.
	43.	 Kan AF, Gin T, Lin ES, Oh TE. Factors influencing humidification in 
high-frequency jet ventilation. Crit Care Med. 1990;18(5):537–539.
	44.	 Zandstra DF, Stoutenbeek CP, Miranda DR. Efficacy of a heat and 
moisture exchange device during high-frequency jet ventilation. 
Intensive Care Med. 1987;13(5):355–557.
	45.	 Kawahito S, Kitahata H, Tanaka K, Nozaki J, Oshita S. Transesoph­
ageal echocardiographic assessment of pulmonary arterial and 
venous flow during high-frequency jet ventilation. J Clin Anesth. 
2000;12(4):308–314.
	46.	 George RJ, Winter RJ, Johnson MA, Slee IP, Geddes DM. Effect of oral 
high frequency ventilation by jet or oscillator on minute ventilation in 
normal subjects. Thorax. 1985;40(10):749–755.
	47.	 Kohl J, Koller EA. Blockade of pulmonary stretch receptors reinforces 
diaphragmatic activity during high-frequency oscillatory ventilation. 
Pflugers Arch. 1988;411(1):42–46.
	48.	 van Vught AJ, Versprille A, Jansen JR. Suppression of sponta­
neous breathing during high-frequency jet ventilation: sepa­
rate effects of lung volume and jet frequency. Intensive Care Med. 
1987;13(5):315–322.
	49.	 Dempsey JA. Crossing the apnoeic threshold: causes and conse­
quences. Exp Physiol. 2005;90(1):13–24.
	50.	 Fan R, Cano O, Ho SY, et al. Characterization of the phrenic nerve 
course within the epicardial substrate of patients with nonisch­
emic cardiomyopathy and ventricular tachycardia. Heart Rhythm. 
2009;6(1):59–64.
126
Gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopies are among the most com­
mon non–operating room procedures requiring anesthesia. 
This chapter reviews considerations and challenges related 
to anesthesia for upper GI endoscopy procedures. These 
include esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), endoscopic 
ultrasound (a variation on EGD employing a specialized 
endoscope with a miniature ultrasound transducer affixed 
to its distal tip), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan­
creatography (ERCP). The biggest challenge for the anes­
thesia provider is that because these procedures involve 
insertion of an endoscope into the patient’s mouth, the 
patient’s airway must be shared with the gastroenterologist.
Anesthesia is not required for all GI endoscopy proce­
dures. In fact, gastroenterologists can successfully complete 
endoscopies in most patients (frequently with no or mini­
mal comorbidities) with moderate sedation such as mid­
azolam and fentanyl. Propofol may have advantages over 
midazolam in terms of efficiency (i.e., faster sedation and 
recovery) and patient satisfaction, but it cannot be admin­
istered by gastroenterologists in many venues, and involv­
ing an anesthesiologist is expensive. For sicker patients or 
more complex procedures, most gastroentero­logists prefer 
to have an anesthesiologist provide sedation and care to 
ensure patient safety and comfort and to allow the gastroen­
terologist to concentrate on the procedure. Insurance com­
panies may question reimbursement for the expense of an 
anesthesiologist for a relatively healthy patient having a 
diagnostic EGD. However, they probably will not question 
the need for an anesthesiologist for a more complicated situ­
ation such as a therapeutic intervention or a patient with 
American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 3 or 
greater, for which there are clear indications.
Patient Populations Presenting 
for Upper Gastrointestinal 
Endoscopic Procedures
Gastroesophageal reflux disease and its potential sequelae, 
including Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal cancer, are 
common indications for EGD. The incidences of Barrett’s 
esophagus and esophageal cancer are increasing. Barrett’s 
esophagus is a precursor of esophageal cancer. Fortunately, 
effective endoscopic therapeutic interventions are available 
that can decrease the need for a debilitating esophagectomy. 
However, the endoscopic interventions can be lengthy and 
uncomfortable. Many patients who undergo esophagec­
tomy enjoy long-term survival, but they frequently present 
to the gastroenterologist for repeated dilations.
Conditions for which surgery was seen as the only cura­
tive option, such as tracheoesophageal fistula, are now 
treated endoscopically with a high degree of success. Bariat­
ric surgery is gaining popularity in developed nations, and 
EGD is often performed for assessment before or after the 
surgery. Placement of stents, cautery of bleeding arteriove­
nous malformations, and banding of esophageal varices are 
other growing areas of endoscopic practice.
The most frequent indication for ERCP is common bile 
duct stones. Gallstone disease is estimated to affect more 
than 20 million adults in the United States, at an annual cost 
of $6.2 billion.1 Of patients undergoing laparoscopic cho­
lecystectomy for symptomatic cholelithiasis and patients 
with acute biliary pancreatitis, 5% to 10% and 18% to 33%, 
respectively, also will have choledocholithiasis.2
Patients with pancreatic cancer often need endoscopic 
ultrasound or ERCP for staging or palliation. The pan­
creas is the 10th most common site of new cancer and the 
4th-leading cause of cancer death in the United States and 
worldwide. In 2010 an estimated 43,140 new cases of 
pancreatic cancer were diagnosed in the United States; this 
accounts for 2.8% of all cancers.3
Although many advanced endoscopic procedures are 
currently the privilege of tertiary gastroenterology centers, 
they are likely to be performed more widely in the future.
Preprocedure Evaluation
In general, patients presenting for an inpatient EGD or ERCP 
are likely to be far sicker than their outpatient counterparts. 
The comorbidities discussed in the following paragraphs 
should be kept in mind while conducting a preoperative 
evaluation. The time available for a comprehensive evalua­
tion in a busy endoscopy unit may be limited; the anesthe­
siologist should triage and allocate appropriate time for a 
given patient.
Hypertension and coronary artery disease are extremely 
common in this patient population. The procedure in a 
patient presenting for surveillance EGD who has under­
gone recent coronary stent placement, with either a bare 
metal or drug-eluting stent, may be postponed if issues 
concerning ongoing anticoagulation are not addressed.4 If 
the patient presents for cancer staging or for a therapeutic 
ERCP, however, the risks of postponement might exceed 
the risks of the procedure. The risk-to-benefit ratio for fine-
needle aspiration cytology and any other potential instiga­
tion of bleeding should be discussed in advance with the 
gastroenterologist. A cardiologist should also be consulted 
for guidance in these situations.
Anesthesia for Upper 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
BASAVANA G. GOUDRA, JONATHAN W. TANNER, PREET MOHINDER SINGH, 
and GREGORY G. GINSBERG
14
14  •  Anesthesia for Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
127
Cardiac rhythm disorders are not uncommon. Chronic 
atrial fibrillation with anticoagulation is less frequent, with 
wider availability and success of antiarrhythmic medica­
tions and ablation procedures. Patients with a pacemaker 
or automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator are 
increasingly encountered. Therapeutic EGD or ERCP might 
involve use of electrocautery close to these devices. It is pru­
dent to have a magnet available, although prophylactic use 
is unnecessary. When applied, the magnet may activate the 
backup mode (fixed-rate pacing); in such an event, pace­
maker evaluation and resetting are recommended.
Ventricular assist devices (VADs) are more commonly 
used. In our hospital, these patients are managed by non­
cardiac anesthesiologists for noncardiac procedures. In the 
absence of pulsatile flow, pulse oximeter and noninvasive 
blood pressure readings may be unreliable. Communica­
tion with the VAD coordinator nurse regarding physiologi­
cal parameters such as volume and vasodilation status is 
important.
Patients with chronic obstructive airway disease who 
require supplemental oxygen at baseline may occasion­
ally present for EGD or ERCP. These patients usually can be 
anesthetized for endoscopy without endotracheal intuba­
tion and sent home on the same day.
Obstructive sleep apnea is present in approximately 70% 
of patients with morbid obesity presenting for bariatric sur­
gery.5 An accurate airway assessment is important. Intuba­
tion is rarely necessary in these patients for EGD, although 
elective intubation may be considered for prolonged ERCP.
Considering the frequency of diabetes mellitus in the 
population, it is impossible to schedule all such patients as 
the first case of the day. Most of these patients can be fed 
almost immediately after the procedure and return to their 
insulin or oral treatment regimen. Holding the morning 
dose of hypoglycemic agent and insulin may be all that is 
necessary.
Patients on chronic opioid therapy require significantly 
higher than average doses of intravenous anesthetic agents 
and opioids. Gastroenterologists will often request anesthe­
sia for these patients.
Endoscopic procedures have low cardiac risk. There­
fore, according to recent guidelines,6 preprocedural elec­
trocardiograms (ECGs) are not indicated in asymptomatic 
patients, even if they are older than 60 years of age or 
have known cardiovascular disease. Likewise, laboratory 
testing is not usually needed before endoscopy, with rare 
exceptions such as coagulation studies and platelet count 
in patients with liver disease undergoing therapeutic endo­
scopic procedures.
Anesthetic Drugs for 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Propofol is the cornerstone when anesthesia services are 
provided for EGD and ERCP.7 Smooth intravenous induc­
tion and maintenance, quick and clear-headed recovery, 
and low incidence of postprocedure nausea and vomiting 
make it an attractive anesthetic agent in this setting. The 
anesthesia provider should, however, be mindful of the 
fact that patients are often under general anesthesia dur­
ing some or most of an endoscopy procedure with propofol; 
this has attendant risks, especially loss of airway control. 
The anesthesia provider must also appreciate the phar­
macokinetic and pharmacodynamic variability of propo­
fol, especially when used in combination with other drugs 
(such as short-acting opioids). As a result, a patient with a 
seemingly adequate dose can be still awake, and a patient 
with a smaller dose can be apneic, be unresponsive, and 
require airway support. Additionally, instrumentation of 
an inadequately sedated patient can cause reflex coughing 
and laryngospasm despite the fact that propofol does not 
increase airway irritability.
Although propofol is not absolutely contraindicated 
in patients with a mild egg allergy,8 patients occasionally 
present with a history of severe egg allergy or propofol 
allergy. One alternative to propofol is etomidate. Etomidate 
is advantageous because of its minimal cardiorespiratory 
depression but disadvantageous because of the increased 
incidence of nausea or vomiting and tonic or clonic move­
ments in contrast to propofol. Both etomidate and propofol 
may produce a burning sensation when injected intrave­
nously; this unpleasant effect can be mitigated by pretreat­
ment with intravenous lidocaine, which may also have 
some general anesthetic properties and suppress coughing 
from endoscope insertion.
Another alternative to propofol is the combination of a 
benzodiazepine and an opioid such as midazolam and remi­
fentanil. Remifentanil is an ultra–short-acting opioid. Its 
pharmacodynamic properties are similar to those of the other 
commonly used opioids, but its pharmacokinetic properties 
are unique. Unlike all other opioids, remifentanil is metabo­
lized by esterases, because of the presence of an ester moiety 
at the active site, and esterases are ubiquitous, being pres­
ent in many tissues, including plasma and red blood cells. 
Its fixed context-sensitive half-time stems from this unique 
metabolism. As a result of rapid elimination, its context-
sensitive half-time is approximately 2 to 4 minutes. It is 
important to administer it as a small bolus (1 to 2 mcg/kg) 
infused over a period of at least 2 minutes. This is followed 
by an infusion at 0.06 to 0.2 mcg/kg/min. Administration 
of 0.5 to 2 mg midazolam 2 or 3 minutes before is useful for 
amnesia, although remifentanil itself has amnestic proper­
ties.9 Midazolam can be repeated again in small doses during 
the procedure. After 4 to 5 minutes of remifentanil infusion, 
patients tolerate GI endoscopy quite well. It is important not 
to be tempted to increase the remifentanil infusion, because 
apnea and rigidity can ensue. Frequently, patients receiving 
remifentanil can stop breathing, although they are conscious 
and cooperative, and they need to be reminded to take deep 
breaths. Supplemental oxygen should be administered. The 
patients usually tolerate endoscopy well and often have no 
recollection of the procedure.
Limited data exist regarding the use of ketamine for 
endoscopy.10 Ketamine produces a less familiar state of 
anesthesia: the patient might give an impression of star­
ing, with eyeballs rolling, and he or she might even move. 
The mere mention of ketamine may conjure up concern 
about psychomimetic reactions, but the incidence of those 
can be greatly reduced by coadministration of midazolam, 
propofol, or both.11 Although ketamine’s cardiovascular 
stimulation may be undesirable in some patients (such as 
those prone to myocardial ischemia), it may be advanta­
geous in some hemodynamically unstable (e.g., septic or 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
128
bleeding) patients. In most patients, ketamine will offset 
hypotension caused by propofol. One potential problem 
with ketamine for endoscopy is that it promotes saliva­
tion, which can be mitigated by preprocedure anticholin­
ergic administration but that is associated with further 
tachycardia and postprocedural dry mouth. Ketamine’s 
lack of respiratory depression is attractive for upper GI 
endoscopy, particularly in patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea. Ketamine may also be particularly advantageous 
in patients with asthma because of its bronchodilating 
properties. Ketamine is an analgesic as well, so additional 
analgesics may not be needed in patients undergoing 
endoscopy.
Dexmedetomidine, a selective α2-adrenergic receptor 
agonist,12 has properties unlike those of other commonly 
used anesthetic drugs. Its action is similar to that of cloni­
dine, another α2 agonist, but it is six times more selective. 
The drug is now approved for sedation13 in nonintubated 
patients, so its inclusion in the GI endoscopy armory is 
relevant. Almost all studies agree that patients receiving 
dexmedetomidine maintain spontaneous ventilation with 
almost no assistance, apart from an occasional chin lift. 
A few studies have been conducted on the role of dexme­
detomidine in GI endoscopy.14-17 Coadministration of mid­
azolam and a short-acting opioid will help achieve a higher 
success rate. Dexmedetomidine is administered with a load­
ing dose over 10 minutes, and its effects of sedation and 
hypotension tend to linger longer than those of propofol. 
Thus, although dexmedetomidine may be appropriate for 
certain patients, such as those particularly prone or sensi­
tive to respiratory depression from other agents, it is not as 
practical for routine, rapid turnover cases.
In summary (Table 14-1), for most patients, propofol is 
the basis of anesthesia for upper GI endoscopy although in 
particular patients alternative drugs may be more attrac­
tive. The details of intravenous administration, especially 
target-controlled infusion (TCI) versus traditional intrave­
nous infusion, are discussed in a separate chapter, so dis­
cussion here is limited to their application for endoscopy. 
Depending on which side of the Atlantic Ocean one is prac­
ticing, the tools for intravenous anesthetic delivery will 
vary. Use of TCI pumps will definitely reduce the variabil­
ity, and that reduction might be especially useful for endos­
copy. They are known to reduce the number of changes to 
the infusion settings necessary for surgical anesthesia. In 
the setting of endoscopy, however, in which the change 
of stimulation is less frequent than in surgical procedures, 
such a luxury may not be necessary.
Airway Management
Anesthetizing in any location needs to be taken as seri­
ously as in an operating room. Preoperative evaluation 
with special attention to airway and aspiration risk factors 
must be thorough. An anesthesia machine is not required, 
but a breathing circuit capable of positive-pressure ventila­
tion (such as Mapleson C), laryngoscope, face masks, oral 
and nasal airways, laryngeal mask airways, various sizes of 
endotracheal tubes, and emergency drugs should be readily 
available. Because of its remote location, it is also important 
to have additional airway adjuncts such as Bougies, sty­
lets, video laryngoscopes, and carbon dioxide detectors. It is 
important to check the availability and functionality of these 
before the start of every procedure. Airway emergencies such 
as laryngospasm and other airway obstruction often occur 
with little notice during upper GI endoscopy. Being ready for 
any airway situation (or not) could be the difference between 
apnea-related cardiac arrest and a safe discharge home.
Options for airway management for upper GI endoscopic 
procedures range from natural (with supplemental oxygen 
by nasal cannula) to endotracheal intubation.18 In fact, a 
study of ERCPs with laryngeal mask airways has been pub­
lished.19 Another choice used in our practice is insertion of 
a nasal trumpet. Insertion of a nasal airway may provoke 
epistaxis, so use of a vasoconstrictor nasal spray or oral inser­
tion of the nasal trumpet should be considered, particularly 
in patients who have received anticoagulation therapy. Even 
for advanced endoscopic procedures, including complicated 
ERCPs, endotracheal intubation is rarely used in our prac­
tice, with the exception of patients with a stomach full of food 
or blood. It should be noted that gastric contents can be suc­
tioned by the endoscopist under direct vision.
The experience of the anesthesiologist in providing anes­
thesia for endoscopy procedures seems to play a major part 
in this decision; anesthesiologists unfamiliar with this area 
of practice seem to intubate more frequently.18 It is a tight­
rope walk to keep the patients unresponsive and comfort­
able while spontaneously breathing. Avoiding endotracheal 
intubation is beneficial in the rapid turnover, outpatient 
endoscopy setting. In this population, irrespective of the 
drugs chosen and the tool used to administer them, the cen­
tral aim of anesthesia is to have an unresponsive patient 
who is spontaneously ventilating and maintaining the air­
way with little or no support. Airway manipulations such as 
chin lift, jaw thrust, and neck extension and various devices 
help maintain a patent airway, and their use should not be 
seen as failure of the technique. Having a dedicated team of 
Table 14-1  Comparison of Drugs for Anesthesia for Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Drug
Site of Action
Time of Onset (min)
Notable Clinical Effects
Notable Drawbacks
Time for Recovery (min)
Propofol
GABA receptor
½-1
Amnesia, hypnosis
PK/PD variability, apnea, hypo­
tension
5-7 (for a 30- to 45-min 
procedure)
Remifentanil
μ Receptor
1-2
Analgesia
Bradycardia, hypoxemia, 
rigidity
2-3
Ketamine
NMDA receptor
1-2
Dissociative anesthesia
Tachycardia, salivation
5-10
Dexmedetomidine
α2 Receptor
8-10
Sedation
Slow loading and offset, bra­
dycardia
15-20
Remimazolam
GABA receptor
3-5
Sedation
None so far
10-15
GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate; PK/PD, pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics.
14  •  Anesthesia for Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
129
providers with experience in anesthesia for endoscopy and 
an appreciation of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
variability will help master this technique and greatly 
facilitate efficiency without compromising safety. The gas­
troenterologist must be aware that scope removal during 
the procedure may be needed urgently for airway manage­
ment. Not every situation, procedure, and patient factor can 
be addressed, but the following items can be used as broad 
principles for airway management in upper GI endoscopy.20
   
	1.	 Most patients with normal airway anatomy and physi­
ology presenting for a short diagnostic upper GI endos­
copy do not need any special airway apart from nasal 
cannula for supplemental oxygen administration.
	2.	 Most ERCPs in our hospital are done without an endo­
tracheal tube. Anesthesia is induced after prone posi­
tioning. A nasal trumpet can be inserted soon after 
induction and connected to a breathing system, as seen 
in Figure 14-1. Apnea lasting 30 to 45 seconds after 
induction is not uncommon, but the stimulation of gas­
troscope insertion helps restart spontaneous ventilation. 
The nasal trumpet allows some degree of controlled ven­
tilation, if necessary. More importantly, it allows delivery 
of 100% oxygen at the laryngeal inlet. High-frequency 
jet ventilation is also useful in this setting. Endotracheal 
intubation is the airway of choice for endoscopic drain­
age of a pancreatic pseudocyst.
	3.	 Most therapeutic upper GI endoscopies such as endo­
scopic mucosal resection, Barrett’s eradication, appli­
cation of variceal banding, and resection of larger 
gastroduodenal polyps are managed similarly to ERCPs. 
These procedures may involve frequent scope with­
drawal and reinsertion, so it is important to maintain 
or increase the depth of anesthesia to prevent coughing. 
Patients undergoing treatment for tracheoesophageal 
fistula, especially with a history of aspiration, should be 
considered for endotracheal intubation.
	4.	 Morbidly obese patients often present for upper GI endos­
copy before weight reduction surgery. Obstructive sleep 
apnea is very common in this group. We use nasal trum­
pets after induction, occasionally supplemented with 
supraglottic jet ventilation. Use of supraglottic jets pro­
vides ventilation and also probably prevents the upper 
airway from collapsing. This is a technique that requires 
experience and maintenance of adequate depth of anes­
thesia at all times. If in doubt, these patients are better 
handled with endotracheal intubation. In any event, 
equipment for difficult intubation should be at hand.
	5.	 Patients who had previous esophagectomy for cancer or 
achalasia frequently present for esophageal dilation. In 
the absence of gastric motility issues, these patients can 
be handled safely with supplemental nasal oxygen or a 
nasal trumpet connected to breathing system. Stretch­
ing with a balloon or a Bougie can be stimulating, and 
deepening of anesthesia in anticipation is important.
	6.	 Patients with a documented pharyngeal pouch are 
anesthetized after awake endotracheal intubation. 
Application of cricoid pressure may not be useful in this 
scenario.
	7.	 Patients with limited mouth opening or neck extension 
as a result of radiation treatment for oropharyngeal 
cancer often present for repeated esophageal dilations of 
radiation-induced stricture. In the absence of any naso­
pharyngeal airway obstruction and if ventilation by 
mask is not expected to be difficult, these patients can be 
safely managed with nasal cannula or nasal trumpet.
	8.	 Patients who had prior weight loss surgery sometimes pres­
ent for endoscopic evaluation. Insufficient evidence exists 
to recommend endotracheal intubation in this subgroup.21 
Each individual patient needs to be evaluated with regard 
to potential for aspiration and accordingly managed.
	9.	 GI bleeding is common in patients with ventricular 
assist devices. Although it is recommended22 to treat 
them as having a full stomach because of the position 
of the devices, in our practice oxygen is delivered with 
nasal cannula or nasal trumpet for EGD. The potential 
risks of rapid sequence induction and intubation in these 
very sick patients outweigh any benefits.
Conduct of Anesthesia for Upper 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
As with all anesthetics, an understanding of the procedure 
makes administration of the anesthetic smoother. Common 
indications for upper GI endoscopy can be found in Box 14-1. 
Advanced endoscopic procedures are technically challeng­
ing for endoscopists and anesthesia providers alike. The 
patients are often elderly and ill; they are not usually supine; 
the room is often darkened; equipment such as fluoroscopy 
machine, ultrasound machine, and/or video display extends 
over the patient; and there is competition for space around 
the patient’s mouth and airway. For EGD, gastroenterologists 
usually prefer the patient to assume the left lateral position, 
whereas for ERCP, they usually prefer the patient to be prone, 
with head turned to the side. A bite block is usually inserted 
by the gastroenterology team; it is easiest to get the patient 
in position, with the bite block in place, before induction of 
anesthesia, unless the anesthesiologist plans to intubate the 
patient’s trachea. As indicated earlier, insertion of the endo­
scope is usually the most stimulating part of the procedure, 
except if dilation is performed. Topical pharyngeal anesthesia 
may improve tolerance of endoscopy.23 A simple EGD may 
Figure 14-1  Mapleson C breathing circuit connected to nasal trumpet 
via endotracheal tube connector.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
130
take a few minutes, although a complicated ERCP can take 
over an hour. Antibiotics are not usually indicated, even in 
patients with valvular heart disease.
In our practice, induction is typically with propofol. The 
dose is variable—it depends on the patient’s age, weight, 
height, comorbidity, and medication history, all of which 
influence the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynam­
ics. We typically start with approximately 1 to 1.5 mg/kg, 
although less in elderly patients. Propofol may be preceded 
(1 to 2 minutes before) with fentanyl 25 to 50 mcg for an 
antitussive effect. At the peak clinical effect of propofol, 
signaled by loss of eyelash reflex, unresponsiveness, and 
sometimes apnea, a nasal trumpet can be inserted and con­
nected to a Mapleson C breathing system (see Figure 14-1). 
The gastroscope is introduced at the same time to provide 
sufficient stimulation to initiate (if patient was apneic) and 
sustain spontaneous ventilation.
The gastroenterologist may request glucagon for GI 
relaxation. Glucagon is usually supplied as a vial with 1 mg 
powder and a vial with 1 mL solvent; the usual initial dose is 
between 0.2 and 0.5 mg intravenously. It may affect blood 
glucose, so it should be used with caution in patients with 
diabetes or insulinoma.
Postprocedure pain is rare except for mild throat irrita­
tion, so more than 100 mcg or so of fentanyl is excessive 
except in the patient on chronic opioid therapy. Postproce­
dure abdominal pain could be a sign of visceral perforation, 
and approximately 5% of patients will have pancreatitis 
after ERCP, so make sure the gastroenterologist is aware of 
this symptom.
Monitoring
Routine monitoring via pulse oximetry, blood pressure at 
least every 5 minutes, and continuous ECG during anes­
thesia are among the standards of the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists. Those standards were recently revised to 
state that exhaled carbon dioxide should also be monitored, 
unless precluded or invalidated by the nature of the patient, 
procedure, or equipment. Obtaining accurate capnography 
during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy can be difficult, 
but it is important for recognizing apneic periods that might 
otherwise go unnoticed during the procedure. Artifacts 
can be produced if the endoscopist uses carbon dioxide for 
insufflation. Other techniques of respiratory monitoring are 
emerging based on acoustics or pulse plethysmograph anal­
ysis.24 Transcutaneous carbon dioxide monitoring has been 
attempted, but its use in this setting is of questionable value.
Complications
Providing anesthesia at remote locations carries significant 
risk for morbidity and mortality.25-27 Inadequate oxygen­
ation and ventilation seem to be the most common prob­
lems. Approximately half of all deaths reported in closed 
claim studies in the GI endoscopy suite are the result of 
airway mismanagement. Titration to appropriate levels at 
which patients are appropriately sedated yet adequately 
ventilating is not always easy because of pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic variability of sedative medica­
tions.28 Apnea, laryngospasm, and aspiration are more 
specific to EGD and ERCP (Box 14-2). As mentioned, pre­
paredness for any airway eventuality is the key for a suc­
cessful and safe anesthetic for endoscopy.
Future
The future of anesthesia for EGD and ERCP will depend on 
the development of new drugs that can potentially replace 
propofol. Although pain on injection can be unpleasant 
(sometimes the only unpleasant experience of the whole 
anesthetic), its major drawback is its propensity to cause 
hypotension and apnea, which sometimes requires air­
way support and, rarely, even endotracheal intubation. 
The additional cost of anesthesiologist involvement inevi­
tably calls for a suitable replacement that also can be used 
safely by the gastroenterologist, particularly in subsets 
of low-risk patients. SEDASYS is a computer-based sys­
tem with built-in safety features that can be safely used 
to sedate low-risk colonoscopy patients and is discussed 
elsewhere.29,30 Remimazolam, a midazolam derivative 
metabolized by ester hydrolysis, is a newer drug undergo­
ing clinical trials. It is unlikely to fill this void because of 
Box 14-1  Common Indications for Upper 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Procedures
Diagnostic
Isolated dysphagia, odynophagia, Barrett’s esophagus
Persistent vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux disease
Chronic anemia, melena
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleed
Peptic ulcer, duodenal biopsy
Portal hypertension
Small bowel enteroscopy
Evaluation before bariatric surgery
Therapeutic
Common bile duct stones
Biliary, pancreatic stenting, dilatation
Variceal bleed
Foreign body extraction
Esophageal stricture dilatation
Esophageal stenting
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
Endoscopic mucosal resection (for neoplasms)
Box 14-2  Complications Related to Sedation 
for Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Airway Obstruction
Apnea
Failed airway management under deep sedation
Inadequate or Excessive Sedation
Desaturation
Laryngospasm
Aspiration
14  •  Anesthesia for Upper Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
131
apnea and more importantly long induction and recovery 
times. The drugs in sight at various stages of develop­
ment are unlikely to replace propofol in the near future. 
Even if an intravenous anesthetic can be designed with 
rapid elimination and thereby quick recovery, the doses 
required are likely to be higher and thus increase the cost. 
In any event, with the trends of older, sicker patient pop­
ulations and more complex procedures, the role of anes­
thesia providers for upper GI endoscopies seems currently 
secure and likely to expand in both the inpatient and out­
patient settings.
References
	 1.	 Everhart JE, Ruhl CE. Burden of digestive diseases in the United 
States. I. Overall and upper gastrointestinal diseases. Gastroenterology. 
2009;136(2):376–386.
	 2.	 American Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Standards of Practice 
Committee, Maple JT, Ben-Menachem T, Anderson MA, et al. The role 
of endoscopy in the evaluation of suspected choledocholithiasis. Gas­
trointest Endosc. 2010;71(1):1–9.
	 3.	 Vincent A, Herman J, Schulick R, Hruban RH, Goggins M. Pancreatic 
cancer. Lancet. 2011;378(9791):607–620.
	 4.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and 
Practice Parameters. Practice alert for the perioperative management 
of patients with coronary artery stents: a report by the American Soci­
ety of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Practice Param­
eters. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(1):22–23.
	 5.	 Frey WC, Pilcher J. Obstructive sleep-related breathing disorders 
in patients evaluated for bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2003;13(5):
676–683.
	 6.	 American College of Cardiology, American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2002 
Guidelines on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation for Noncar­
diac Surgery), American Society of Echocardiography, American 
Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of 
Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angi­
ography and Interventions, et al. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines on peri­
operative cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac surgery: 
executive summary. Anesth Analg. 2008;106(3):685–712.
	 7.	 Goudra BG, Mandel JE. Target-controlled infusions/patient-controlled 
sedation. Tech Gastrointest Endosc. 2009;11(4):181–187.
	 8.	 Baombe JP, Parvez K. Towards evidence-based emergency medicine: 
best BETs from the Manchester Royal Infirmary. BET 1: is propofol safe 
in patients with egg anaphylaxis? Emerg Med J. 2013;30(1):79–80.
	 9.	 Vennila R, Hall A, Ali M, et al. Remifentanil as single agent to facili­
tate awake fibreoptic intubation in the absence of premedication. 
Anaesthesia. 2011;66(5):368–372.
	10.	 Varadarajulu S, Eloubeidi MA, Tamhane A, Wilcox CM. Prospec­
tive randomized trial evaluating ketamine for advanced endoscopic 
procedures in difficult to sedate patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2007;25(8):987–997.
	11.	 Badrinath S, Avramov MN, Shadrick M, Witt TR, Ivankovich AD. The 
use of a ketamine-propofol combination during monitored anesthesia 
care. Anesth Analg. 2000;90(4):858–862.
	12.	 Kaur M, Singh P. Current role of dexmedetomidine in clinical anesthe­
sia and intensive care. Anesth Essays Res. 2011;5(2):128–133.
	13.	 Iirola T, Ihmsen H, Laitio R, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of dex­
medetomidine during long-term sedation in intensive care patients. 
Br J Anaesth. 2012;108(3):460–468.
	14.	 Muller S, Borowics SM, Fortis EAF, et al. Clinical efficacy of dexme­
detomidine alone is less than propofol for conscious sedation during 
ERCP. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008;67(4):651–659.
	15.	 Dere K, Sucullu I, Budak ET, et  al. A comparison of dexmedetomi­
dine versus midazolam for sedation, pain and hemodynamic control, 
during colonoscopy under conscious sedation. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2010;27(7):648–652.
	16.	 Jalowiecki P, Rudner R, Gonciarz M, et al. Sole use of dexmedetomi­
dine has limited utility for conscious sedation during outpatient colo­
noscopy. Anesthesiology. 2005;103(2):269–273.
	17.	 Demiraran Y, Korkut E, Tamer A, et al. The comparison of dexme­
detomidine and midazolam used for sedation of patients during upper 
endoscopy: a prospective, randomized study. Can J Gastroenterol J. 
2007;21(1):25–29.
	18.	 Goudra BG, Singh PM, Sinha AC. Anesthesia for ERCP: impact of 
anesthesiologist’s experience on outcome and cost. Anesthiol Res 
Pract. 2013. [Internet]. May 28, 2013 [cited June 7, 2013]. http://
www.hindawi.com/journals/arp/2013/570518/abs/.
	19.	 Osborn IP, Cohen J, Soper RJ, Roth LA. Laryngeal mask airway: a 
novel method of airway protection during ERCP—comparison with 
endotracheal intubation. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56(1):122–128.
	20.	 Goudra BG, Singh PM, Sinha A. Outpatient endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography: safety and efficacy of anesthetic manage­
ment with a natural airway in 653 consecutive procedures. Saudi J 
Anaesth. 2013;7(3):259–265.
	21.	 Herbella FAM, Vicentine FPP, Del Grande JC, Patti MG, Arasaki CH. 
Postprandial proximal gastric acid pocket in patients after Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010;14(11):1742–1745.
	22.	 Stone ME, Soong W, Krol M, Reich DL. The anesthetic considerations 
in patients with ventricular assist devices presenting for noncardiac 
surgery: a review of eight cases. Anesth Analg. 2002;95(1):42–49.
	23.	 Evans LT, Saberi S, Kim HM, Elta GH, Schoenfeld P. Pharyngeal anes­
thesia during sedated EGDs: is “the spray” beneficial? A meta-analysis 
and systematic review. Gastrointest Endosc. 2006;63(6):761–766.
	24.	 Goudra BG, Penugonda LC, Speck RM, Sinha AC. Comparison of 
acoustic respiration rate, impedance pneumography and capnometry 
monitors for respiration rate accuracy and apnea detection during GI 
endoscopy anesthesia. Open J Anesth. 2013;03(02):74–79.
	25.	 Metzner J, Posner KL, Domino KB. The risk and safety of anesthesia at 
remote locations: the US closed claims analysis. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2009;22(4):502–508.
	26.	 Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Cheney FW, et  al. Injury and liability 
associated with monitored anesthesia care: a closed claims analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;104(2):228–234.
	27.	 Hug Jr CC. MAC should stand for maximum anesthesia caution, not 
minimal anesthesiology care. Anesthesiology. 2006;104(2):221–223.
	28.	 Gan TJ. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics 
of medications used for moderate sedation. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2006;45(9):855–869.
	29.	 Pambianco DJ, Vargo JJ, Pruitt RE, Hardi R, Martin JF. Computer-
assisted personalized sedation for upper endoscopy and colonoscopy: 
a comparative, multicenter randomized study. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2011;73(4):765–772.
	30.	 Martin JF, Bridenbaugh P, Gustafson M. The SEDASYS System is not 
intended for the sedation of high-risk patients. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2011;74(3):723.
132
History of Anesthesia for 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopic 
Procedures
Sedation and analgesia are common components to most 
upper and lower endoscopic procedures. Although diagnos­
tic upper and lower endoscopy can be performed without 
sedation, the use of sedative medications improves patient 
comfort and the quality of the procedure.1,2 The use of 
sedation in part depends on the country and reflects local 
practices. The decision to include an anesthesiologist in the 
care of a patient with a gastrointestinal (GI) issue also may 
depend on the location of the procedure and ready avail­
ability of trained anesthesia staff. Anesthesiologists tend to 
be more involved in sedation when procedures are being 
performed in an ambulatory surgery center instead of an 
office-based setting, where resources are limited.3
Since the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force mandated 
screening colonoscopies for all patients between the ages of 
50 and 75 years, colonoscopies have become one of the most 
common medical procedures in the United States.4 In 2002 
it was estimated that more than 14 million colonoscopies 
were performed.5 Although diagnostic colonoscopies can 
be done without sedation, the use of sedative medications 
improves overall outcomes — patients describe improved 
comfort, and proceduralists note that sedating the patient 
improves the diagnostic quality of the procedure.6,7 Seda­
tion for endoscopy has traditionally been administered by 
a nurse or endoscopist; however, as the number and com­
plexity of cases have increased, participation by a trained 
anesthesiologist has become more commonplace in the 
endoscopy suite. Anesthesiologists tend to be more involved 
in sedation when procedures are performed in an ambula­
tory surgery center as compared with an office based–setting, 
where there are limited resources.8
General Considerations
GENERAL REASONS TO REQUEST AN 
ANESTHESIA PROVIDER
Several factors can contribute to the decision to use anesthe­
siology-based sedation for an endoscopic procedure. Certain 
patients commonly warrant anesthesiology-based care, 
including those with multiple or problematic comorbidi­
ties or airway concerns and pediatric patients. In addition, 
highly complex, long, or high-risk procedures are performed 
most safely under general anesthesia to prevent patient 
movement interfering with the procedure. Finally, patients 
with a history of failed gastroenterologist-administered 
sedation will benefit from the skills of a trained anesthesia 
provider (Box 15-1).9
The majority of patients can tolerate endoscopic proce­
dures without general anesthesia by titrating the level of 
sedation to achieve a safe balance between patient comfort 
and optimal procedure conditions. Most endoscopic pro­
cedures are performed with the patient under moderate 
sedation.10 Table 15-1 lists the criteria for varying levels of 
sedation.11
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Patients must be evaluated for each procedure, with safety 
a top priority. Empty-stomach status must be confirmed 
with patients before proceeding with an elective proce­
dure such as a colonoscopy. Preoperatively the anesthe­
siologist should always perform an airway examination. 
This includes evaluation for characteristics of difficult 
mask ventilation (Box 15-2).12 Discuss with the patient 
all possible comorbidities associated with the sedation and 
anesthesia that will be used during the procedure. Ask 
the patient about previous experience with anesthetics, 
to identify patients who could be difficult to sedate or who 
could react poorly to sedation. Discuss what the patient 
expects from the procedure. Remember that patient 
comfort is an important factor in patient satisfaction for 
colonoscopies.7
Communication between the proceduralist and anesthe­
siologist is key to understanding how long the procedure 
will take and for ensuring that the patient will be able to 
tolerate sedation for the entirety of the colonoscopy. Older 
age in women, body mass index greater than 25 kg/m2, 
diverticular disease in women, and history of constipa­
tion in men are predictors of increased time to complete 
an outpatient colonoscopy.13 The anesthesia plan should 
Anesthesia for Colonoscopy
ESTHER D. GARAZI, CHRISTOPHER D. PRESS, and PEDRO P. TANAKA
15
Box 15-1  Guidelines for Anesthesiology 
Assistance During Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
Prolonged procedure requiring deep sedation or general 
­anesthesia
Anticipated intolerance to standard sedation regimens
Increased risk because of comorbidity (ASA 3 to 5)
Increased risk for airway obstruction (e.g., severe obstructive 
sleep apnea, stridor)
Dysmorphic facial features (e.g., Pierre-Robin, trisomy 21)
Oral abnormalities (e.g., macroglossia, small mouth opening, 
trismus)
Neck abnormalities (e.g., cervical stenosis, thick neck, trauma)
Uncooperative or pediatric patient
Modified from American Association for Study of Liver Diseases; American 
College of Gastroenterology; American Gastroenterological Association 
Institute; American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy; Society for 
Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates; Vargo JJ, DeLegge MH, Feld AD, 
et al. Multisociety sedation curriculum for gastrointestinal endoscopy. 
Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;76:e1-e25.
15  •  Anesthesia for Colonoscopy
133
be adjusted accordingly and always contain alternative 
options in the event the initial plan does not work.
MONITORING
The recent advancements in safety for patients undergoing 
anesthesia are due in part to improved monitoring. In the 
past several decades, key monitors have increased anesthe­
sia safety. The basic monitors now mandated by the Ameri­
can Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) to be used during all 
procedures requiring anesthesia, are electrocardiogram, 
blood pressure (noninvasive or invasive), end-tidal capnog­
raphy, oxygen saturation, and temperature.14
Additional monitors might be necessary on a patient-to-
patient basis. For example, electroencephalographic (EEG) 
monitoring can be used to identify the depth of anesthesia 
to avoid awareness during general anesthesia, although the 
efficacy of EEG monitors for this indication is still debated. 
Continuous physical examination is the typical means of 
monitoring the depth of anesthesia for patients undergoing 
a colonoscopy. Ideally, patients should be able to verbally 
communicate with the anesthesia provider if provoked.
POSITIONING
Patient position is a particularly important consideration 
because many endoscopic procedures require the patient to 
be in the lateral or prone position, making it difficult if not 
impossible to access the airway if airway management tech­
niques must be implemented. Therefore careful preoperative 
airway evaluation is paramount. If concern exists about air­
way management, the safest plan is to proceed with general 
anesthesia with endotracheal intubation, depending on the 
patient’s associated comorbidities.
Once the patient has been positioned for the procedure, 
all monitors should be checked to ensure they are work­
ing properly. In addition, functional intravenous access 
should be confirmed before the patient is handed over to the 
proceduralist.
ANESTHETIC CHOICES
Anesthesia providers have the ability to vary the amount of 
sedation necessary to ensure the patient gets through the pro­
cedure safely and comfortably. In devising the anesthetic plan, 
focus should be on the level of sedation necessary to achieve 
this goal (see Table 15-1).9 Monitored anesthesia care can be 
provided with the myriad medications listed in Table 15-2.
In the outpatient setting, which is where most diagnostic 
colonoscopies are performed, the goal of care is to provide 
a safe and effective anesthetic, with minimal side effects 
and quick recovery. Combinations of anesthetic agents are 
often the best means of achieving this goal. For example, 
medications such as propofol, when used in addition to 
a short-acting opiate such as fentanyl, provide the ideal 
level of amnesia, anxiolysis, and analgesia.7 Combining 
propofol with other sedative medications can help reduce 
the amount of any one administered medication, thereby 
preventing propofol’s negative cardiovascular effects.15 In 
the preoperative period, take note of a patient’s anesthetic 
history to identify patients at risk for bad reactions or side 
effects with these medications. One effect of note is the 
patient who becomes extremely nauseous with opiates. In 
patients with a history of difficult sedation, ketamine has 
shown to be an effective adjunct in moderate sedation.16 In 
the inpatient setting, in which colonoscopies are in contrast 
to the outpatient setting, anesthesiologists are not limited 
by the expectation that the patient will be going home that 
day, so medications that have a longer-lasting effect, such 
as ketamine, are more readily used.
It is essential to maintain the airway of patients identified 
preoperatively as presenting with a potentially problematic 
airway. For these patients, the safest way to do the proce­
dure might be general anesthesia with a protected airway. 
It is important to have this discussion preoperatively with 
the proceduralist and the patient.
Level of Sedation
The necessary levels of sedation to achieve safe and suc­
cessful endoscopic procedures, ranging from no sedation to 
Table 15-1  Continuum of Depth of Sedation
Signs
Minimal Sedation
Anxiolysis
Moderate Sedation/ 
Analgesia
Deep Sedation/ Analgesia
General Anesthesia
Responsiveness
Normal response to verbal 
stimulation
Purposeful response to verbal 
or tactile stimulation
Purposeful response after 
repeated or painful stimu­
lation
Unarousable even with 
painful stimulation
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be required
Intervention often required
Spontaneous ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Frequently inadequate
Cardiovascular function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
May be impaired
Modified from Gross J, Bailey PL, Connis R, et al. Practice guidelines for sedation and analgesia by nonanesthesiologists. Anesthesiology. 2002;6(4):1004-1017.33
Box 15-2  Predictors of Difficult Mask 
Ventilation and Difficult Intubation
Increased body mass index (>30 kg/m2)
History of snoring or sleep apnea
Presence of beard
Lack of teeth
Age greater than 55 years
Mallampati class III or IV
Limited mandibular protrusion
Male gender
Airway masses or tumors
Modified from El-Orbany M, Woehlck HJ. Difficult mask ventilation. Anesth 
Analg. 2009;109(6);1870-1880.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
134
general anesthesia, are determined by patient-related and 
procedure-related factors. Patient-related factors include 
comorbidities, airway concerns, medication tolerance, and 
amount of pain or anxiety. Important procedure-related 
factors include patient position, type of procedure, dura­
tion, and complexity of procedure.
Patient position is a particularly important consideration, 
because many endoscopic procedures require the patient to 
be in the lateral or prone position, in which access to the air­
way becomes difficult, if not impossible, if airway manage­
ment techniques must be implemented. Airway accessibility 
consideration increases during upper endoscopic proce­
dures when the endoscope is advanced through the oral 
cavity. When concern for airway management exists, the 
safest plan is to proceed with general anesthesia with endo­
tracheal intubation, often with a rapid sequence induction.
The majority of patients can tolerate endoscopic proce­
dures without general anesthesia by titrating the level of 
sedation to achieve a safe balance between patient comfort 
and optimal procedure conditions. Most endoscopic pro­
cedures are performed with the patient under moderate 
sedation. Table 15-1 lists the criteria for varying levels of 
sedation.17 In the United States; interest is growing on the 
part of the insurers to have clear indications for the use of 
an anesthesiologist.
Pharmacology: Common Sedative Medications
The choice of sedative medication depends on the provider 
and should be based on a combination of the procedure 
being performed and the individual patient. Traditional 
sedation for endoscopies typically entails a combination of 
opioids and benzodiazepines, usually midazolam and fen­
tanyl, respectively, administered under the supervision of 
the endoscopist. The diverse array of sedative medications 
can allow sedation to be tailored according to each individ­
ual patient’s needs based on the side effect profile of each 
medication (see Table 15-2).
Midazolam.  Benzodiazepines have historically been the 
sedative agents favored by gastroenterologists. Along with 
their sedative effects, benzodiazepines have the added ben­
efit of providing anxiolysis. Midazolam (Versed), in partic­
ular, is preferred because of its amnesic effects, fast onset, 
and short duration of action. When used alone, benzodi­
azepines have only modest hemodynamic effects.18 Initial 
dosing of 1 to 2 mg is standard for young, healthy adults 
and provides significant anxiolysis. Additional doses of 
1 mg every 2 to 5 minutes can then be administered as 
needed throughout the procedure to achieve adequate 
levels of sedation. When midazolam is given in conjunc­
tion with an opioid, such as fentanyl, synergism reduces 
the amount of midazolam needed for sedation. Patients 
older than 60 years of age or classified as having ASA 3 or 
greater status often require smaller doses of midazolam for 
the same effect. Because the liver metabolizes midazolam, 
dose adjustments are also indicated in patients with signifi­
cant liver disease.
The major disadvantage of midazolam is its respiratory 
depression, especially when given in combination with 
an opioid. The respiratory depressant effect can last up to 
2 hours.19 However, benzodiazepines can be reversed with 
flumazenil, which competitively antagonizes the central 
effects on gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors. In 
addition, paradoxical reactions to midazolam, including 
disinhibition and aggression, have been reported.20
Fentanyl.  Fentanyl is a short-acting synthetic opioid that 
is frequently given as an analgesic during endoscopic pro­
cedures. Its fast onset and short duration of action make 
it a better choice than other opioid analgesics, such as 
morphine or meperidine21. Fentanyl in combination with 
midazolam is considered part of the “traditional” sedation 
approach used by endoscopists without the supervision 
of an anesthesiologist. Initial doses of 50 to 100 mcg can 
be supplemented with boluses of 25 to 100 mcg, based on 
the individual patient. As with benzodiazepines, the dose 
should be reduced for elderly and critically ill patients and 
with hepatic impairment. Fentanyl is also safe to use in the 
pediatric population, with an initial dose of 0.5 mcg/kg, up 
to a maximum initial dose of 50 mcg.
Common side effects of fentanyl are similar to the side 
effects of all opioid narcotics and include bradycardia and 
respiratory depression. The respiratory depressant effects 
can be reversed with naloxone if needed.
Propofol.  Propofol has come into favor for use by endos­
copists as a replacement for traditional sedation because 
it increases patient comfort and decreases recovery 
times. It also improves the diagnostic quality of the pro­
cedure.22,23 Propofol can be administered as an infusion 
or as intermittent boluses to achieve the desired sedation 
levels. Continuous infusions allow for easy titration to the 
desired level of sedation with relatively fast recovery after 
the infusion is terminated.24 Propofol may have signifi­
cant advantages during more complex procedures, such 
as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP), in which deep sedation is needed.25 Infusion rates 
for moderate sedation are 25 to 75 mcg/kg/min, but may 
be considerably less in elderly or critically ill patients. Pro­
pofol infusions for sedation may also cause some degree of 
amnesia, which can be beneficial to patient satisfaction.26 
Finally, the antiemetic properties of propofol may be espe­
cially useful when providing sedation for upper endo­
scopic procedures. In the pediatric population, propofol is 
an effective regimen alone or in combination with other 
sedative agents.27
Table 15-2  Favorable Sedative Effect Profile of Common Sedative Agents
Effect
Midazolam
Fentanyl
Propofol
Ketamine
Dexmedetomidine
Amnesia
+
+ >30mcg/kg/m
+ dissociative
Analgesia
+
+
+
Anxiolysis
+
+/−
+
15  •  Anesthesia for Colonoscopy
135
The common side effects of propofol include hypoven­
tilation, decreased muscle tone, cardiac depression, and 
hypotension. Therefore caution must be used when admin­
istering propofol as a sole means of sedation in patients 
who have significant cardiopulmonary disease or airway 
abnormalities.
Dexmedetomidine.  Dexmedetomidine has more recently 
gained favor among anesthesiologists as an agent for induc­
ing mild to moderate levels of sedation. As a nonselective 
alpha-2 receptor agonist, dexmedetomidine provides seda­
tion, anxiolysis, and analgesia.28 Although its high cost can 
make it prohibitively expensive, it still may be a favorable 
sedative in patients with hypoventilation concerns because 
it has minimal effect on respiratory drive. It is not very effec­
tive as a sole agent for colonoscopy, but can be very effective 
when supplemented with fentanyl or other agents 29 Dex­
medetomidine is given as an optional initial bolus of 0.5 to 
1 mg/kg over 10 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.2 to 
0.7 mcg/kg/hr.
The main concern with dexmedetomidine is that its sym­
patholytic effects can trigger significant hypotension and 
bradycardia. However, for endoscopic procedures, it can 
be used in conjunction with ketamine to blunt some of the 
hemodynamic consequences of sympatholysis.
Ketamine.  Ketamine is unique in that is has both seda­
tive and analgesic properties without impairing respiratory 
drive or cardiovascular tone. It is a useful sedation adjunct 
for complex procedures, such as ERCP or endoscopic ultra­
sound (EUS), or for difficult-to-sedate patients undergoing 
colonoscopy.16 Ketamine is frequently administered in 
combination with low-dose midazolam to prevent some of 
the hallucinogenic effects associated with ketamine admin­
istration. Ketamine boluses are also useful adjuncts to pro­
pofol or dexmedetomidine infusions because its stimulant 
effect on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems can 
counteract the cardiac and respiratory depressant effects 
of these agents. Bolus dosing of 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg every 2 
to 5 minutes, titrating to the desired effect, is a reasonable 
dose in a healthy adult, with a maximum dose of 1 mg/kg. 
Intramuscular or intravenous ketamine also can be useful 
in the pediatric population for sedation during endoscopic 
procedures.30,31
Complications
Preoperatively, it is important to identify and discuss 
with patients the complications associated with sedation. 
Patients should be aware that aspiration is a possible com­
plication of sedation and monitored anesthesia care. In par­
ticular, the increased use of propofol for colonoscopies has 
raised the concern of the increased incidence of aspiration. 
The rate of aspiration events during sedation for colonos­
copy is approximately 0.10% to 0.14%. 32
Anesthesia providers should be ready to treat any of 
the complications associated with the procedure, such as 
a vagal response with insufflation, colonic laceration, and 
bleeding. Anesthesia providers usually can overcome these 
complications by having atropine or glycopyrrolate readily 
available in advance and ensuring adequate access.
Conclusion
Colonoscopies are better tolerated when analgesia and seda­
tion are provided. Although proceduralists provide sedation 
during many colonoscopies, anesthesiologists are often con­
sulted for care in complex cases and for critically ill patients 
or patients who have failed traditional sedation. Propofol 
has now become a popular alternative to the traditional 
benzodiazepine and opioid regimens of the past; however, 
a combination of multiple sedative agents tailored to indi­
vidual patient needs is always warranted. The most complex 
endoscopic procedures, especially upper endoscopies, may 
require general anesthesia for the safety of the patient.
References
	 1.	 Dumonceau J, Riphaus A, Aparicio, et al. European Society of Gas­
trointestinal Endoscopy; European Society of Gastroenterology and 
Endoscopy Nurses and Associates. European Society of Anaesthesiol­
ogy guideline: non-anaesthesiologist administration of propofol for GI 
endoscopy. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2010;27(11):960–974.
	 2.	 McQuaid K, Laine L. A systematic review and meta-analysis of ran­
domized, controlled trials of moderate sedation for routine endoscopic 
procedures. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008;67(6):910–923.
	 3.	 Liu H, Waxman D, Main R, Mattke S. Utilization of anesthesia ser­
vices during outpatient endoscopies and colonoscopies and associated 
spending in 2003-2009. JAMA. 2012;307(11):1178–1184.
	 4.	 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for colorectal cancer: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann 
Intern Med. 2008;149(9):627–637.
	 5.	 Seeff LC, Richards TB, Shapiro JA, et al. How many endoscopies are 
performed for colorectal cancer screening? Results from CDC’s sur­
vey of endoscopic capacity. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(6):1670–
1677.
	 6.	 Dumonceau JM, Riphaus A, Aparicio JR, et al. European Society of 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy; European Society of Gastroenterology 
and Endoscopy Nurses and Associates. European Society of Anaesthe­
siology guideline: non-anesthesiologist administration of propofol for 
GI endoscopy. Endoscopy. 2010;42:960–974.
	 7.	 McQuaid KR, Laine LA. Systematic review and meta-analysis of ran­
domized, controlled trials of moderate sedation for routine endoscopic 
procedures. Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. 2008;67:910–923.
	 8.	 Liu H, Waxman DA, Main R, Mattke S. Utilization of anesthesia ser­
vices during outpatient endoscopies and colonoscopies and associated 
spending in 2003–2009. JAMA. 2012;307:1178–1184.
	 9.	 American Association for Study of Liver Diseases, American College 
of Gastroenterology, American Gastroenterological Association Insti­
tute, American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, Society for 
Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates, Vargo JJ, DeLegge MH, Feld 
AD, et al. Multisociety sedation curriculum for gastrointestinal endos­
copy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;76:e1–e25.
	10.	 Heuss LT, Schnieper P, Drewe J, et  al. Risk stratification and safe 
administration of propofol by registered nurses supervised by the gas­
troenterologist: a prospective observational study of more than 2000 
cases. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003;57(6):664–671.
	11.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Sedation 
and Analgesia by Non-Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for 
sedation and analgesia by non-anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology. 
2002;96(4):1004–1017.
	12.	 El-Orbany M, Woehlck HJ. Difficult mask ventilation. Anesth Analg. 
2009;109(6):1870–1880.
	13.	 Anderson JC, Messina CR, Cohn W, et al. Factors predictive of difficult 
colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54(5):558–562.
	14.	 Eichhorn JH. Prevention of intraoperative anesthesia accidents and 
related severe injury through safety monitoring. Anesthesiology. 
1989;70(4):572–577.
	15.	 Wang D, Wang S, Chen J, et al. Propofol combined with traditional sed­
ative agents versus propofol-alone sedation for gastrointestinal endos­
copy: a meta-analysis. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2013;48(1):101–110.
	16.	 Varadarajulu S, Eloubeidi MA, Tamhane A, Wilcox CM. Prospec­
tive randomized trial evaluating ketamine for advanced endoscopic 
procedures in difficult to sedate patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2007;25(8):987–997.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
136
	17.	 Heuss LT, Schnieper P, Drewe J, Pflimlin E, Beglinger C. Risk stratification 
and safe administration of propofol by registered nurses supervised by 
the gastroenterologist: a prospective observational study of more than 
2000 cases. Gastroint Endosc. 2003;57:664–671.
	18.	 Wong RC. The menu of endoscopic sedation: all-you-can-eat, combi­
nation set, á la carte, alternative cuisine, or go hungry. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2001;54(1):122–126.
	19.	 Cole SG, Brozinsky S, Isenberg JI. Midazolam, a new more potent 
benzodiazepine, compared with diazepam: a randomized, dou­
ble-blind study of preendoscopic sedatives. Gastrointest Endosc. 
1983;29(3):219–222.
	20.	 Robin C, Trieger N. Paradoxical reactions to benzodiazepines in 
intravenous sedation: a report of 2 cases and review of the literature. 
Anesth Prog. 2002;49(4):128–132.
	21.	 Triantafillidis JK, Merikas E, Nikolakis D, Papalois AE. Sedation in gas­
trointestinal endoscopy: current issues. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 
Jan 28;19(4):463–481.
	22.	 Qadeer MA, Vargo JJ, Khandwala F, et al. Propofol versus traditional 
sedative agents for gastrointestinal endoscopy: a meta-analysis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005;3(11):1049–1056.
	23.	 Singh H, Poluha W, Cheung M, et al. Propofol for sedation during 
colonoscopy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;(4). CD006268.
	24.	 Wilson E, Mackenzie N, Grant IS. A comparison of propofol and mid­
azolam by infusion to provide sedation in patients who receive spinal 
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia. 1988;43(Suppl):91–94.
	25.	 Jung M, Hofmann C, Kiesslich R, Brackertz A. Improved sedation in 
diagnostic and therapeutic ERCP: propofol is an alternative to mid­
azolam. Endoscopy. 2000;32(3):233–238.
	26.	 Grounds RM, Lalor JM, Lumley J, Royston D, Morgan M. Propofol infu­
sion for sedation in the intensive care unit: preliminary report. Br Med J 
(Clin Res Ed). 1987;294:397–400.
	27.	 Van Beek EJ, Leroy PL. Safe and effective procedural sedation for 
gastrointestinal endoscopy in children. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2012;54(2):171–185.
	28.	 Kamibayashi T, Maze M. Clinical uses of alpha2-adrenergic agonists. 
Anesthesiology. 2005;93:1345–1349.
	29.	 Jalowiecki P, Rudner R, Gonciarz M, et al. Sole use of dexmedetomi­
dine has limited utility for conscious sedation during outpatient colo­
noscopy. Anesthesiology. 2005;103(2):269–273.
	30.	 Law AK, Ng DK, Chan K-K. Use of intramuscular ketamine for endos­
copy sedation in children. Pediatr Int. 2003;45(2):180–185.
	31.	 Green SM, Klooster M, Harris T, Lynch EL, Rothrock SG. Ketamine 
sedation for pediatric gastroenterology procedures. J Pediatr Gastroen­
terol Nutr. 2001;32(1):26–33.
	32.	 Cooper GS, Kou TD, Rex DK. Complications following colonoscopy 
with anesthesia assistance: a population-based analysis. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2013;173(7):551–556.
	33.	 Gross J, Bailey PL, Connis R, et al. Practice guidelines for sedation 
and analgesia by nonanesthesiologists. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(4):
1004–1017.
137
An increasing number of pulmonary disorders are amenable 
to flexible or rigid bronchoscopic diagnostic or therapeutic 
intervention. New techniques such as endobronchial ultra­
sound, electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy, and 
treatment of central airway obstruction, including tumor 
debulking and placement of airway stents, require special­
ized equipment and the physical space to store and use it. The 
increase in variety and volume of procedures led to the devel­
opment of dedicated procedural space in many hospitals—
interventional pulmonology or bronchoscopy suites.
Many bronchoscopic procedures can be performed with 
minimal sedation. Thus the continual presence of a trained 
anesthesia provider is not always necessary. However, 
because of procedural or patient complexity, anesthesia 
providers are being increasingly consulted to provide care 
in these settings. For several reasons, the pulmonology suite 
can be an intimidating location for the anesthesiologist or 
nurse anesthetist. Familiarity with the physical space and 
ancillary staff may be limited as a result of the intermittent 
request for anesthesia services. Patients often have multiple 
baseline comorbidities with tenuous respiratory or cardiac 
status. Procedures are typically short, with rapid patient 
turnover and limited time for preprocedural evaluation. 
The airway must be shared with the bronchoscopist, and 
the patient’s head is often turned away from the anesthesi­
ologist. Anesthesia providers who do not frequently perform 
in these cases may be somewhat unfamiliar with the spe­
cialized ventilatory and intravenous anesthetic techniques 
used for these procedures. Finally, the procedure suite may 
be located distant from the main operating rooms, limiting 
the availability of assistance in an emergency.
The goal of this chapter is to provide an overview of the 
procedures and accompanying airway and ventilation 
choices, anesthetic management issues, and complications 
unique to the adult interventional bronchoscopy suite.
Interventional Bronchoscopic 
Techniques
Modern interventional bronchoscopy encompasses a vari­
ety of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. An in-depth 
discussion of all techniques exceeds the scope of this chap­
ter; therefore we have chosen to briefly examine a few 
important procedures that are either becoming widespread 
or show great potential for transforming interventional 
bronchoscopic practice over the next decade. Common 
anesthetic techniques and airway choices for each proce­
dure are detailed in Table 16-1.
ENDOBRONCHIAL ULTRASOUND WITH 
TRANSBRONCHIAL NEEDLE ASPIRATION
Endobronchial ultrasound with transbronchial needle aspi­
ration (EBUS-TBNA) is a less invasive procedure than tradi­
tional mediastinoscopy; both are intended to yield tissue for 
diagnostic purposes. For EBUS, an ultrasound transducer 
integrated into a dedicated bronchoscope is placed either 
directly in contact with the tracheal or bronchial wall or 
indirectly via a saline-inflated balloon, displaying real-time 
ultrasound images. Fine needle aspiration of lymph nodes 
can then be performed under ultrasound visualization. Pro­
cedural indications include staging of non–small cell lung 
cancer, diagnosis of suspected lung cancer without endo­
bronchial lesions, and evaluation of unexplained mediasti­
nal lymphadenopathy. EBUS-TBNA may be diagnostically 
superior to computed tomography (CT) and positron emis­
sion tomography (PET)1,2 and has overall accuracy similar 
to that of mediastinoscopy but with less invasiveness and 
the ability to sample hilar lymph nodes.3 As the required 
technology is maturing and becoming more widely avail­
able, EBUS-TBNA is quickly becoming the standard of care.
EBUS with or without biopsies is usually only minimally 
stimulating, and most procedures can be completed under 
conscious sedation; however, general anesthesia may be 
requested in several instances. First, sampling adequacy is 
improved with sampling a higher number of lymph node 
stations.4 When extensive staging is performed, particu­
larly when lymph nodes are less than 1 cm in their largest 
dimension, procedures can become quite prolonged. Patient 
intolerance may necessitate general anesthesia. Further, 
some pulmonologists prefer general anesthesia when a 
large number of stations are sampled, believing it improves 
diagnostic yield. Finally, the saline-filled balloon can occa­
sionally completely obstruct the airway; cases have been 
reported in which coughing against the obstruction led to 
negative-pressure pulmonary edema,5 a problem obviated 
by general anesthesia with muscle relaxation.
ELECTROMAGNETIC NAVIGATIONAL 
BRONCHOSCOPY
Electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy (ENB) was 
developed as a guidance system to assist the bronchoscopist 
Anesthesia in the 
Bronchoscopy Suite
MARK A. LEIBEL, W. KIRKE ROGERS, and RICHARD E. GALGON
16
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
138
in performing a biopsy of difficult-to-access peripheral, 
pulmonary nodules. The technology combines multidirec­
tional CT (MDCT) imaging, magnetic field localization, and 
a steerable probe with a magnetized tip. During the proce­
dure, the bronchoscope is guided into the area of interest 
and the tip location is displayed on the MDCT image. Diag­
nostic yield of biopsies for small peripheral lung nodules is 
much improved over previous techniques.6,7 Other poten­
tial uses include placement of fiducial markers for stereotac­
tic radiotherapy and marking of nodules for surgical wedge 
resection. Sedation and anesthetic needs are similar to 
those of EBUS and dictated by patient comorbidities, needs 
of the bronchoscopist, and anticipated procedure duration.
TREATMENT OF CENTRAL AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
In modern practice, relief of obstruction of the central airways 
(trachea, mainstem bronchi, and bronchus intermedius) 
remains the main indication for therapeutic bronchoscopy. 
Obstruction can result from intraluminal malignancy, exter­
nal compression by mediastinal mass, massive hemoptysis 
with clot, or benign causes such as foreign body, postintuba­
tion tracheal stenosis, or tracheobronchomalacia. A variety 
of therapeutic approaches exist, with selection depending on 
cause, urgency, and availability. Laser ablation, electrocau­
tery, argon plasma coagulation (APC), mechanical debride­
ment, and airway stents can provide immediate relief of 
obstruction. In contrast, cryotherapy, brachytherapy, and 
photodynamic therapy produce delayed effects. If interven­
tion is urgent because of severe or progressive obstruction, 
effort should be made to stabilize the patient to enable com­
pletion of diagnostic studies (such as CT imaging) to aid in 
developing an optimal treatment strategy. In this situation, 
heliox, given its lower density than air or 100% oxygen, can 
improve gas flow across highly narrowed areas of the airway 
and reduce turbulent flow conditions. If heliox is ineffective 
or not available, consideration must be given for intubation 
distal to the obstruction, typically accomplished with fiber­
optic bronchoscopy. Alternatively, rigid bronchoscopy in 
expert hands can be lifesaving.
The 
neodymium-doped 
yttrium 
aluminum 
garnet 
(Nd:YAG) laser and other “hot” therapies, such as electro­
cautery and APC, are designed to vaporize tissue and achieve 
superior coagulation and thus are often chosen to treat 
obstructing central airway lesions. Unfortunately, these 
thermal techniques also carry an increased risk for airway 
and procedure room fires. Microdebriders, which mechani­
cally debulk airway tumors, were developed as “cold” thera­
pies that still can rapidly open an airway. Although inferior 
to thermal techniques in controlling bleeding, microdebrid­
ers also avoid some of their potential complications.
APC is based on gas flow, and many lasers have a gas-cooled 
fiber that is used to apply the energy. Case reports have docu­
mented intravascular gas during use of the Nd:YAG laser and 
even cardiac arrest secondary to gas embolism during bron­
choscopic APC.8,9 In animal studies, gas emboli were more 
frequent with higher laser coolant flow and longer laser pulse 
generation,10 a finding the authors speculatively ascribed to 
positive-pressure ventilation forcing air through small bron­
chovascular defects. Therefore current procedural recom­
mendations include using the lowest possible setting for laser 
coolant flow, using noncontact mode, and applying thermal 
ablation only during apnea or spontaneous breathing.
AIRWAY STENTS
Indications for airway stenting include extrinsic airway 
compression, mixed extrinsic and endoluminal lesions, 
recurrence of airway compromise after treatment of intra­
luminal lesions, inoperable nonmalignant disease, and 
treatment of airway fistulas.11,12 Stents can be made of sili­
cone, expandable metal, or a combination of both, such as 
a covered metal stent. Metal stents resist migration because 
they become embedded in airway tissue and tend to gener­
ate a proliferative granulation response. Unfortunately, this 
also means that metal stents can be difficult and potentially 
dangerous to remove if in place for more than a few weeks. 
Expandable metal stents can be placed via flexible or rigid 
bronchoscope. Fluoroscopy is often used to guide place­
ment. Because silicone stents do not collapse, a rigid bron­
choscope must be used for placement.
Table 16-1  Anesthesia for Interventional Bronchoscopic 
Techniques
Bronchoscopic 
Technique
Recommended Anes­
thetic Technique
Recommended 
Airway
DIAGNOSTIC
Endobronchial 
ultrasound with 
transbronchial 
needle aspiration 
(EBUS-TBNA)
Conscious seda­
tion versus less 
commonly general 
anesthesia
None versus SGA
Electromagnetic navi­
gational bronchos­
copy (ENB)
Conscious seda­
tion versus less 
commonly general 
anesthesia
None versus SGA
THERAPEUTIC
Treatment of central 
airway obstruction
TIVA with rigid bron­
choscopy versus 
awake fiberoptic 
intubation; reduced 
Fio2; consider 
Heliox and mainte­
nance of sponta­
neous ventilation 
even with rigid 
bronchoscopy
ETT versus rigid 
bronchoscopy
Airway stents
General anesthesia, 
often TIVA with 
rigid bronchoscopy
ETT versus rigid 
bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopic bal­
loon dilation
TIVA with paralysis; jet 
ventilation versus 
bag-mask ventila­
tion between bal­
loon inflations
Rigid bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopic lung 
volume reduction 
(BLVR)
Conscious sedation 
versus general 
anesthesia
None versus SGA
Radiofrequency 
ablation
Conscious sedation 
versus general 
anesthesia if lung 
isolation is neces­
sary; reduced Fio2
None versus 
double-lumen 
endotracheal tube 
if lung isolation is 
necessary
Bronchial thermo­
plasty
Conscious sedation
None versus SGA
ETT, Endotracheal tube; SGA, supraglottic airway; TIVA, total intravenous 
anesthesia.
16  •  Anesthesia in the Bronchoscopy Suite
139
Complications are common with all stent types. Gran­
ulation tissue formed after metal stent placement may 
occasionally cause airway obstruction and necessitate 
reintervention, often by Nd:YAG laser ablation. Removal 
of metal stents is best accomplished with a rigid broncho­
scope and jet ventilation. Silicone stents are much easier to 
remove but are prone to migration, mucous obstruction, 
and infection.
BRONCHOSCOPIC BALLOON DILATATION
Bronchoscopic balloon dilatation is commonly used to treat 
nontraumatic subglottic stenosis, often in conjunction with 
injection of corticosteroids or the anti-neoplastic drug mito­
mycin-C in an attempt to reduce the rate of restenosis. Total 
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) with paralysis is often used in 
combination with intermittent bag-mask ventilation or jet 
ventilation before and after balloon dilatation, which typically 
lasts 1 to 3 minutes and can be performed repeatedly during 
a single procedure. During balloon dilatation, it is impor­
tant to maintain adequate muscle relaxation and monitor 
for diaphragmatic firing to prevent respiratory effort against 
the occluded airway and the subsequent development of 
negative-pressure pulmonary edema. Further, improvement 
in stenosis is often delayed, so the anesthesia provider must 
be particularly vigilant in monitoring for airway obstruction 
and adequate ventilation both immediately after the proce­
dure and in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU).
RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a minimally invasive treat­
ment modality that has previously been used to treat patients 
with hepatic, renal, and breast tumors. After the RFA elec­
trode is inserted into the target lesion, alternating radiofre­
quency currents are generated, leading to frictional heating 
and ultimately coagulative necrosis and cell death. The pro­
cedure tends to be well tolerated and is often done under 
conscious sedation. However, achieving effective targeting 
of pulmonary neoplastic lesions and protecting nontargeted 
tissues can be challenging. Deflating the target lung can be 
helpful but may move the lesion too close to central struc­
tures. A technique to obtain improved tumor positioning 
has been described using lung isolation with a double-lumen 
endotracheal tube (DLT) with static inflation of the target 
lung by either clamping the DLT lumen supplying the target 
lung or applying CPAP to maintain target lung inflation.13 
Although not reported with RFA of pulmonary lesions, the 
use of high oxygen concentrations may pose a fire risk.
BRONCHIAL THERMOPLASTY
In poorly controlled chronic asthma, airway smooth muscle 
hypertrophy is a component of airway remodeling, which 
contributes to ongoing symptoms. Bronchial thermoplasty, 
which uses heat generated by radiofrequency energy to 
destroy bronchial smooth muscle, has been shown in at 
least two trials to (1) improve prebronchodilator forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), (2) reduce severe 
exacerbations, (3) decrease rescue medication use, and 
(4) improve reported quality of life for patients with severe 
asthma.14,15 Current guidelines, however, limit bronchial 
thermoplasty as a treatment option to selected patients with 
severe persistent asthma already on maximal medical ther­
apy.16 Bronchial thermoplasty is generally well tolerated 
and can usually be accomplished under conscious sedation. 
However, if the anesthesiologist is involved, he or she must 
be aware of the increased risk for respiratory complications 
in the first 24 hours after the procedure, primarily acute 
bronchospasm or increased mucous plugging, occasionally 
resulting in lobar collapse.
BRONCHOSCOPIC LUNG VOLUME REDUCTION
The National Emphysema Treatment Trial was published 
in 2003, demonstrating that in a carefully selected patient 
population with severe heterogeneous emphysema, lung 
volume reduction surgery (LVRS) reduced mortality, 
improved exercise tolerance, and improved quality of life.17 
However, LVRS was associated with considerable morbidity 
and mortality, causing investigators to speculate that less 
invasive bronchoscopic interventions might achieve simi­
lar benefits while minimizing perioperative risk. Multiple 
techniques are currently under study, including intrabron­
chial valves, lung volume reduction coils, lung sealant, and 
bronchoscopic thermal vapor ablation. The goal for any of 
these procedures is to achieve segmental or lobar collapse to 
effectively reduce lung volume, thus reducing air trapping 
and improving elastic recoil and expiratory flows. Although 
results for many of these modalities are somewhat promis­
ing, none are ready for widespread adoption, and optimal 
anesthetic techniques have not yet been described.
Preoperative Evaluation
HISTORY AND REVIEW OF SYSTEMS
The majority of patients presenting for interventional 
bronchoscopic procedures are classified as American 
Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 3 or higher.18 
Tobacco abuse is a common risk factor for the majority 
of upper airway and pulmonary pathological conditions 
necessitating bronchoscopic intervention. Unsurprisingly, 
smoking-related diseases such as obstructive or less com­
monly restrictive pulmonary disease, coronary artery dis­
ease, congestive heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, 
cerebral ischemic disease, hypertension, malnutrition, and 
malignancies outside the lungs and airway are extremely 
common in this population. Heavy alcohol use, type 2 dia­
betes mellitus, and obesity are also common. Sequelae of 
the aforementioned pathological conditions that can affect 
anesthetic management include chronic kidney disease, 
obstructive sleep apnea, gastroparesis and gastroesopha­
geal reflux disease, and limited neck mobility. The review 
of systems should further focus on the patient’s functional 
status, symptom control of baseline pulmonary or car­
diac disease and any environmental triggers, presence of 
orthopnea, specific triggers for cough, and the severity of 
reflux disease.
Rigid bronchoscopy requires neck hyperextension, so 
patients presenting for this procedure should be assessed for 
risk factors for cervical spine subluxation such as trisomy 
21 (Down syndrome) cervical ankylosis, or rheumatoid or 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
140
other inflammatory arthritis with cervical involvement.19 
Inquiring about previous chemotherapy is important, par­
ticularly the use of bleomycin and its associated risks for 
pulmonary fibrosis and acute oxygen toxicity, as well as 
doxorubicin and its potential for causing cardiomyopathy. 
Patients with previous lung transplantation or cystic fibro­
sis require increased sedative dosing during flexible bron­
choscopy.20 Interestingly, advanced age alone does not 
confer an increased risk for complications from either flex­
ible or rigid bronchoscopy.21,22
PREPROCEDURE STUDIES
Patients with suspected chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) should undergo spirometry and also should 
have a baseline arterial blood gas sample drawn if COPD 
is determined to be severe (FEV1 <40% predicted and/or 
room air oxygen saturation [Sao2] <93%).23 If biopsies are 
to be performed, coagulation tests, including international 
normalized ratio, partial thromboplastin time, and platelet 
count, may be considered.24 Other laboratory studies such 
as a complete blood count or metabolic panel should not 
be routinely ordered unless prompted by the history and 
review of systems. Radiographic images must be reviewed, 
particularly when central airway obstruction is present or 
suspected, allowing the anesthesiologist to assess the poten­
tial for clinical airway compromise. Large bullae typical of 
severe emphysema suggest an increased risk for pneumo­
thorax or other barotrauma with jet ventilation or even 
conventional positive-pressure ventilation.
Management of Anesthesia: 
Pharmacology
PREMEDICATION
Anticholinergics
In a consensus statement on the use of sedation and topi­
cal anesthesia during flexible bronchoscopy, the Ameri­
can College of Chest Physicians advised against the routine 
use of anticholinergic medication as a bronchodilator or 
antisialagogue.25 However, glycopyrrolate 0.005 mg/kg 
(approximately 0.2 to 0.4 mg for an average-size adult) is 
not unreasonable in selected cases, such as when aerosolized 
local anesthetic is to be used, and is generally better tolerated 
and more effective than atropine in decreasing secretions.25
Sedatives
Oral clonidine, at a dose of 150 mcg or up to 3 mcg/kg, has 
been suggested as a premedicant because it has some sedative 
effect and can blunt the hemodynamic response to bronchos­
copy or laryngoscopy,26 though additional sedative medicines 
are likely to be needed during awake fiberoptic bronchos­
copy.27 Other preprocedure sedatives and anxiolytics such 
as midazolam (0.25 to 2 mg intravenously) or diazepam (2.5 
to 10 mg intravenously) should be minimized because of the 
risk for respiratory depression in an undermonitored patient. 
Oversedation with benzodiazepines also can lead to disinhi­
bition, complicating a bronchoscopic procedure that could 
otherwise be performed in a lightly sedated and cooperative 
patient. Supplemental oxygen should be routinely provided 
before administering any sedatives, and anxiolytics should be 
used in only extremely anxious patients.
Steroids
Multiple studies have suggested that a 24-hour course of 
dexamethasone or other corticosteroid can reduce laryn­
geal edema and decrease the risk for postextubation stridor 
or obstruction in a critical care setting,28 but there is no solid 
evidence that the routine use of corticosteroids has any ben­
efit in most bronchoscopic procedures. Nonetheless, many 
practitioners administer dexamethasone 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg 
(up to 10 mg) intravenously to prevent airway swelling in 
cases of longer duration or when extensive inflammation 
of vocal cords or airway mucosa is expected. This may not 
be an unreasonable approach, because at least two small 
studies have suggested that a prophylactic dose of dexa­
methasone 0.2 mg/kg can at least decrease the incidence of 
postoperative sore throat and hoarseness in patients intu­
bated for relatively short procedures.29,30 Although high-
dose steroids have many potential adverse effects, the risk 
for significant complications after a single prophylactic dose 
of dexamethasone is likely negligible.31
Antiemetics
Published guidelines on postoperative nausea and vomiting 
(PONV) prophylaxis do not recommend routine antiemetic 
administration.32 However, the risk for aspiration during 
and after bronchoscopic interventions may be higher than 
that for other procedures. Given that many of the patients 
undergoing such procedures have limited pulmonary 
reserve, aggressive PONV prophylaxis may be warranted. 
Because multiple drug classes have similar efficacy, medica­
tion selection is based on side effect profile, patient factors, 
physician preference, availability, and cost. Dexametha­
sone given preprocedurally is an effective antiemetic and is 
often given for other reasons, as discussed earlier.
Antacids and Gastrokinetics
Reducing gastric acidity may decrease the risk for chemi­
cal pneumonitis in patients who aspirate, although no evi­
dence supports the routine use of acid-reducing drugs in 
patients undergoing bronchoscopic procedures. Although 
protein pump inhibitors are the most potent class, they 
may take more than 24 hours for full effect and thus have 
a limited role as preoperative medications.33 In contrast, 
histamine-2 (H2) antagonists may produce a clinically sig­
nificant increase in gastric pH and reduction in gastric vol­
ume 30 to 60 minutes after an intravenous dose or 2 to 3 
hours after an oral dose. Metoclopramide is often used as 
a prokinetic in patients with gastroparesis. Less effective in 
increasing gastric pH than H2 blockers, metoclopramide 
also has more potential side effects and drug and disease 
interactions, making it a less attractive option. In patients 
with high aspiration risk presenting without sufficient time 
for other medications to take effect, a nonparticulate ant­
acid such as 0.3 M sodium citrate can be administered with 
a resultant immediate increase in gastric pH.
Bronchodilators
Many authorities recommend that patients with asthma 
or COPD with a reversible component routinely receive a 
16  •  Anesthesia in the Bronchoscopy Suite
141
short-acting bronchodilator preprocedurally,34 although 
such premedication may not produce any benefit in COPD.35 
Atropine has been long suggested to have protective bron­
chodilatory properties when given before bronchoscopic 
procedures.36 However, more recent studies failed to show 
meaningful improvement in lung function or sustained 
benefit postprocedurally.25
LOCAL ANESTHETICS AND AIRWAY REFLEX 
SUPPRESSION
Successful bronchoscopy in a patient not receiving general 
anesthesia requires adequate suppression of airway reflexes 
to facilitate the procedure. The degree and location of neces­
sary reflex suppression depend on the planned airway man­
agement and route of bronchoscopy. Perineural injections, 
topicalization with local anesthetics, or a combination of 
these techniques may be used. In either case, lidocaine is the 
preferred local anesthetic because of its rapid onset, appro­
priately short duration of action, and relative safety.25 The 
total cumulative dose of lidocaine used through all proce­
dures described in the following section should absolutely not 
exceed 8.2 mg/kg 37; most practitioners are more conserva­
tive and limit maximum lidocaine administration to 5 mg/kg.
Nasal Anesthesia
Adequate nasal anesthesia usually can be achieved using a 
combination of a vasoconstricting nasal spray, such as oxy­
metazoline or phenylephrine, followed by application of vis­
cous lidocaine jelly. This process usually provides adequate 
sensory blockade and lubrication to allow passage of a nasal 
trumpet, bronchoscope, or endotracheal tube (ETT). Alter­
natively, the pterygopalatine ganglion (providing sensory 
input to the anterior third of the nasal septum and posterior 
nasal cavity) can be blocked by soaking a cotton ball or cot­
ton-tipped applicator in 2% to 4% lidocaine with epineph­
rine (1:200,000) or phenylephrine (1:20,000), passing it 
slowly to the posterior wall of the nasopharynx, and leaving 
it in place for 5 to 10 minutes.38
Anesthesia of the Posterior Oropharynx and 
Upper Airway
For an awake patient to tolerate either nasotracheal or 
orotracheal bronchoscopy or intubation, sequential block­
ade of the superior laryngeal nerve and recurrent laryngeal 
nerve is required, via either perineural injections or less inva­
sive mucosal saturation. Direct regional blockade of the supe­
rior laryngeal nerve is performed bilaterally at the level of the 
thyrohyoid membrane, just inferior to the cornu of the hyoid 
bone. A small-bore needle is directed anteroinferomedially 
until the greater cornu is contacted; the needle is then with­
drawn slightly, and after negative aspiration is confirmed, 
2 mL of 2% to 4% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200,000 is 
injected. The block is repeated in the same fashion on the 
contralateral side.38 Recurrent laryngeal nerve blockade 
is necessary to suppress coughing when the bronchoscope 
is passed through the vocal cords and into the trachea and 
can be readily achieved by translaryngeal block. A 20- or 
22-gauge needle on a syringe under constant negative pres­
sure is advanced through the cricothyroid membrane until 
air is aspirated, and then 4 mL of 2% to 4% lidocaine with 
epinephrine is injected. Patients invariably cough with the 
delivery of the local anesthetic solution, which helps disperse 
the local anesthetic but increases the risk for puncturing 
the back wall of the trachea with the needle.38 To minimize 
this risk, some practitioners prefer to use a 20- or 22-gauge 
peripheral intravenous catheter-over-needle to access the 
trachea. After aspiration of air, the needle is removed, air 
aspiration is repeated to confirm catheter location in the 
airway, and the local anesthetic solution is delivered. Ultra­
sound guidance has recently been used to facilitate this 
procedure.39 Remember that the induction of coughing 
potentially could be life-threatening in patients with severe 
central airway obstruction,40 and another approach to air­
way management may be required.
Although direct regional blockade of the superior and 
recurrent laryngeal nerves is possible, adequate anesthe­
sia usually can be achieved less invasively with topical 
local anesthetic application and mucosal saturation. After 
administration of a drying agent such as glycopyrrolate 
to reduce oropharyngeal secretions and improve local 
anesthetic absorption, 5 mL of 4% lidocaine or another 
local anesthetic can be aerosolized via a standard nebu­
lizer attached to a face mask or mouthpiece and is well 
tolerated in nearly all patients. With enough time, aero­
solized local anesthetic usually provides adequate initial 
anesthesia of the oropharynx and upper airway. Denser 
anesthesia of more distal structures can then be achieved 
through a combination of gargled, swallowed, or sprayed 
liquid or viscous local anesthetic. Benzocaine spray can 
be used, but excessive administration can cause met­
hemoglobinemia.41 Finally, the working channel of a 
flexible bronchoscope can be used to sequentially inject 
1 to 2 mL of 2% to 4% lidocaine over the epiglottis, just above 
the vocal cords, just below the cords, and at the carina. Sys­
temic lidocaine levels are generally negligible even when 
administered to mucosa using a combination of methods.42
MODERATE SEDATION
Standard flexible bronchoscopy in an otherwise healthy 
patient usually requires little more than moderate conscious 
sedation with adequate airway reflex suppression via any of 
the previously described techniques. Intravenous fentanyl 
2 to 2.5 mcg/kg titrated over the duration of the procedure in 
12.5- to 50-mcg aliquots and midazolam 0.5 to 2 mg usually 
provide adequate sedation, anxiolysis, and some degree of 
cough suppression. Higher doses of benzodiazepines tend to 
cause disinhibition and may actually lead to increased cough­
ing. Between 500 to 1000 mcg of alfentanil was used more 
commonly in the past as an alternative to fentanyl to achieve 
adequate sedation for flexible bronchoscopy.43,44 Adding 
midazolam to alfentanil may increase the risk for hypoxia 
without improving sedation or decreasing discomfort.43
When anesthesiologists are consulted, the most com­
mon choice for moderate sedation is propofol, adminis­
tered either by intermittent boluses (10 to 20 mg)18 or as 
a low-dose infusion (10 to 50 mcg/kg/min). In contrast to 
the combination of midazolam and fentanyl, propofol offers 
more rapid recovery and easier titration in bronchoscopic 
cases lasting more than 20 minutes.45-47
Remifentanil by infusion can be used as a sole agent for 
moderate sedation or as an infusion after 0.5 to 2 mg of mid­
azolam for particularly anxious patients. The initial infusion 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
142
rate should be 0.1 mcg/kg/min started 5 minutes before 
beginning bronchoscopy, with the infusion then weaned to 
approximately 0.05 mcg/kg/min as tolerated during the pro­
cedure. This regimen usually provides adequate sedation and 
cough suppression for bronchoscopy and has even been used 
for more stimulating procedures, such as tracheoplasty using 
combined laser and balloon dilation,48 although providers 
may find that patients need to be “coached” to breathe. Remi­
fentanil offers an advantage as a sole agent over other opioids 
because patients predictably awaken within 4 to 5 minutes of 
discontinuation of its infusion, regardless of infusion duration.
Dexmedetomidine has been studied as a sedative for bron­
choscopic procedures49 but has the disadvantage of requir­
ing a loading infusion, typically 0.5 to 1 mcg/kg over 10 to 
20 minutes, before the initiation of a maintenance infusion 
of 0.2 to 0.7 mcg/kg/hr. Given the relatively short duration 
and fast turnover of most procedures performed in a bron­
choscopy suite, this relatively long loading time may result in 
significant inconvenience and cost ineffectiveness. Nonethe­
less, the use of dexmedetomidine is appealing because of its 
lack of blunting of respiratory drive while providing analge­
sia. Dexmedetomidine can be associated with clinically sig­
nificant bradycardia and hypotension at any point during its 
use, as well as occasional hypertension during the initial load.
General Anesthesia
INDUCTION
General anesthesia may be necessary for long cases, proce­
dures in which immobility is necessary, or when significant 
stimulation is anticipated. Induction of general anesthe­
sia should be relatively rapid and without coughing while 
maintaining hemodynamic stability.
Inhaled sevoflurane can be used to gently induce general 
anesthesia and may be the preferred choice of induction 
in cases of critical airway stenosis because spontaneous 
ventilation is maintained. A single-breath vital capacity 
technique in which the patient, beginning from maximal 
exhalation, deeply inhales 8% sevoflurane and then holds 
the breath is reported to be most effective in healthy vol­
unteers.50 Although a single-breath induction has been 
successfully reported in patients with airway stenosis,51 
patients with pulmonary disease tend to do better with a 
tidal volume technique in which the concentration of sevo­
flurane is slowly titrated up, with the patient taking regular 
normal tidal volume breaths, because many cannot take 
large breaths and hold them without coughing.
As in general operating rooms, propofol at 1 to 2 mg/kg is 
the most commonly used primary induction medication in 
the bronchoscopy suite. Ketamine is an attractive induction 
agent because of its unique characteristics; as an indirect 
sympathomimetic, it is a potent bronchodilator with rela­
tive preservation of respiratory drive and cardiac function. 
At an induction dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg, psychotropic side 
effects are rarely encountered after benzodiazepine premed­
ication (e.g., midazolam 1 to 2 mg). Etomidate 0.2 to 0.3 
mg/kg is an alternative induction agent for patients with 
impaired left ventricular function. Complete opioid-based or 
benzodiazepine-based induction regimens are rarely appro­
priate for bronchoscopic procedures because the doses 
required to achieve adequate anesthetic depth do not allow 
emergence in a timely manner.
MAINTENANCE
Either TIVA or inhalational anesthetic can be employed 
for maintenance of general anesthesia, although TIVA is 
often preferred for bronchoscopic procedures because of its 
multiple advantages. Most notably, recurrent insertion and 
removal of the bronchoscope, as well as frequent airway suc­
tioning, cause inconsistent delivery of volatile agents. TIVA 
ensures uninterrupted delivery of anesthetic separate from 
ventilation and avoids exposing procedural room person­
nel to leaked inhalational agent. Other advantages of TIVA 
when propofol-based include less PONV, decreased cough at 
emergence,52 and less depression of bronchial mucous trans­
port velocity.53 Inhalational anesthetics may predispose 
patients to increased bleeding at the site of needle puncture 
during biopsies, perhaps because volatile agents cause local 
vasodilation in the bronchial mucosa.5 Finally, jet ventila­
tion and other specialized modes of ventilation may be tech­
nically incompatible with the delivery of volatile anesthetic.
Propofol can be used as a sole agent for maintenance of 
anesthesia for flexible bronchoscopy at a dose of 75 to 250 
mcg/kg/min, but it is usually necessary to add an opioid to 
suppress coughing in nonparalyzed patients or to blunt the 
hemodynamic response to more stimulating procedures, such 
as rigid bronchoscopy. Either intermittent low-dose fentanyl 
(12.5- to 50-mcg aliquots to a total of <2 to 2.5 mcg/kg for 
the duration of a typical case) or a remifentanil infusion (0.1 
to 0.3 mcg/kg/min) are commonly used.5 A higher dose of 
remifentanil (0.5 mcg/kg/min) together with propofol more 
effectively attenuates the hemodynamic response to insertion 
of a rigid bronchoscope,54 but more frequently causes hypo­
tension. Remifentanil has a reliably short duration of action, 
with 3 to 10 minutes to arousal after its discontinuation 
regardless of the duration or dose of infusion, allowing predict­
able emergence. Arousal from propofol is short and fairly pre­
dictable after short cases typical of bronchoscopic procedures. 
Prolonged use, however, may lead to unpredictably pro­
longed emergence. If a target-controlled infusion, currently 
not available in the United States, is administered, appropri­
ate induction and maintenance plasma concentration tar­
gets for propofol are 7 mcg/mL and less than 5 to 6 mcg/mL, 
respectively, if a remifentanil infusion or intermittent fentanyl 
boluses are used concurrently. The most commonly reported 
initial effect-site target concentration for remifentanil infu­
sions in bronchoscopic procedures is 2 to 5 ng/mL.
MUSCLE RELAXATION
It is worth remembering that most procedures performed in 
the bronchoscopy suite do not absolutely require pharma­
cological muscle relaxation if quiescent conditions can be 
achieved by other means. Even procedures requiring rigid 
bronchoscopy, jet ventilation, laser therapy, and stent place­
ment have been safely performed without paralysis.55,56 
Potential advantages of avoiding neuromuscular blockade 
include shortened emergence and no chance of residual 
paralysis or recurarization of patients with baseline or antici­
pated limited pulmonary reserve after the procedure. Despite 
this, many proceduralists and anesthesia providers prefer 
16  •  Anesthesia in the Bronchoscopy Suite
143
muscle relaxation for procedures with a high risk for airway 
injury or hemorrhage or the potential for spontaneous respi­
ratory effort against an obstructed or occluded airway, which 
can lead to negative-pressure pulmonary edema.
Management of Anesthesia: 
Airway Choice
Appropriate airway choice depends on a variety of patient-
related and procedure-related factors, as well as the prefer­
ences and experience of the interventional bronchoscopist 
and anesthesiologist. Many patients undergoing interven­
tional bronchoscopic procedures have significant baseline 
comorbidities and limited cardiopulmonary reserve. These 
patients often do not tolerate the transient hypoxia associ­
ated with bronchoscopy and may require high-flow oxygen 
supplementation or positive-pressure ventilation. Supra­
glottic airways (SGAs) are now used more often than endo­
tracheal tubes (ETTs) as a conduit for the flexible fiberoptic 
bronchoscope but may not achieve adequate seal pressures 
for controlled ventilation and are contraindicated in patients 
at high risk for aspiration. Treatment of central airway 
obstruction or hemoptysis, foreign body removal, and sili­
cone stent placement generally require rigid bronchoscopy.
NO AIRWAY
Many short, minimally stimulating procedures may be 
safely completed with intravenous sedation without the 
need for airway device placement. In these cases, good topi­
calization with local anesthetics is necessary to minimize 
sedation and its associated risks. If procedurally acceptable, 
maintaining the patient in an upright or sitting position 
improves respiratory mechanics and may reduce aspiration 
risk. Typical monitoring with pulse oximetry is mandatory; 
if available, capnography is helpful to monitor ventilation.
SUPRAGLOTTIC AIRWAYS
SGAs are increasingly popular for many types of surgery, 
including those necessitating positive-pressure ventilation, 
and may have special advantages during fiberoptic broncho­
scopic procedures. For example, use of an SGA allows fiberop­
tic bronchoscopic examination of the vocal cords or proximal 
infraglottic masses. During endoscopic ultrasound, use of 
an SGA may allow closer approximation of the ultrasound 
transducer to the tracheal or bronchial mucosa to obtain 
better ultrasound images, whereas use of an ETT can force 
the bronchoscope into the middle of the trachea, increasing 
transducer and tissue impedance mismatching. In addition, 
higher lymph node stations, which would be blocked by an 
ETT, can be imaged and sampled, if appropriate.
For patients receiving general anesthesia, SGAs have 
been shown to reduce the risk for airway-related complica­
tions, including laryngospasm during emergence, postop­
erative hoarse voice, PONV, and coughing, in contrast to 
ETTs,57 although this has not been specifically validated 
in patients undergoing bronchoscopy. SGAs, particularly 
designs lacking a gastric vent port, do not protect against 
aspiration and should generally be avoided in patients with 
increased aspiration risks.
The choice of any particular SGA over another is often 
based on availability and physician preference; however, 
patient and procedural factors combined with known 
device performance characteristics, such as airway seal 
pressure and air tube internal diameter, length, and shape, 
should be considered. Preferable SGA characteristics are 
summarized in Box 16-1 and include an airway seal pres­
sure of 18 cm H2O or greater, a built-in bite block, a rela­
tively small periglottic cuff that minimizes glottic distortion 
and facilitates examination of supraglottic structures, a 
short and relatively flexible air tube with a larger inner 
diameter, and proved potential for use as intubating con­
duit during an emergency. Several SGAs, including the 
widely used LMA Classic (LMA, San Diego, Calif.), have epi­
glottic aperture bars designed to prevent the epiglottis from 
Box 16-1  Desirable Qualities for Supraglottic 
Airways To Be Used During Flexible 
Bronchoscopy
Built-in bite block: Examples: Air-Q sp (Mercury Medical, Clear­
water, Fla.), iGel (Intersurgical, Liverpool, NY)
Relatively small pharyngeal cuff: May negatively affect seal 
pressure but decreases distortion of periglottic anatomy. Exam­
ples: iGel (Intersurgical), Portex (Smiths Medical, Dublin, Ohio), 
Soft Seal Laryngeal Mask (Smiths Medical)
Short air tube: Eases manipulation of the bronchoscope and 
facilitates use of SGA as an intubating conduit, allowing ETT to 
reach vocal cords. Examples: Ambu (Ambu, Glen Burnie, Md.) 
Aura-i (Ambu), Air-Q sp (Mercury Medical)
Large inner diameter: Allows use of larger bronchoscopes and 
facilitates ventilation around the bronchoscope
Semi-rigid air tube: Provides countertraction, easing manipula­
tion of the bronchoscope.
Gastric access port: Allows drainage of stomach, reducing risk 
for aspiration during positive-pressure ventilation. Examples: LMA 
Supreme (LMA, San Diego, Calif.), iGel (Intersurgical)
Proven potential for use as an ETT intubating conduit in an 
emergency: Examples: Air-Q sp (Mercury Medical), iGel (Intersurgical)
Proven potential for use during positive-pressure ventilation: 
Most newer-generation SGAs
ETT, Endotracheal tube; SGA, supraglottic airway.
Box 16-2  Undesirable Qualities for 
Supraglottic Airways To Be Used During 
Flexible Bronchoscopy
Epiglottic aperture bars: Designed to reduce risk of the epiglot­
tis obstructing airflow but prohibits or hinders insertion of bron­
choscope. Example: LMA Classic (LMA, San Diego, Calif.)
Flexible air tube: Airway tube can be positioned away from the 
surgical field but is counterproductive in bronchoscopic procedures; 
also, flexible air tubes tend to have a smaller diameter than the air 
tubes on similarly sized standard SGAs. Example: LMA Flexible (LMA)
Gastric port that extends into lumen of the air tube: Allows 
placement of a larger nasogastric tube but interferes with move­
ment of bronchoscope. Example: LMA ProSeal (LMA)
Acute anterior curve in air tube: May facilitate initial placement 
and seating of SGA but can make passage of a bronchoscope 
more difficult. Examples: LMA Supreme; Ambu and Aura-i (Ambu, 
Glen Burnie, Md.)
SGA, Supraglottic airway.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
144
Table 16-2  Characteristics of Common Supraglottic Airways Deemed Adequate for Use During Diagnostic and Therapeutic 
Flexible Bronchoscopy
Supraglottic Airway
Size
Inner Diameter 
(mm)
Manufacturer’s Recom­
mended Maximum ETT 
size: Inner Diameter (mm)
Comments
Air-Q and Air-Q sp 
(Mercury Medical, 
Clearwater, Fla.)
2.5
3.5
4.5
6.5
7.5
8.5
ADVANTAGES
 □ Short length facilitates FOB manipulation and use as an 
­intubating conduit
 □ Integral bite block
 □ Mask tip with recessed front
 □ Removable 15-mm connector facilitates use as an intubating 
conduit
DISADVANTAGES
 □ Requires wider mouth opening to place than an equivalently 
sized LMA
OTHER COMMENTS
 □ Self-pressurizing cuff may reduce potential for tissue trauma 
and allow device to be left in situ during long cases
Aura-i (Ambu)
3
4
5
11.0
12.4
12.7
6.5
7.5
8.0
ADVANTAGES
 □ Short length facilitates FOB manipulation and use as an intu­
bating conduit
 □ Bite resistance in connector block
DISADVANTAGES
 □ Acute anterior curve in airway tube
OTHER COMMENTS
 □ Not widely available, has not been well studied
AuraStraight (Ambu, 
Glen Burnie, Md.)
3
4
5
9.8
10.7
11.6
ADVANTAGES
 □ Widely available
DISADVANTAGES
 □ Length may hinder use as an intubating conduit (standard ETT 
may not reach vocal cords)
OTHER COMMENTS
 □ Maximum FOB size is 5.4 mm per manufacturer
 □ Both disposable and reusable models available
iGel (Intersurgical, 
Liverpool, NY)
3
4
5
6.0
7.0
8.0
ADVANTAGES
 □ Integral bite block
 □ Short cuff may cause less distortion of anatomy
 □ Short length facilitates FOB manipulation and use as an intu­
bating conduit
DISADVANTAGES
 □ Requires wider mouth opening than an equivalently sized 
LMA in order to place
OTHER COMMENTS
 □ Size 12 NG tube will fit through gastric port
 □ Gel bowl does not require inflation
 □ Has been studied for use during positive-pressure ventilation*
LMA ProSeal and 
Supreme (LMA, San 
Diego, Calif.)
3
4
5
5.0
5.0
6.0
ADVANTAGES
 □ Widely available
 □ Integral bite block
DISADVANTAGES
 □ Lateral stabilizing bars can obstruct passage of FOB
 □ FOB can catch on rim of bite block
 □ Gastric port tube can inhibit movement of FOB
 □ Length may hinder use as an intubating conduit
OTHER COMMENTS
 □ Supreme is disposable version of Proseal
 □ Multiple studies support use during positive-pressure ventila­
tion, with or without muscle relaxation
 □ 14-French NG tube will fit through gastric port
Portex Soft Seal Laryn­
geal Mask (Smiths 
Medical, Dublin, 
Ohio)
3
4
5
10.1
11
12
ADVANTAGES
 □ High atrium allows easy passage of FOB into epiglottis
DISADVANTAGES
 □ Length may hinder use as an intubating conduit
OTHER COMMENTS
 □ Not widely available, not as well studied as other products
*Uppal V, Fletcher G, Kinsella J. Comparison of the iGel with the cuffed tracheal tube during pressure-controlled ventilation. Br J Anaesth. 2009; 102(2):264-268.
ETT, Endotracheal tube; FOB, fiberoptic bronchoscope; LMA, laryngeal mask airway; NG, nasogastric.
16  •  Anesthesia in the Bronchoscopy Suite
145
obstructing airflow into the trachea but unfortunately then 
block passage of a fiberoptic bronchoscope or blind ETT. 
Other undesirable SGA properties are listed in Box 16-2, 
and characteristics of many commonly available SGAs are 
detailed in Table 16-2.
ENDOTRACHEAL TUBE
Tracheal intubation remains the definitive standard for 
securing the airway and should be used for patients at 
increased risk for aspiration or when pressures required 
for positive-pressure ventilation will likely exceed the 
airway seal pressure of an SGA. An ETT, however, pre­
cludes endoluminal access to supraglottic and glottic 
structures and may limit access to subglottic structures 
and the proximal trachea. When placed in the presence of 
a tracheal stent, care must be employed to avoid dislodg­
ing the stent, which may travel distally or cause airway 
trauma. Choosing an ETT with a sufficiently large inter­
nal diameter is critical given the relatively large sizes of 
therapeutic bronchoscopes. To minimize airway obstruc­
tion, it is recommended to select an artificial airway with 
an internal diameter at least 2 mm greater than the out­
side diameter of the bronchoscope.58 Because adult ther­
apeutic and EBUS bronchoscopes typically have outer 
diameters of 5.7 to 5.9 mm and 6.0 to 6.9 mm, respec­
tively, an ETT with an internal diameter of at least 8 to 
8.5 mm is usually required. To improve maneuverability 
of the bronchoscope, some practitioners cut the ETT to a 
shorter length after placement.
RIGID BRONCHOSCOPY
Rigid bronchoscopy is mandatory for placement of sili­
cone stents because of their noncollapsibility and is pre­
ferred for many other therapeutic interventions, including 
large tumor debulking, hemoptysis control, foreign body 
removal, and maintaining airway patency in the pres­
ence of tracheal compression from a mediastinal mass. 
Although multiple reports exist detailing rigid bronchos­
copy performed successfully with only topical anesthesia 
and conscious sedation, general anesthesia with adequate 
muscle relaxation before insertion of the rigid broncho­
scope is preferred to minimize the risk for airway injury.59 
Ventilation can be accomplished by either attaching the 
breathing circuit to the bronchoscope or jet ventilation. 
Breathing circuit leaks are understandably common but 
can generally be overcome by increasing gas flows or plac­
ing a throat pack.
NONINVASIVE VENTILATION
The majority of patients undergoing bronchoscopy have 
underlying acute or chronic respiratory disease. Many 
marginally oxygenate or ventilate and do not tolerate bron­
choscopy well even when sedation is minimized or avoided. 
Tracheal intubation and SGA use are options but require 
deep sedation or general anesthesia, prolonging and add­
ing risk to what might otherwise be a very brief procedure. 
Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) modalities, including con­
tinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and bilevel posi­
tive airway pressure (BiPAP), increase functional residual 
capacity, improve respiratory mechanics, and decrease 
work of breathing. In patients with high baseline oxygen 
requirements, diagnostic flexible bronchoscopy has been 
successfully performed during NIV,60 a technique we com­
monly employ in our intensive care unit. CPAP has also 
proved useful in patients with dynamic airway collapse or 
tracheobronchomalacia, in which a pressure of 7 to 10 cm 
H2O usually can maintain airway patency.61 Anesthesi­
ologists must be cognizant of the contraindications to NIV, 
including patients with hemodynamic instability, copi­
ous secretions, or an inability to protect their airway.61 
In addition, NIV may cause gastric distention, increasing 
aspiration risk.
Management of Anesthesia: 
Oxygenation and Ventilation
MANAGEMENT OF Fio2 AND HELIOX
In general, a high fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) is used 
during most bronchoscopic procedures to increase patient 
oxygen reserve and tolerance of periods of intraprocedural 
apnea, particularly because many patients are oxygen 
dependent at baseline. However, lower Fio2 (usually <0.4) 
is mandatory during high-temperature thermal interven­
tions, such as Nd:YAG or carbon dioxide laser, argon plasma 
coagulation, or electrocautery, to reduce the risk for airway 
fire62 and is recommended in patients with prior bleomycin 
exposure. Nitrous oxide is contraindicated during laser pro­
cedures, because it too can support combustion.
Use of heliox (70% to 79% helium in oxygen) may rarely 
be necessary in cases of airway obstruction. Heliox is less 
dense than a mixture of oxygen in air, so when obstruction 
and thus turbulent airflow are present, it promotes lami­
nar flow, increases airflow velocity, and reduces work of 
breathing.63 Patients presenting with obstructing masses 
can be preoxygenated with heliox, and its use may facilitate 
extubation after partially treated obstructions.40,64 Heliox 
also has been purported to be beneficial in cases of severe 
asthma exacerbation,65 including refractory broncho­
spasm with emergence from general anesthesia.66 Of note, 
the lower Fio2 of heliox (21% to 30%) may not be tolerated 
in all patients.
VENTILATION TECHNIQUES
Positive-Pressure Ventilation
Positive-pressure ventilation can present several potential 
pitfalls for patients undergoing interventional broncho­
scopic procedures. Partial occlusion of an artificial airway 
lumen by a bronchoscope increases airflow resistance. 
Increasing inspiratory pressures can compensate for the 
diminished inspiratory flow, but it is difficult to predict how 
much pressure will be transmitted to the distal airways. 
Most ventilators cannot compensate for diminished expira­
tory flow, potentially leading to much higher airway pres­
sures, and any resultant intrinsic positive end-expiratory 
pressure (PEEP) will not be detected by ventilator transduc­
ers. Using volume-control ventilation, a tidal volume that is 
not reduced after bronchoscope advancement can result in 
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
146
air trapping and unintentional rises in both intrabronchial 
peak airway pressures and intrinsic PEEP.67 This can in 
turn cause alveolar volutrauma or reduce cardiac preload. 
Pressure control ventilation is preferred, because maintain­
ing a constant pressure setting after bronchoscope inser­
tion will result in a reduced tidal volume and secondary 
increased partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (Paco2) 
but with much lower risk for undetected high distal airway 
pressures. As discussed earlier, placing a sufficiently large 
ETT or SGA as a conduit for bronchoscopy will minimize 
obstruction and these potential ventilation issues.
Jet Ventilation
Many interventional pulmonology procedures are per­
formed using jet ventilation to improve airway access for 
the proceduralist. All jet ventilators rely on the Venturi 
principle to enhance administered gas volumes. The high-
velocity oxygen jet from the ventilator entrains room air, 
which increases the delivered tidal volume beyond the 
volume of air expelled by the ventilator. Jet ventilation is 
most commonly administered in a low-frequency pattern 
from a supraglottic position, but can also be achieved from 
infraglottic, transtracheal, and transluminal positions. 
High-frequency delivery patterns are also increasingly 
being used.
With low-frequency jet ventilation (LFJV), the anesthe­
sia provider uses a hand-operated trigger valve or auto­
cycled delivery device to deliver a high-velocity­ stream of 
gas to the patient, typically at a rate of 10 to 20 breaths/
min with an approximate inspiratory to expiratory ratio of 
1:4, which allows the lungs to fully deflate between breaths 
The jet pressure is adjusted by a reducing valve to the 
minimal pressure required, typically 25 to 30 cm H2O, to 
achieve adequate chest rise of 1 to 2 inches. Oxygenation 
is monitored by pulse oximetry, and we often monitor air 
movement with a pretracheal stethoscope as well. From 
the supraglottic position, it is important to maintain align­
ment of the jet nozzle or cannula with the laryngeal inlet 
or trachea to avoid gastric insufflation and minimize the 
potential for soft tissue barotrauma. Constant vigilance and 
communication between the interventionalist and anesthe­
siologist are critical. Intermittent ventilation pauses may be 
necessary to facilitate the procedure. Because of its simplic­
ity, relative safety, and broad applicability for many types of 
upper airway procedures, a hand-operated, low-frequency 
jet ventilator should be available for use in all bronchoscopy 
suites.
High-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) is associated with 
many of the same risks as LFJV but requires more specialized 
equipment. The inspiratory stream of air is controlled elec­
tronically or pneumatically by a flow interrupter, admin­
istering very-low-volume breaths at a rate of 60 to 600 
breaths/min. Until recently, HFJV had rarely been described 
for use in bronchoscopic procedures performed outside a 
general operating room, but its use appears to be increasing 
in non–operating room environments.56 The respiratory 
rate, drive pressure, oxygen concentration, and inspiration 
time all can be varied. Typical initial settings to produce a 
tidal volume of 100 mL include a rate of 120 breaths/min, 
a driving pressure of 14 to 16 psi, and an inspiratory time 
of 40%.56 Reported benefits of HFJV include an immobile 
operative field, prevention of blood and tissue aspiration, 
and removal of laser surgery–associated smoke from the 
operative site resulting from constant gas egress.56
Management of Anesthesia: Other 
Considerations
FLUID MANAGEMENT
Currently, no studies exist that specifically evaluate fluid 
management for patients undergoing interventional pulm­
onology procedures. Therefore recommendations regarding 
fluid management for these patients are extrapolated from 
those for patients undergoing thoracic surgical procedures, 
because these patient populations have similarly limited 
pulmonary reserve. Most studies show improved outcomes 
in thoracic surgery with use of a fluid restrictive regimen.68 
To maintain adequate perfusion pressure during general 
anesthesia in the presence of volume restriction, concomi­
tant use of phenylephrine or another vasopressor is often 
necessary.
MONITORING
Pulse oximetry is essential in all bronchoscopic procedures, 
even those with minimal sedation.34,69 Standard ASA 
monitors should be used in all cases in which an anesthesia 
provider is involved, including at least three-lead electro­
cardiogram monitoring and intermittent noninvasive blood 
pressure monitoring. End-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring 
is often not available or inadequate during bronchoscopic 
procedures, regardless of the mode of ventilation, because 
of frequent gas leaks at bronchoscope ports or suctioning 
by the proceduralist. A pretracheal or precordial stetho­
scope can be useful. An arterial catheter allowing frequent 
assessment of the Paco2 should be considered when non­
conventional ventilation is used and end-tidal carbon diox­
ide monitoring will not be available for prolonged periods, 
such as cases using jet ventilation. In facilities in which it 
is available, transcutaneous monitoring of Pco2 and partial 
pressure of oxygen (Po2) can be considered during jet ven­
tilation procedures.70 Although the topic is controversial, 
many experts recommend monitoring the depth of anesthe­
sia during TIVA with an electroencephalogram or bispec­
tral index (BIS) monitor with a target BIS score between 40 
and 60.71
EMERGENCE AND EXTUBATION
Cases involving central airway obstruction are often the 
most challenging to manage during emergence and extuba­
tion. Even after treatment of the obstructing lesion, residual 
mass, laryngeal edema, or other airway edema may exist. 
Such procedures often also cause significant secretions or 
bleeding that can predispose to laryngospasm. For these rea­
sons, these patients should always be fully awake, demon­
strate good strength, and have intact airway reflexes before 
extubation. Oropharyngeal suctioning should be performed 
while the patient is still deeply anesthetized. If a rigid bron­
choscope is used, some experts recommend leaving the scope 
in situ “until the patient virtually coughs it out”40; however, 
this has the potential to increase airway injury. Alternatively, 
16  •  Anesthesia in the Bronchoscopy Suite
147
the rigid bronchoscope can be removed and a standard ETT 
or SGA placed until the patient is ready for extubation. When 
postextubation stridor occurs, the patient’s respiratory sta­
tus must be monitored closely because airway obstruction 
can progress rapidly. Initial treatment can be instituted with 
upright positioning and inhaled racemic epinephrine (0.5 
mL of 2.25% epinephrine in 2 mL of normal saline admin­
istered by nebulizer) or heliox. The use of an exchange cath­
eter to temporarily maintain airway access after extubation 
also has been described.72
In selected patients at high risk for bronchospasm and 
without contraindications such as significant airway edema, 
difficult intubation or mask ventilation, excessive secretions, 
or high aspiration risk, extubation under deep anesthesia 
(with airway reflexes not intact) may be considered.
Propofol may reduce coughing during emergence from 
general anesthesia.52
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
To be considered for PACU discharge, patients should be 
awake with intact airway reflexes and oxygen require­
ments back to baseline. After uncomplicated bronchoscopy 
with moderate sedation, criteria for discharge are usually 
achieved within 30 minutes. After transbronchial biopsy or 
other procedures with risks for pneumothorax, such as dif­
ficult stent removal, a chest radiograph is often obtained at 
least 1 hour after the procedure, although studies have sug­
gested that routine imaging is not necessary in asymptom­
atic patients.73 Few procedures performed in a bronchoscopy 
suite should be associated with more than modest postop­
erative pain, and postoperative opioids are rarely indicated. 
Patient reports of chest pain or more than mild sore throat 
should therefore prompt evaluation for complications such 
as pneumothorax, airway laceration or disruption, or myo­
cardial ischemia. Some patients with significant comorbidi­
ties should be admitted for overnight observation. Forced 
vital capacity (FVC) below 15 mL/kg ideal body weight, FEV1 
below 1000 mL, FEV1/FVC ratio below 35% of the predicted 
value, and hypercarbia on preoperative arterial blood gas 
(ABG) sampling are all associated with increased postop­
erative pulmonary complications and thus the need for pro­
longed monitoring.74
Management of Complications
AIRWAY BLEEDING
Up to 9% of endobronchial biopsies are complicated by 
modest bleeding.75 Blood loss exceeding 20 mL, how­
ever, is rare76 but can potentially occur from perforation 
of major intrathoracic blood vessels. Simple techniques to 
control mild-to-moderate airway bleeding include turning 
the patient onto the side of hemorrhage, wedging the bron­
choscope into the involved segment to tamponade bleed­
ing, flooding the involved lung subsegment with 10 to 15 
mL of iced saline (with or without 1 mL of 1:1000 epineph­
rine) to induce vasoconstriction, or applying fibrin glue.75 
Fortunately, lung isolation with a bronchial blocker, DLT, 
or contralateral mainstem intubation is rarely required 
but should be kept in mind as a potential temporizing 
measure until definitive surgical hemorrhage control can 
be obtained.
HYPOXIA
Given periods of apnea and difficulty ventilating around a 
bronchoscope or past an obstructing lesion, some degree of 
hypoxia is almost inevitable during bronchoscopy20,55 and 
usually does not necessitate disruption of the procedure. 
For clinically significant hypoxemia with sustained Spo2 
less than 90% or development of cardiac arrhythmias, the 
procedure may need to be aborted or the bronchoscope tem­
porarily withdrawn into the trachea The bronchoscopist 
should avoid suctioning during hypoxic episodes, because it 
reduces inspired oxygen and causes an up to 75% reduction 
in tidal volume.77 Administration of a β2 agonist or heliox 
may be helpful if bronchospasm or mechanical obstruction 
are present. Consider less common causes such as tension 
pneumothorax or pulmonary edema if hypoxia is associ­
ated with hemodynamic instability or does not readily 
respond to the previously mentioned measures.
BAROTRAUMA
Barotrauma has been reported as a complication of jet 
ventilation, particularly with HFJV in patients with poorly 
compliant lungs or in cases of transtracheal jet ventilation. 
Pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema are most 
common, but pneumocardium, pneumomediastinum, and 
pneumoperitoneum also can occur. Mucosal disruption is 
assumed, and if the procedure is continued, the jetting cath­
eter must be repositioned.
PNEUMOTHORAX
Pneumothorax can result from a variety of bronchoscopic 
procedures, including stent placement or removal, biopsy, 
or jet ventilation. Most anesthesia providers do not have the 
appropriate training to perform tube thoracostomy in the 
event of a tension pneumothorax but should at least know 
how to perform emergency needle thoracostomy. Once a 
pneumothorax is diagnosed, avoiding positive-pressure ven­
tilation is prudent but not always possible. A small asymptom­
atic pneumothorax (<2 cm on chest radiograph) diagnosed 
postprocedurally and not enlarging on serial imaging often 
can be managed with close observation.78 Increasing admin­
istered Fio2 not only treats potential hypoxemia but increases 
pleural air reabsorption by approximately fourfold.78
FIRE
Fire is a potential complication of use of the Nd:YAG laser, 
carbon dioxide laser, argon plasma coagulation, or electro­
cautery within the airway. To minimize this risk, Fio2 should 
be reduced to below 0.4 if possible and nitrous oxide discon­
tinued at least 3 minutes before initiation of any “hot” ther­
apy. If endotracheal intubation is planned, laser-resistant 
tubes with a saline-filled cuff should be used. Placing wet tow­
els in high-risk areas may further minimize fire risk. Animal 
studies suggest that flooding the surgical field with carbon 
dioxide can prevent airway fires even in the presence of high 
Fio2 and electrocautery,79 but this is not routine practice.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
148
Once fire is noted, it should be clearly announced, the pro­
cedure should be halted, and any flammable objects should 
be immediately removed from the airway, including sponges 
and the ETT if one was used. The flow of all gases must be 
stopped and the flames doused with saline. Some authori­
ties recommend keeping a 50-mL syringe of 0.9% saline 
immediately available during laser surgery.80 If fire persists, 
a carbon dioxide fire extinguisher can be used.62 Once the 
fire is out, ventilation must be reestablished with the anes­
thesia circuit or a self-inflating resuscitation bag, preferably 
with room air. If a volatile anesthetic is being administered, 
this should be changed to a TIVA in anticipation of rigid 
bronchoscopy being performed to assess airway injury and 
remove any debris.62 Routine corticosteroids or antibiotics 
have not been proved beneficial after an airway fire.
TRACHEAL LACERATION OR RUPTURE
Traumatic intubation, balloon dilatation of a stricture, or 
airway stent removal all can result in tracheobronchial 
rupture or laceration. Unfortunately, such a complication is 
often not diagnosed until after the procedure. Head and neck 
emphysema, hemoptysis, dry cough, and dyspnea should 
raise suspicion for tracheal disruption in the appropriate 
clinical setting. Chest imaging may show pneumomediasti­
num; bronchoscopy or CT scan can confirm the diagnosis.81
Traumatic intubation most commonly lacerates the 
membranous portion of the trachea, often a few centimeters 
above the carina.82 Rupture related to balloon dilation is 
usually at the site of balloon inflation, again on the posterior 
tracheal wall.83 Minor lacerations usually can be managed 
conservatively,81 but immediate thoracic surgery consulta­
tion is recommended for tracheal rupture.82,84 Passing an 
endotracheal tube under bronchoscopic guidance beyond 
the rupture and then inflating the cuff distal to the injury is 
sometimes recommended.85
LOSS OF AIRWAY
Creation of a percutaneous airway is a rarely performed but 
potentially lifesaving procedure of last resort in the patient 
with a failed airway. Associated conditions possibly encoun­
tered in a bronchoscopy suite include massive postproce­
dure hemorrhage or emesis, airway edema, and obstructing 
masses. Anesthesia providers as a group are understandably 
reluctant to perform emergency surgical procedures, and 
studies have suggested that anesthesiologists are very poor at 
correctly identifying the cricothyroid membrane, especially 
in obese patients.86 Nonetheless, a surgical airway is a poten­
tially lifesaving procedure, and we believe that cricothyroid­
otomy should be considered a core skill for anyone providing 
anesthesia in a bronchoscopy suite.
Emergency tracheotomy is generally beyond the scope of 
anesthesia providers. Needle or Seldinger cricothyroidoto­
mies are commonly described in anesthesia textbooks but 
require special kink-resistant cannulas and equipment to 
administer high-pressure ventilation. A simple technique 
for surgical cricothyroidotomy has been described that 
relies only on equipment that is immediately available in 
standard anesthesia carts—a no. 11 scalpel blade, an elas­
tic bougie such as an Eschmann stylet, and a 6.0 endotra­
cheal tube.87 This procedure is detailed in Box 16-3.
Conclusion
The interventional bronchoscopy suite can be a challeng­
ing environment in which to provide anesthesia. Perfor­
mance of a safe anesthesia requires thorough consideration 
of environmental factors, patient factors, the surgical or 
bronchoscopic technique to be employed, and the relative 
merits of various airway devices, ventilatory techniques, 
and pharmacological regimens.
References
	 1.	 Yasufuku K, Pierre A, Darling G, et  al. A prospective controlled 
trial of endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle 
aspiration compared with mediastinoscopy for mediastinal lymph 
node staging of lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142(6):
1393–1400. e1.
	 2.	 Hwangbo B, Kim SK, Lee H-S, et  al. Application of endobronchial 
ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration following inte­
grated PET/CT in mediastinal staging of potentially operable non-
small cell lung cancer. Chest. 2008;135(5):1280–1287.
	 3.	 Ernst A, Eberhardt R, Krasnik M, Herth FJF. Efficacy of endobron­
chial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration of hilar 
lymph nodes for diagnosing and staging cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 
2009;4(8):947–950.
	 4.	 Depew ZS, Edell ES, Midthun DE, et al. Endobronchial ultrasound-
guided transbronchial needle aspiration: determinants of sam­
pling adequacy. J Bronchol Interventional Pulmonol. 2012;19(4):
271–276.
	 5.	 Sarkiss M, Kennedy M, Riedel B, et  al. Anesthesia technique for 
endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of medi­
astinal lymph node. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2007;21(6):
892–896.
	 6.	 Gildea TR, Mazzone PJ, Karnak D, Meziane M, Mehta AC. Electro­
magnetic navigation diagnostic bronchoscopy: a prospective study. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006;174(9):982–989.
Box 16-3  Emergency Cricothyroidotomy
	1.	 Skin incision
 □ Cleanse neck with an alcohol-based solution.
 □ Grasp larynx with the nondominant hand.
 □ Identify the thyroid cartilage, cricothyroid membrane, and 
cricoid ring.
 □ Use dominant hand to make a vertical incision with a no. 11 
blade knife over the cricothyroid membrane.
 □ Place the nondominant index finger into the vertical ­incision 
and move it side to side to clearly feel the cricothyroid 
­membrane.
	2.	 Incision of cricothyroid membrane
 □ Make a 5-mm horizontal incision through the cricothyroid 
membrane.
 □ Place an elastic bougie into the defect, and advance until 
resistance is felt.
 □ If immediately available, insert a tracheal hook into the hole and 
retract the larynx upward.
	3.	 Endotracheal tube placement
 □ Advance a cuffed 6.0 endotracheal tube over the elastic bougie, 
up to the cricothyroid membrane.
 □ Align the bevel of the endotracheal tube with the horizontal 
incision of the cricothyroid membrane, and then gently advance 
the ETT through the divided cricothyroid membrane.
 □ Stop advancing once the cuff of the ETT has passed into the 
trachea, and inflate the ETT cuff.
Modified from MacIntyre A, Markarian MK, Carrison D, et al. Three-step emer­
gency cricothyroidotomy. Mil Med. 2007;172(12):1228-1230.
ETT, Endotracheal tube.
16  •  Anesthesia in the Bronchoscopy Suite
149
	 7.	 Eberhardt R, Anantham D, Herth F, Feller-Kopman D, Ernst A. Elec­
tromagnetic navigation diagnostic bronchoscopy in peripheral lung 
lesions. Chest. 2007;131(6):1800–1805.
	 8.	 Tellides G, Ugurlu BS, Kim RW, Hammond GL. Pathogenesis of sys­
temic air embolism during bronchoscopic Nd:YAG laser operations. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 1998;65(4):930–934.
	 9.	 Reddy C, Majid A, Michaud G, et  al. Gas embolism following 
bronchoscopic argon plasma coagulation: a case series. Chest. 
2008;134(5):1066–1069.
	10.	 Feller-Kopman D, Lukanich JM, Shapira G, et al. Gas flow during bron­
choscopic ablation therapy causes gas emboli to the heart: a compara­
tive animal study. Chest. 2008;133(4):892–896.
	11.	 Makris D, Marquette C-H. Tracheobronchial stenting and central air­
way replacement. Curr Opin Pulmon Med. 2007;13(4):278–283.
	12.	 Lund ME, Garland R, Ernst A. Airway stenting: applications and prac­
tice management considerations. Chest. 2007;131(2):579–587.
	13.	 Elliott BA, Curry TB, Atwell TD, Brown MJ, Rose SH. Lung isola­
tion, one-lung ventilation, and continuous positive airway pressure 
with air for radiofrequency ablation of neoplastic pulmonary lesions. 
Anesth Analg. 2006;103(2):463–464.
	14.	 Pavord ID, Cox G, Thomson NC, et al. Safety and efficacy of bronchial 
thermoplasty in symptomatic, severe asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2007;176(12):1185–1191.
	15.	 Thomson NC, Chaudhuri R, Spears M. Emerging therapies for severe 
asthma. BMC Med. 2011;6(9):102.
	16.	 Du Rand IA, Barber PV, Goldring J, et  al. British Thoracic Society 
guideline for advanced diagnostic and therapeutic flexible bronchos­
copy in adults. Thorax. 2011;66(suppl 3):iii1–21.
	17.	 Ramsey SD, Berry K, Etzioni R, et al. Cost effectiveness of lung-volume-
reduction surgery for patients with severe emphysema. New Engl J 
Med. 2003;348(21):2092–2102.
	18.	 Grendelmeier P, Kurer G, Pflimlin E, Tamm M, Stolz D. Feasibility and 
safety of propofol sedation in flexible bronchoscopy. Swiss Med Wkly. 
2011;141(Aug):w13248.
	19.	 Wain JC. Rigid bronchoscopy: the value of a venerable procedure. 
Chest Surg Clin North Am. 2001;11(4):691–699.
	20.	 Chhajed PN, Glanville AR. Management of hypoxemia during flexible 
bronchoscopy. Clin Chest Med. 2003;24(3):511–516.
	21.	 Hehn BT, Haponik E, Rubin HR, Lechtzin N, Diette GB. The relation­
ship between age and process of care and patient tolerance of bron­
choscopy. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51(7):917–922.
	22.	 Davoudi M, Shakkottai S, Colt HG. Safety of therapeutic rigid bron­
choscopy in people aged 80 and older: a retrospective cohort analysis. 
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56(5):943–944.
	23.	 Global Strategy for Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of COPD. 
Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD), 2011. 
http://www.goldcopd.org.
	24.	 Brickey DA, Lawlor DP. Transbronchial biopsy in the presence of 
profound elevation of the international normalized ratio. Chest. 
1999;115(6):1667–1671.
	25.	 Wahidi MM, Jain P, Jantz M, et al. American College of Chest Physi­
cians consensus statement on the use of topical anesthesia, analgesia, 
and sedation during flexible bronchoscopy in adult patients. Chest. 
2011;140(5):1342–1350.
	26.	 Matot I, Kuras Y, Kramer MR. Effect of clonidine premedication on 
haemodynamic responses to fibreoptic bronchoscopy. Anaesthesia. 
2000;55(3):269–274.
	27.	 De Padua AI, De Castro M, Schmidt A, et al. Clonidine as a pre-anesthetic 
agent for flexible bronchoscopy. Respir Med. 2004;98(8):746–751.
	28.	 Fan T, Wang G, Mao B, et al. Prophylactic administration of paren­
teral steroids for preventing airway complications after extubation in 
adults: meta-analysis of randomised placebo controlled trials. BMJ. 
2008;337(1):a1841.
	29.	 Park S-H, Han S-H, Do S-H, et  al. Prophylactic dexamethasone 
decreases the incidence of sore throat and hoarseness after tracheal 
extubation with a double-lumen endobronchial tube. Anesth Analg. 
2008;107(6):1814–1818.
	30.	 Thomas S, Beevi S. Dexamethasone reduces the severity of postopera­
tive sore throat. Can J Anaesth Can J Anesth. 2007;54(11):897–901.
	31.	 Hawkins DB, Crockett DM, Shum TK. Corticosteroids in airway man­
agement. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1983;91(6):593–596.
	32.	 Gan TJ, Meyer T, Apfel CC, et al. Consensus guidelines for manag­
ing postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2003;97(1):
62–71.
	33.	 Ng A, Smith G. Gastroesophageal reflux and aspiration of gastric con­
tents in anesthetic practice. Anesth Analg. 2001;93(2):494–513.
	34.	 British Thoracic Society Bronchoscopy Committee. British Tho­
racic Society guidelines on diagnostic flexible bronchoscopy. Thorax. 
2001;56(suppl 1):i1–21.
	35.	 Stolz D, Pollak V, Chhajed PN, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled 
trial of bronchodilators for bronchoscopy in patients with COPD. 
Chest. 2007;131(3):765–772.
	36.	 Neuhaus A, Markowitz D, Rotman HH, Weg JG. The effects of fiberop­
tic bronchoscopy with and without atropine premedication on pulmo­
nary function in humans. Ann Thorac Surg. 1978;25(5):393–398.
	37.	 Langmack EL, Martin RJ, Pak J, Kraft M. Serum lidocaine concen­
trations in asthmatics undergoing research bronchoscopy. Chest. 
2000;117(4):1055–1060.
	38.	 Kundra P, Kutralam S, Ravishankar M. Local anaesthesia for 
awake fibreoptic nasotracheal intubation. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
2000;44(5):511–516.
	39.	 De Oliveira GS, Fitzgerald P, Kendall M. Ultrasound-assisted trans­
laryngeal block for awake fibreoptic intubation. Can J Anaesth. 
2011;58(7):664–665.
	40.	 Conacher ID. Anaesthesia and tracheobronchial stenting for central 
airway obstruction in adults. Br J Anaesth. 2003;90(3):367–374.
	41.	 Wright RO, Lewander WJ, Woolf AD. Methemoglobinemia: etiol­
ogy, pharmacology, and clinical management. Ann Emerg Med. 
1999;34(5):646–656.
	42.	 Vloka J, Hadzic A, Kitain E. A simple adaptation to the Olympus LF1 
and LF2 flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopes for instillation of local anes­
thetic. Anesthesiology. 1995;82(3):792.
	43.	 Greig JH, Cooper SM, Kasimbazi HJ, et al. Sedation for fibre optic bron­
choscopy. Respir Med. 1995;89(1):53–56.
	44.	 Houghton CM, Raghuram A, Sullivan PJ, O’Driscoll R. Pre-medication 
for bronchoscopy: a randomised double blind trial comparing alfent­
anil with midazolam. Respir Med. 2004;98(11):1102–1107.
	45.	 Crawford M, Pollock J, Anderson K. Comparison of midazolam with 
propofol for sedation in outpatient bronchoscopy. Br J Anaesth. 
1993;70:419–422.
	46.	 Clarkson K, Power CK, O’Connell F, Pathmakanthan S, Burke CM. A 
comparative evaluation of propofol and midazolam as sedative agents 
in fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Chest. 1993;104(4):1029–1031.
	47.	 Stolz D, Kurer G, Meyer A, et al. Propofol versus combined sedation in 
flexible bronchoscopy: a randomised non-inferiority trial. Eur Respir J. 
2009;34(5):1024–1030.
	48.	 Andrews BT, Graham SM, Ross AF, et al. Technique, utility, and safety 
of awake tracheoplasty using combined laser and balloon dilation. 
Laryngoscope. 2007;117(12):2159–2162.
	49.	 Liao W, Ma G, Su Q, et al. Dexmedetomidine versus midazolam for 
conscious sedation in postoperative patients undergoing flexible bron­
choscopy: a randomized study. J Int Med Res. 2012;40:1371–1380.
	50.	 Yurino M, Kimura H. A comparison of vital capacity breath and tidal 
breathing techniques for induction of anaesthesia with high sevo­
flurane concentrations in nitrous oxide and oxygen. Anaesthesia. 
1995;50(4):308–311.
	51.	 Baraka AS, Siddik SS, Taha SK, Jalbout MI, Massouh FM. Low fre­
quency jet ventilation for stent insertion in a patient with tracheal 
stenosis. Can J Anaesth. 2001;48(7):701–704.
	52.	 Hohlrieder M, Tiefenthaler W, Klaus H, et al. Effect of total intrave­
nous anaesthesia and balanced anaesthesia on the frequency of 
coughing during emergence from the anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 
2007;99(4):587–591.
	53.	 Ledowski T, Paech MJ, Patel B, Schug SA. Bronchial mucus trans­
port velocity in patients receiving propofol and remifentanil versus 
sevoflurane and remifentanil anesthesia. Anesth Analg. 2006;102(5):
1427–1430.
	54.	 Prakash N, McLeod T, Gao Smith F. The effects of remifentanil on 
haemodynamic stability during rigid bronchoscopy. Anaesthesia. 
2001;56(6):576–580.
	55.	 Perrin G, Colt HG, Martin C, et al. Safety of interventional rigid bron­
choscopy using intravenous anesthesia and spontaneous assisted 
ventilation: a prospective study. Chest. 1992;102(5):1526–1530.
	56.	 Raiten J, Elkassabany N, Mandel JE. The use of high-frequency jet ven­
tilation for out of operating room anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2012;25(4):482–485.
	57.	 Yu SH, Beirne OR. Laryngeal mask airways have a lower risk of air­
way complications compared with endotracheal intubation: a system­
atic review. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2010;68(10):2359–2376.
	58.	 Lawson RW, Peters JI, Shelledy DC. Effects of fiberoptic bron­
choscopy during mechanical ventilation in a lung model. Chest. 
2000;118(3):824–831.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
150
	59.	 Ernst A, Silvestri GA, Johnstone D. Interventional pulmonary pro­
cedures: guidelines from the American College of Chest Physicians. 
Chest. 2003;123(5):1693–1717.
	60.	 Baumann HJ, Klose H, Simon M, et al. Fiber optic bronchoscopy in 
patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure requiring noninva­
sive ventilation: a feasibility study. Crit Care. 2011;15(4):R179.
	61.	 Murgu SD, Pecson J, Colt HG. Bronchoscopy during noninvasive 
ventilation: indications and technique. Respir Care. 2010;55(5):
595–600.
	62.	 Caplan RA, Barker SJ, Connis RT, et al. Practice advisory for the pre­
vention and management of operating room fires. Anesthesiology. 
2008;108(5):786–801. quiz 971–972.
	63.	 Orr JB. Helium-oxygen gas mixtures in the management of patients with 
airway obstruction. Ear Nose Throat J. 1988;67(12): 866, 868–869.
	64.	 Milner QJ, Abdy S, Allen JG. Management of severe tracheal obstruc­
tion with helium/oxygen and a laryngeal mask airway. Anaesthesia. 
1997;52(11):1087–1089.
	65.	 Reuben AD. Heliox for asthma in the emergency department: a review 
of the literature. Emerg Med J. 2004;21(2):131–135.
	66.	 Linck SL. Use of heliox for intraoperative bronchospasm: a case report. 
AANA J. 2007;75(3):189–192.
	67.	 Nakstad ER, Opdahl H, Skjønsberg OH, Borchsenius F. Intrabronchial 
airway pressures in intubated patients during bronchoscopy under 
volume controlled and pressure controlled ventilation. Anaesth Inten­
sive Care. 2011;39(3):431–439.
	68.	 Searl CP, Perrino A. Fluid management in thoracic surgery. Anesthesiol 
Clin. 2012;30(4):641–655.
	69.	 Bolliger CT, Mathur PN, Beamis JF, et al. ERS/ATS statement on inter­
ventional pulmonology. European Respiratory Society/American 
Thoracic Society. Eur Respir J. 2002;19(2):356–373.
	70.	 Hautmann H, Gamarra F, Henke M, Diehm S, Huber RM. High fre­
quency jet ventilation in interventional fiberoptic bronchoscopy. 
Anesth Analg. 2000;90(6):1436–1440.
	71.	 Bruhn J, Myles PS, Sneyd R, Struys MMRF. Depth of anaesthesia 
monitoring: what’s available, what’s validated and what’s next? 
Br J Anaesth. 2006;97(1):85–94.
	72.	 Cooper RM. The use of an endotracheal ventilation catheter in the man­
agement of difficult extubations. Can J Anaesth. 1996;43(1):90–93.
	73.	 Izbicki G. Is routine chest radiography after transbronchial biopsy 
necessary? A prospective study of 350 cases. Chest. 2006;129(6):
1561–1564.
	74.	 Wong DH, Weber EC, Schell MJ, et al. Factors associated with post­
operative pulmonary complications in patients with severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Anesth Analg. 1995;80:276–284.
	75.	 Lee P, Mehta AC, Mathur PN. Management of complications 
from diagnostic and interventional bronchoscopy. Respirology. 
2009;14(7):940–953.
	76.	 Carr IM, Koegelenberg CFN, Von Groote-Bidlingmaier F, et al. Blood 
loss during flexible bronchoscopy: a prospective observational study. 
Respiration. 2012;84(4):312–318.
	77.	 Goldman JM, Currie DC, Morgan AD, Collins JV. Arterial oxygen satu­
ration during bronchography via the fibreoptic bronchoscope. Thorax. 
1987;42(9):694–695.
	78.	 Haynes D, Baumann MH. Management of pneumothorax. Semin 
Respir Crit Care Med. 2010;31(6):769–780.
	79.	 Ho AM-H, Wan S, Karmakar MK. Flooding with carbon dioxide pre­
vents airway fire induced by diathermy during open tracheostomy. 
J Trauma. 2007;63(1):228–231.
	80.	 English J. Anaesthesia for airway surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit 
Care Pain. 2006;6(1):28–31.
	81.	 Kim JH, Shin JH, Song H-Y, et al. Tracheobronchial laceration after 
balloon dilation for benign strictures: incidence and clinical signifi­
cance. Chest. 2007;131(4):1114–1117.
	82.	 Carbognani P, Bobbio A, Cattelani L, et al. Management of postintu­
bation membranous tracheal rupture. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(2):
406–409.
	83.	 Kim JH, Kim YH, Shin JH, et al. Deep tracheal laceration after bal­
loon dilation for benign tracheobronchial stenosis: case reports of two 
patients. Br J Radiol. 2006;79(942):529–535.
	84.	 Mussi A, Ambrogi MC, Menconi G, Ribechini A, Angeletti CA. Sur­
gical approaches to membranous tracheal wall lacerations. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2000;120(1):115–118.
	85.	 Miñambres E, Burón J, Ballesteros MA, et al. Tracheal rupture after 
endotracheal intubation: a literature systematic review. Eur J Cardio­
thorac Surg. 2009;35(6):1056–1062.
	86.	 Aslani A, Ng S-C, Hurley M, et al. Accuracy of identification of the 
cricothyroid membrane in female subjects using palpation: an obser­
vational study. Anesth Analg. 2012;114(5):987–992.
	87.	 MacIntyre A, Markarian MK, Carrison D, et al. Three-step emergency 
cricothyroidotomy. Mil Med. 2007;172(12):1228–1230.
151
One of the driving forces in the genesis of the field of inter­
ventional radiology was its minimally invasive nature. As 
catheters and stents replaced the physiologically taxing 
“open” procedure, patients were able to have an interven­
tion they may not otherwise have survived. Initially, local 
anesthesia and light sedation were usually sufficient to pro­
vide a comfortable experience for the patient with minimal 
risk, but continued improvements in imaging and device 
technology have made more complex procedures possible 
in sicker patients. This has made “local with sedation” a 
more challenging proposition for the interventionalist. The 
increasing need for an anesthesiologist seems like a natural 
progression since the line between the radiology suite and 
the operating room continues to be blurred. The knowledge 
and skill of an anesthesiologist play an undeniable role in 
providing appropriate anesthetic and physiological support 
for patients undergoing these procedures. The anesthe­
siologist’s understanding of the procedure and the proper 
application of pharmacology and other interventions is 
becoming necessary to decrease morbidity and improve 
patient care.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to discuss and detail 
all of the various procedures performed in the radiology 
suite. Our goal is to discuss the fundamental issues that exist 
in the radiology suite, with an emphasis on the more com­
mon and more challenging procedures performed there. As 
the field of interventional radiology continues to expand the 
number and complexity of procedures performed, the need 
for presence of an anesthesiologist will continue to expand 
with it.
Radiopaque Contrast
Intravenous contrast is commonly used in interventional 
radiology procedures. The overall incidence of adverse 
reactions using high-osmolar contrast agents is 5% to 
8%, with severe reactions occurring in 1 in 1000 to 2000 
examinations.1 Moderate reactions are those requiring 
therapeutic measures without hospitalization. Develop­
ment of nonionic and lower osmolality contrast agents 
has decreased the incidence and severity of contrast reac­
tions to 1% to 4%. Severe, life-threatening reactions in 
low-osmolality contrast agents continue to be rare and are 
reported to be less than 0.2%.2 Contrast reactions are clas­
sified as either anaphylactoid or chemotoxic, with ana­
phylactoid being more common and chemotoxic typically 
more severe (Box 17-1).
Anaphylactoid reactions can manifest as nausea, vomit­
ing, urticaria, pruritus, bronchospasm, and cardiovascular 
collapse. The exact mechanism is still unclear but likely 
involves the direct release of histamine from basophils and 
mast cells, which directly or indirectly activates the comple­
ment, coagulation, fibrinolytic, and kinin systems.1 It does 
not appear to be mediated by an antibody-antigen interac­
tion, despite resembling the typical symptoms of an allergic 
reaction. The magnitude of the reaction is not dependent on 
the dose or concentration of the contrast agent, and as with 
true allergic reactions, symptoms are typically seen within 
1 hour after administration of contrast. Preexisting activa­
tion of these systems in critically ill patients may increase 
the severity and activation of the contrast reaction. Cur­
rently no evidence suggests that shellfish allergy predisposes 
patients to a contrast reaction, but patients with a history of 
significant allergies, asthma, or anxiety have an increased 
risk for anaphylactoid reactions, and premedication should 
be considered.2 Patients with previous anaphylactoid reac­
tions may benefit from premedication with corticosteroids 
and histamine-1 blockers. A commonly used regimen is 
to give prednisone 50 mg 13 hours, 7 hours, and 1 hour 
before contrast administration and diphenhydramine 50 
mg 1 hour before contrast administration.3
Chemotoxic reactions to intravascular contrast are due 
to the inherent chemical properties of the contrast agent on 
specific organ systems. Because the contrast itself causes 
the reaction, the severity is directly proportional to its dose 
and concentration. Important factors are (hyper) osmolal­
ity, calcium binding, and the nature and concentration of 
its cations (sodium or meglumine). Critically ill patients 
who are already sensitive to significant volume shifts, 
arrhythmias, and renal insufficiency are at greater risk for 
chemotoxic reactions.
Treatment of acute contrast reactions is largely support­
ive. Once an adverse reaction has manifested, the injection 
of further contrast material should be immediately stopped. 
An urticarial rash may be self-limited or the harbinger of 
Adult Anesthesia in the 
Radiology Suite
DANIEL RUBIN and THOMAS CUTTER
17
Box 17-1  Classification of Severity of 
Reactions to Contrast Media
Minor: Nausea, vomiting (limited), urticarial (limited), pruritus, 
diaphoresis
Moderate: Faintness, vomiting (severe), urticaria (profound), facial 
edema, laryngeal edema, bronchospasm (mild)
Severe: Hypotensive shock, pulmonary edema, respiratory arrest, 
cardiac arrest, seizures
From Bush WH, Swanson DP. Acute reactions to intravascular contrast 
media: types, risk factors, recognition, and specific treatment. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol. 1991;157(6):1154.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
152
a worsening anaphylactoid reaction. The anesthesiologist 
should be vigilant for the development of bronchospasm, 
angioedema, hypotension, bradycardia, and sudden car­
diovascular collapse. Beta-agonists, intravenous fluids, 
epinephrine, atropine, and the ability to secure the airway 
should be readily available in any location where intrave­
nous contrast is administered.
Contrast-induced nephrotoxicity (CIN) is thought to 
result from the chemotoxic effects of the contrast on the 
renal tubules or by direct vasoconstriction. It is described 
as a sudden deterioration in renal function after the intra­
vascular administration of iodinated contrast material that 
cannot be explained by another nephrotoxic event.3 It is 
rare in patients without preexisting renal dysfunction or 
critical illness, but studies suggest an increased risk is also 
seen in patients with diabetes mellitus, heart failure, older 
age, hypertension, and anemia.4 A dose-dependent cor­
relation exists between the severity of injury and the dose 
of contrast, so the risks for worsening renal injury must be 
weighed against the benefits of the study or intervention 
planned. Strategies to help prevent CIN in patients with 
renal dysfunction are hydration with crystalloid and the 
administration of N-acetylcysteine and sodium bicarbon­
ate. N-acetylcysteine 600 mg given 24 hours and 12 hours 
before and 12 hours and 24 hours after administration of 
contrast coupled with prehydration before administration 
of nonionic, low-osmolality contrast decreased the inci­
dence of CIN in patients with preexisting renal disease as 
assessed by serum creatinine.5 Sodium bicarbonate also 
decreased the incidence of CIN in patients with preexisting 
renal dysfunction with the administration of 154 mEq/L 
of sodium bicarbonate as a bolus of 3 mL/kg/hr for 1 hour 
before contrast administration, followed by an infusion of 
1 mL/kg/hr for 6 hours after the procedure.6
Patients with diabetes and preexisting renal dysfunction 
who take metformin have developed severe lactic acidosis 
after an iodinated contrast study. If possible, metformin 
should be discontinued at the time of or before the proce­
dure, withheld for 48 hours subsequent to the procedure, 
and reinstituted only after renal function has been reevalu­
ated and found to be normal.7
Radiation Safety
The primary safety concern for the anesthesiologist in the 
interventional radiology suite is ionizing radiation. Com­
puted tomography and simple x-rays carry little risk, and 
fluoroscopy poses the greatest. The three primary sources 
are scatter radiation from the patient, direct radiation from 
the beam, and leakage from the radiation source, with scat­
ter radiation from the patient providing the greatest risk.
A typical fluoroscope comprises a radiation source and 
an image intensifier. The orientation of the fluoroscopy 
beam in the anterior–posterior plane places the radiation 
source below the patient and the image intensifier above 
the patient. This minimizes scatter radiation by deflecting 
it down to the floor, away from medical personnel. Biplane 
machines employ an additional laterally facing fluoro­
scope to improve visualization, decrease contrast dose, 
and shorten procedure time. The lateral scope’s radiation 
source is classically positioned on the opposite side of the 
interventionalist to decrease his radiation exposure. Anes­
thesia personnel are frequently located on the same side as 
the radiation source and can be exposed to four times greater 
radiation levels than the interventionalist.8 The anesthesia 
team should communicate to the interventionalist when 
they need to access the patient, during which fluoroscopy 
should not be used, to decrease unnecessary radiation expo­
sure. Anesthesia providers should avoid placing their hands 
into the x-ray beam unless absolutely necessary for patient 
safety (Figure 17-1).
The two primary methods to decrease overall radiation 
exposure are distancing oneself from the source of radiation 
and shielding. Standard lead aprons with thyroid collars 
decrease the radiation from fluoroscopy by a factor of 10 and 
should be worn by all anesthesia personnel while in the radi­
ology suite.9 Providers wearing aprons that do not provide 
adequate shielding in the back should avoid turning away 
from the beam while it is in use. When possible, transparent 
leaded acrylic shielding also should be placed between anes­
thesia providers and the patient to further decrease x-ray 
exposure. Anastasian et al8 showed that anesthesiologists’ 
eyes are exposed to a significant amount of radiation that 
could lead to cataracts and recommend that providers who 
spend considerable time in interventional radiology should 
consider using the lightweight leaded glasses that are com­
monly worn by interventionalists.
In addition to lead shielding, anesthesia providers should 
distance themselves as far as safely possible from the 
patient. The dose of radiation to which a provider is exposed 
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from 
the source of radiation. Interventions such as administer­
ing a bolus of medication, adjusting ventilator settings, or 
checking neuromuscular blockade all increase radiation 
0.5
0.5
1
2
4
8
8
2
2
1
1
2.
0 
m
1.
5
 m
1
.
0
 
m
Stray radiation
is µSv
per Gy ⋅ cm2
Figure 17-1  Distribution of scatter radiation from a lateral C-arm with 
the radiation source on the same side as the anesthesiologist. (From 
Anastasian ZH, Strozyk D, Meyers PM, Wang S, Berman MF. Radiation expo­
sure of the anesthesiologist in the neurointerventional suite. Anesthesiology. 
2011;114[3]:517.)
17  •  Adult Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
153
exposure.8 Even small distances can decrease radiation 
exposure significantly; therefore “remote” access using 
intravenous extension tubing or ventilator extension tub­
ing may allow the anesthesia provider to be positioned far­
ther away.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and road-map­
ping are two techniques that aid the interventionalist dur­
ing complex vascular procedures. These image acquisition 
techniques are highly sensitive to patient movement and 
breathing, and image quality is degraded easily. Patients 
are required to remain motionless and apneic for periods 
of up to 15 seconds to acquire adequate images. Because 
of the high levels of radiation, the anesthesiologist may 
choose to leave the immediate area, which is still within the 
standards for basic anesthetic monitoring endorsed by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) if the patient 
can be monitored remotely.10
General Considerations
CHOICE OF ANESTHETIC
The diversity and complexity of interventional radiology 
procedures have dramatically expanded over the past two 
decades. Although the vast majority of procedures are per­
formed under light or moderate sedation by a nurse and 
supervised by the interventionalist, an anesthesiologist is 
indicated if the patient has significant comorbidities or other 
issues that will make moderate sedation challenging or the 
procedure requires a general anesthetic.11 Procedures per­
formed in the United States are typically performed with 
more sedation than those performed in Europe, but general 
anesthesia is employed more often in Europe. The reason for 
this is unclear, but patient expectations and patient anxiety 
may play a role.12,13 A discussion with the interventionalist 
before every procedure should include the expected proce­
dure length, procedural stimulation, positioning, and need 
for patient cooperation. Biliary and percutaneous urologi­
cal procedures that are particularly stimulating have been 
performed successfully under neuraxial blockade, obviating 
the need for general anesthesia or deep sedation.14,15
PATIENT POSITIONING
Just as in the operating room, procedures performed in the 
radiology suite may last from 10 minutes to several hours. 
It is imperative for patients undergoing long procedures 
under moderate or deep sedation to be positioned as com­
fortably as possible. Foam padding, lumbar support, and a 
comfortable pillow all help ensure patient comfort during 
the procedure and may decrease the amount of sedation 
necessary. During femoral cannulation the patient must 
be completely supine, but a pillow may be placed under the 
knees for added support once the femoral sheath is in place. 
Some patients may not be able to lie supine for extended 
periods because of comorbid conditions, such as arthritis, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, obstructive sleep 
apnea, pleural effusions, or congestive heart failure, and 
these should be discussed with the radiologist. Some proce­
dures may allow for or require patients to be in the semi­
recumbent position. Extra care should be taken in patients 
undergoing placement of venous-access devices, because 
the patient position will increase the risk for venous air 
embolism during cannulation, especially in the spontane­
ously breathing patient. Some procedures (e.g., placement 
of percutaneous nephrostomy tubes and kyphoplasty) 
require the patient to be placed in the prone position, and 
specialized equipment and materials should be employed—
just as they are in the surgical suite.
PATIENT ACCESS
Depending on the type of procedure, access to the patient 
may be severely limited. The traditional arrangement with 
the anesthesiologist at the head of the bed is altered by the 
presence of fluoroscopy equipment and the radiologist. 
Certain procedures that focus around the head and neck, 
such as interventional neuroradiology procedures and 
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting (TIPS), 
make it especially difficult to access and secure the airway 
in an emergency situation. The patient’s arms are typically 
tucked and secured to allow for free movement of the fluo­
roscopy machine, which will require intravenous access 
and monitoring equipment, such as arterial lines, to be 
placed before the procedure starts (Figure 17-2).
TEMPERATURE
Maintaining normothermia during a procedure can be 
challenging in interventional radiology suites because the 
temperature is typically at or below 68° F because of the 
sensitivity of the radiology equipment.16 Strategies that 
actively warm the patient, such as forced-air warming 
Figure 17-2  Interventional neurology suite. Anesthesia providers are 
located behind the imaging monitors on the right and the interven­
tional neuroradiologist is located on the left.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
154
blankets and fluid warmers, and those that minimize heat 
loss, such as humidifiers on the ventilator circuit and low-
flow anesthesia, should be employed for long procedures. 
Applying the usual forced-air warming blankets can be dif­
ficult because of the need for access by the radiologist.
ANESTHESIA EQUIPMENT
Because anesthesia is required for only a small number of 
cases, the anesthesiologist typically uses space “borrowed” 
from the interventionalist. Important considerations 
include positioning the anesthesia machine a sufficient dis­
tance from the patient to allow the fluoroscopy machine 
adequate travel for imaging. Extensions on intravenous 
tubing, arterial pressure tubing, and ventilator tubing 
are usually required to allow adequate distance from the 
patient. Neurointerventional radiology typically employs 
a biplane fluoroscopy machine to help minimize radiation. 
The rotation of this device requires that all tubing, moni­
tors, and ventilator circuits travel inferior to the patient. 
The ASA standards should be followed for equipment in 
all off-site cases and include adequate oxygen supply and 
backup, suction, a waste scavenging system, electrical out­
lets with backup power supply, emergency equipment for 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, trained support staff and 
two-way communication for assistance, and a rehearsed 
plan.17 Nitrous oxide should not be used with anesthesia 
machines that rely on activated charcoal filters (F/AIR filter 
canisters, Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, Mass.) because it 
cannot be effectively removed by these systems.
PATIENT MOTION
A discussion with the radiologist should take place before 
the start of the procedure about the importance of patient 
movement with regard to its impact on image acquisition 
and quality. For example, DSA and road-mapping require 
the patient to be completely motionless and apneic to 
acquire sufficient image quality.
MONITORING
The standards for basic anesthetic monitoring should apply 
to all patients having anything more than light sedation. 
Access to the patient may make ventilation assessment 
difficult for some procedures. The ASA recommends that 
during moderate or deep sedation the adequacy of ven­
tilation should be evaluated by continual observation of 
qualitative clinical signs and monitoring for the presence 
of exhaled carbon dioxide unless precluded or invalidated 
by the nature of the patient, procedure, or equipment.10 
More invasive monitoring such as arterial lines and central 
venous pressure monitoring may be necessary for certain 
interventional neuroradiology procedures such as acute 
stroke or the coiling of arteriovenous malformations. If 
arterial pressure monitoring is required only during the 
procedure, it may be possible to measure it from the arte­
rial sheath placed by the interventionalist, thereby obviat­
ing the need for a specific radial artery cannula. It should 
be noted that the arterial pressure waveform may be damp­
ened by the coaxial catheter in the arterial sheath. Fluids 
administered by the interventionalist should be monitored 
throughout the procedure because large volumes of fluid 
may be given during lengthy procedures. Foley catheteriza­
tion should be considered in patients undergoing lengthy 
procedures so that urine output can help guide fluid man­
agement decisions.
It must be stressed that the location of the radiology suite 
is often a fair distance from the general operating rooms. 
Adequate rescue equipment, particularly airway devices, 
should be brought to, or located near, the radiology suite 
in case of emergency. In the patient with a difficult airway 
undergoing a general anesthetic, it may be safer to induce 
anesthesia in the general operating room area with anes­
thesia support and then transport the patent to the radiol­
ogy suite. Newer institutions have begun to address this 
issue by placing interventional suites closer to the operat­
ing rooms.
Visceral Procedures
BILIARY PROCEDURES
Biliary Angiography and Drainage
Percutaneous biliary procedures can determine the pres­
ence of biliary obstruction, infection, or malignancy. 
Patients undergoing biliary drainage because of obstruc­
tion may be critically ill from sepsis and too unstable to tol­
erate operative cholecystectomy. Patients are placed in the 
supine position with the right arm placed above the head 
and a needle inserted at or below the 10th rib via the liver 
into the biliary system. Although moderate sedation is usu­
ally administered for this procedure, stimulation from dila­
tion of transhepatic tracts can be significant, and neuraxial 
analgesia has been successfully used for these procedures.14 
Contraindications for the procedure include uncorrected 
coagulopathy, contrast reaction, hydatid disease, a vascu­
lar hepatic lesion, and undrained ascites.
TRANSVENOUS BILIARY PROCEDURES
Transvenous biliary procedures include hepatic venogra­
phy, hepatic hemodynamic pressure measurements, liver 
biopsy, and TIPS. Indications for hepatic hemodynamic 
pressure measurements include assessing the presence of 
hepatic venous pathology and the severity of portal venous 
hypertension.
Indications for TIPS are recurrent esophageal variceal 
bleeding, bridge to liver transplantation to prevent variceal 
bleeding, and large ascites or hydrothorax that is not ame­
nable to medical therapy.18 Absolute contraindications to 
TIPS are primary prevention of variceal bleeding, conges­
tive heart failure, multiple hepatic cysts, uncontrolled infec­
tion or sepsis, unrelieved biliary obstruction, and severe 
pulmonary hypertension. Creation of the portal shunt may 
lead to significantly greater venous return and may strain a 
failing right heart.
The procedure involves cannulating the right or left 
jugular vein using ultrasound guidance and placing a 
sheath. The hepatic vein is then canalized, a catheter is 
wedged, and carbon dioxide is injected as contrast for a 
hepatic venogram. The venogram outlines the portal 
venous system and guides the interventionalist for the 
17  •  Adult Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
155
liver puncture. The portal system is then accessed, a tract 
is dilated, and a covered metal stent is left in place to main­
tain patency of the shunt. After the stent is deployed, pres­
sure measurements and portal venography are repeated. 
A decrease in the portosystemic gradient to less than 
12 mm Hg is considered a successful procedure, because 
this leads to a decreased incidence of variceal bleeding and 
decreased recurrence of ascites (Figure 17-3).19
Patients with refractory ascites are likely to have poor 
pulmonary compliance, compressive atelectasis, pleural 
effusions, and hepatopulmonary syndrome, with hypox­
emia secondary to pulmonary arteriovenous malforma­
tions.20 Some centers require an echocardiogram before 
TIPS to investigate for portopulmonary hypertension; this 
is an absolute contraindication to TIPS, and the incidence 
may be up to 16% in the cirrhotic population.21
TIPS has been performed under sedation, monitored 
anesthesia care, and general anesthesia.22-24 The risk for 
aspiration, difficult access to the airway, hepatic encepha­
lopathy, and other significant comorbidities make a gen­
eral anesthetic the prudent choice.25 An emergency TIPS 
procedure for acute variceal bleeding should be performed 
under general anesthesia because of the increased risk for 
aspiration and hemorrhage. Fluid administration should be 
kept to a minimum because of worsening ascites and edema 
formation. Complications from transvenous biliary proce­
dures include hepatic bleeding into the portal tract, biliary 
leak, sepsis, capsular bleeding, hemothorax, pneumotho­
rax, and contrast reaction.
Chalasani et al26 retrospectively reviewed morbidity after 
TIPS procedures and found that an emergency procedure 
for variceal hemorrhage, alanine aminotransferase greater 
than 100 international units/L, bilirubin >3.0 mg/dL, and 
the presence of pre-TIPs encephalopathy were independent 
predictors for 30-day mortality.26 Of the four risk factors, 
emergency procedure for variceal hemorrhage was the 
strongest predictor of mortality.
GENITOURINARY PROCEDURES
Percutaneous nephrostomy is performed for direct access 
to the renal pelvis to provide urinary drainage in the setting 
of obstruction and allow for direct extraction or destruc­
tion of large renal calculi. The patient is placed in the 
prone position, and a subcostal or supracostal approach 
is taken to access the kidney. A significantly higher inci­
dence of pulmonary injuries, such as pneumothorax and 
hydrothorax, occur in patients undergoing the supracostal 
approach, so breath-holding or apnea should be initiated 
during cannulation to decrease the incidence of pulmonary 
complications.27 A chest radiograph is recommended after 
every percutaneous nephrolithotomy, regardless of access 
site.27 The anesthesiologist should be diligent in monitor­
ing for increased peak airway pressures, hypoxemia, and 
increasing arterial carbon dioxide tension (Paco2). Anemia 
from blood loss and hemodilution may be profound as a 
result of absorption of the irrigation fluids, with an average 
decrease in hemoglobin of 2.8 g/dL.28 Although general 
anesthesia is typically employed, neuraxial anesthesia and 
sedation have been shown to be appropriate for this type of 
procedure (Figure 17-4).15
Vascular Procedures
Diagnostic peripheral angiography and angioplasty are 
most commonly performed on the lower extremities for 
claudication secondary to peripheral vascular disease. 
A vascular sheath is usually introduced into the femoral 
artery, but the brachial artery also can be accessed. Light 
sedation and generous local anesthetic administration at 
the site of cannulation are usually all that is required for 
these procedures, and an anesthesiologist typically is not 
Figure 17-3  Portal venogram immediately after transjugular intrahe­
patic portosystemic shunt placement showing excellent shunt patency 
with minimal portal flow to the liver. (From Rosch J, Keller FS. Transjugu­
lar intrahepatic portosystemic shunt: present status, comparison with 
endoscopic therapy and shunt surgery, and future prospectives. World J 
Surg. 2001;25[3]:339.)
Figure 17-4  Patient and fluoroscope positioning for a prone percuta­
neous nephrostomy tube placement. (From Ray AA, Chung DG, Honey 
RJ. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy in the prone and prone-flexed posi­
tions: anatomic considerations. J Endourol 2009;23[10]:1609.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
156
involved.12,13 If an obstruction is noted, balloon angioplasty 
with a subsequent stent may be performed to improve blood 
flow for symptomatic claudication. General anesthesia is 
rarely needed for these procedures, unless the patient can­
not tolerate the supine position for even short periods.
CATHETER-DIRECTED THROMBOLYSIS
Arterial thrombolysis is accomplished by mechanical dis­
ruption of the clot and infusion of a thrombolytic agent 
such as recombinant tissue plasminogen. A catheter is 
advanced through the clot to increase exposure to the 
thrombolytic, or it may stop just proximal to the clot. The 
catheter is then left in place and the medication allowed to 
infuse until perfusion is restored or the clot is determined 
not to be resolving. Similar to angiography, this procedure 
is typically performed with generous local anesthesia and 
mild sedation. Anesthesia is seldom required, but if it is, the 
anesthetic depends on patient comorbidities and avoiding 
trauma during airway maneuvers.12,13 Neuraxial regional 
anesthesia is contraindicated because of the use of throm­
bolytic medication.29
VENOUS ACCESS
Vascular access constitutes a large part of interventional 
radiology practice in some settings. Catheters range in size 
and purpose and are typically placed for intermittent hemo­
dialysis or long-term infusion of medications. Patients are 
supine during the procedure to decrease the risk for venous 
air embolism during cannulation.30 Sedation should be 
light enough to allow patients to comply with holding 
their breath. Judicious use of local anesthesia significantly 
decreases the amount of sedation required for the proce­
dure. Adverse reactions that can occur during the proce­
dure are bleeding, vessel injury, pneumothorax, venous air 
embolism, and contrast reaction.
Neurological Procedures
CAROTID ARTERY STENTING
Carotid artery stenting (CAS) is a minimally invasive alter­
native to an open carotid endarterectomy (CEA) for severe 
carotid artery stenosis. This endovascular approach is pre­
ferred in patients with difficult cervical anatomy, stenosis 
that is above the mandible or below the clavicle, radiation 
to the neck area, and significant comorbidities that may 
increase the risk for surgery.31 In high-risk patients, no 
significant difference was found between long-term inci­
dence of stroke, myocardial infarction, and risk for death in 
patients randomized to receive CAS or CEA.32 The peripro­
cedural stroke rate is higher in patients undergoing CAS, 
but they have a lower incidence of periprocedural myocar­
dial infarction than those undergoing CEA. These outcome 
differences disappear over 4 years.33
CAS is performed through an arterial sheath that is 
placed in the femoral artery with the patient supine. Hepa­
rin is given after femoral artery cannulation, and activated 
clotting time is titrated to between 200 and 300 seconds. 
In the event of significant hemorrhage, protamine should 
be immediately available. A catheter is advanced to the site 
of the lesion, and an emboli-protection device (e.g., Spider 
FX Embolic Protection Device, Covidien, Mansfield, Mass.) 
may be deployed to decrease the incidence of periprocedural 
stroke. A balloon angioplasty is performed, leaving a stent 
in place to maintain patency of the carotid artery. CAS is 
almost always performed under light sedation, because 
this allows monitoring for any neurological changes dur­
ing the procedure.34,35 If the patient cannot tolerate light 
sedation, employing a cerebral monitoring device such as 
an electroencephalograph is prudent.36 Distention of the 
carotid artery and activation of the baroreceptor reflex may 
cause significant bradycardia and hypotension that can be 
treated with anticholinergic medications but may require 
external pacing if it is severe.37 Postprocedure hypertension 
should be avoided to prevent cerebral hyperemia and neu­
rological complications. Patients are usually continued on 
aspirin and clopidogrel to prevent stent thrombosis.
ACUTE STROKE REVASCULARIZATION
“Time is brain” is the critical factor in the setting of an acute 
stroke. Revascularization is always an emergency proce­
dure, and the faster the procedure is performed from the 
onset of symptoms the greater is the chance for neurologi­
cal recovery.38 The two most common methods of revascu­
larization are intraarterial thrombolysis and endovascular 
thrombectomy. Intraarterial thrombolysis is performed 
when intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activa­
tor (rt-PA)—a protein that breaks down blood clots and is 
used in medicines to treat clots—has failed to improve the 
neurological deficit, no intracranial hemorrhage is present, 
and imaging confirms a lesion in the M1 or M2 segment, 
internal carotid artery, or posterior circulation.39 Current 
guidelines restrict the use of intraarterial thrombolysis to 6 
hours from the onset of symptoms and up to 24 hours in the 
posterior circulation.39 Intraarterial thrombolysis allows 
for higher local concentrations of rt-PA, direct administra­
tion over the thrombus, and mechanical disruption of the 
clot to improve exposure to the thrombolytic agent.40
Endovascular thrombectomy is employed as a first-line 
treatment in patients with a contraindication to admin­
istration of thrombolytics or as an adjunct if intraarterial 
thrombolysis is unsuccessful. The devices work by grasping 
the clot proximally, distally sweeping the clot into a basket, 
or aspiration of the clot with balloon occlusion of the proxi­
mal vessel. Endovascular thrombectomy allows for a lon­
ger therapeutic window in the setting of acute stroke of up 
to 8 hours, because it does not use thrombolytics.39 Com­
plications with mechanical approaches include excessive 
trauma to the vasculature that may include vasospasm, 
vessel dissection, perforation, or rupture and thrombus 
fragmentation causing distal embolization (Figure 17-5).
Because the procedure is time-sensitive, little may be 
known about the patient’s medical or surgical history other 
than the presenting condition. Patients are usually unable 
to answer questions, and family or caregivers may not be 
available. A preoperative evaluation focusing on whatever 
history is available, airway examination, physical exami­
nation, and preprocedural mental status should be per­
formed in a timely manner and must not significantly delay 
the procedure. Assessment of mental status should include 
17  •  Adult Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
157
risk for aspiration, ability to protect the airway, and ability 
to follow commands and remain motionless during imag­
ing. Common comorbidities found in patients with acute 
stroke are hypertension, diabetes, atrial fibrillation, coro­
nary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disorder, and smoking.41 Hypergly­
cemia is found in one third of all patients with stroke and 
is associated with worse neurological outcomes. Glucose 
levels should be decreased to below 140 mg/dL, and some 
patients may require an insulin infusion.39 The physical 
examination may be the most helpful part of the preopera­
tive evaluation in identifying other medical conditions.
Sedation or general anesthsia can be safely performed 
in patients with acute stroke, but patient selection for each 
technique is critical.42-44 The two most important variables 
for determining the level of anesthesia are whether patients 
can remain motionless and apneic during imaging and 
whether they can protect their airway. Because the proce­
dure is time-sensitive, in the presence of any doubt a gen­
eral anesthetic with endotracheal intubation is indicated. 
Additionally, any worsening of preprocedural neurological 
status may require that the airway be secured and a general 
anesthetic administered. Recent literature suggests that 
relative hypotension (systolic blood pressure <140 mm Hg) 
and general anesthesia may worsen outcomes after endo­
vascular therapy for acute stroke.44,45 This study should be 
viewed as inconclusive because of the numerous limitations 
in the study, including small sample size, a sicker patient 
population undergoing general anesthesia, and no stan­
dardized general anesthesia technique.44 Also, the retro­
spective analysis precludes definitive conclusions about the 
relationship between general anesthesia and worse neuro­
logical outcomes in the setting of revascularization in acute 
stroke.
Evidence to guide treatment for pharmacologically 
induced hypotension in the setting of an acute stroke is 
lacking. Current understanding of altered cerebral auto­
regulation in the setting of acute stroke suggests that hypo­
tension during a general anesthetic should be avoided, but 
the level of hypotension that decreases cerebral blood flow 
is unknown. Preprocedural blood pressure may be used as a 
guide to help the anesthesiologist determine the appropriate 
target blood pressure during the procedure. Overt hyper­
tension, defined as a systolic blood pressure greater than 
185 mm Hg or diastolic greater than 110 mm Hg, should 
be avoided because it has been shown to worsen outcomes 
in stroke and is a contraindication for intravenous rt-PA.39 
Discussion should be ongoing throughout the procedure 
between the neurointerventionalist and anesthesiologist 
regarding the optimal blood pressure. Blood pressure moni­
toring with an arterial line may be benefical because of the 
likelihood of significant lability in blood pressure and the 
need to avoid pressure extremes, but placement of the cath­
eter should not be at the expense of delaying the procedure. 
Ideally, the neurointerventional team and the anesthesia 
team should work in parallel as they prepare the patient for 
the procedure.
CEREBRAL ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION 
THERAPY
Cerebral arteriovenous malformations are congenital col­
lections of arteries that lead into a venous system with 
a large collection of noncapillary vessels, termed a nidus, 
interspersed between them. Endovascular therapy is per­
formed as either primary therapy to embolize the nidus of 
vessels or in combination with a surgical resection. Preop­
erative embolization is performed to decrease arteriovenous 
malformation bleeding and to size and target vessels that 
are not amenable to surgical resection.46 During emboliza­
tion, solid occlusive devices (coils, balloons), particulates 
(polyvinyl alcohol particles), or liquid embolic agents (onyx 
glue) via flow-directed catheters are fluoroscopically posi­
tioned in the arterial feeders or the nidus.
Anesthetic considerations for arteriovenous malforma­
tion embolization focus around lowering arterial blood pres­
sure to aid embolization.47,48 Decreasing arterial pressure 
causes a decrease in blood flow across the arteriovenous 
A
B
Figure 17-5  The Mechanical Embolus Retrieval in Cerebral Ischemia (Merci) retriever. A, Baseline angiogram demonstrates complete occlusion of the 
right internal carotid artery (ICA) terminus (black arrow). B, Posttreatment angiogram demonstrates complete reperfusion of the right ICA territory after 
1 pass of the Merci L6 device. (From Nogueira RG, Schwamm LH, Hirsch JA. Endovascular approaches to acute stroke. I. Drugs, devices, and data. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 2009;30[4]:654.)
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
158
malformation, allowing for a more controlled deployment 
of embolization devices. General anesthesia is typically 
employed, and volatile agents can be used to help decrease 
blood pressure. Controlled ventilation also allows for mild 
hypoventilation (Paco2 50-60 mm Hg) and cerebral vaso­
dilatation, which helps to further decrease flow across an 
arteriovenous malformation. Complications of the pro­
cedure include embolization of particulate matter in the 
pulmonary circulation, hemorrhage, thrombosis, and cere­
bral infarction. Hypertension after embolization should 
be avoided, because this may precipitate hemorrhage and 
edema in adjacent cerebral parenchyma as a result of nor­
mal perfusion pressure breakthrough. Normal vasculature 
surrounding the arteriovenous malformation is chronically 
vasodilated to divert cerebral blood flow to healthy tissue. 
Cerebral autoregulation may be impaired, and the resulting 
hyperemia may result in hyperperfusion injury.49
ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
Over the past decade, endovascular aneurysm emboliza­
tion has become the primary treatment for many cerebral 
aneurysms. Regardless of the approach—surgical or endo­
vascular—the goal of aneurysm embolization is to remove 
the communication between the cerebral vasculature and 
the aneurysm sac. Initial endovascular embolizations in 
the 1970s were performed using detachable balloons to 
occlude either the aneurysm sac or the parent vessel sup­
plying the aneurysm.50 Guido Guglielmi et al51 revolution­
ized the treatment of endovascular embolization in 1991 
with the use of detachable thrombogenic platinum coils for 
the treatment of a carotid-cavernous fistula. Using a metal­
lic guidewire, a coil can be positioned in the aneurysm sac, 
where a small electrical current is used to detach it and 
leave it in place. Multiple Guglielmi detachable coils (GDC, 
Boston Scientific, Natick, Mass.) are used for each aneu­
rysm, with the goal of producing a thrombus to exclude it 
from the circulation. Endovascular embolization became 
the primary treatment for both ruptured and unruptured 
aneurysms after the International Subarachnoid Aneu­
rysm Trial proved short-term efficacy for endovascular 
treatment by showing a decreased mortality and depen­
dence in the endovascular treatment group after 1 year.52 
Middle cerebral artery aneurysms may be the exception to 
the “coil first” approach because of the unfavorable endo­
vascular anatomy, and these aneurysms may be primarily 
treated using surgical clipping.
Anesthetic considerations for elective endovascular coil­
ing include blood pressure control, imaging requirements, 
discomfort during coiling, and expected length of the pro­
cedure. Hypertension and acute changes in systolic pres­
sure should be avoided during endotracheal intubation if 
a general anesthetic is used, because this can increase the 
risk for rupture.53 DSA and road-mapping techniques are 
used to help guide the catheters to the aneurysm sac, and 
patients must remain motionless with periods of apnea 
for image acquisition and catheter advancement. During 
injection of contrast material, awake patients may experi­
ence a warm sensation accompanied by a headache, and 
the electrical current that is generated when detaching 
the GDC can be painful.54 Endovascular procedures may 
be quite long, especially if the aneurysm sac is difficult to 
access or the coils are not conforming appropriately. Given 
the needs of imaging requirements, discomfort of the proce­
dure, and expected length, general endotracheal anesthesia 
is often chosen for this procedure, but it can be successfully 
performed under local anesthesia with or without seda­
tion.55 A general anesthetic with endotracheal intubation 
should be used for all ruptured aneurysms. Patients who 
are to undergo emergency aneurysm coiling typically have 
altered mental status, increased intracranial pressure, and 
hemodynamic instability. Arterial pressure monitoring typ­
ically is not necessary for elective procedures because of the 
low risk for hemorrhage, unless patient comorbidities war­
rant more aggressive monitoring, but it may be beneficial in 
emergencies (Figure 17-6).
Complications include thrombosis, aneurysmal rupture, 
vasospasm, perforation of normal vessels, and contrast 
reaction. Rupture can be detected by extravasation of con­
trast or hemodynamic changes (i.e., hypertension or brady­
cardia) secondary to raised intracranial pressure. If rupture 
occurs during a procedure performed under sedation, imme­
diate conversion to general anesthesia is advised, being 
A
B
Figure 17-6  Angiographic view of basilar artery aneurysm before 
and after coiling with detachable platinum coils. (From Johnston 
SC, Higashida RT, Barrow DL, et al. Recommendations for the endovas­
cular treatment of intracranial aneurysms: a statement for healthcare 
professionals from the Committee on Cerebrovascular Imaging of the 
American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular Radiology. Stroke. 
2002;33(10):2537.
17  •  Adult Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
159
mindful not to cause hypertension, which may exacerbate 
the hemorrhage. Heparin should be immediately reversed 
with protamine, and blood pressure should be controlled 
to prevent worsening hemorrhage while still maintaining 
adequate cerebral perfusion pressure.54,56 Communica­
tion between the anesthesiologist and interventionalist 
should include the extent of the hemorrhage and the plan 
for further management. Further coiling can be performed 
to attempt to obliterate the aneurysm and prevent further 
hemorrhage. If this fails, the patient may require an opera­
tive intervention, including surgical clipping, craniectomy, 
or placement of a ventricular drain.56 Measures to decrease 
intracranial pressure, such as administration of manni­
tol and mild hyperventilation, should be considered in the 
event of a large rupture.
Certain aneurysms are not amenable to embolization 
without sacrificing the parent artery. In these situations a 
parent vessel occlusion test is performed before embolization 
to determine if adequate collateral circulation exists to avoid 
cerebral infarction. The procedure is always performed on 
an awake patient to provide the sensitivity required in the 
neurological examination to detect changes caused by isch­
emia. The patient is given heparin for anticoagulation, and 
an intravascular balloon is placed at the base of the parent 
artery. A baseline neurological examination is done, the 
balloon is inflated, and continuous neurological examina­
tions are performed to search for any new deficits. A new 
deficit shows that collateral flow is inadequate and a cranial 
bypass needs to be placed before embolization. Some centers 
will induce hypotension to detect the ischemic threshold in 
patients and further quantify the adequacy of collateral flow.
VASOSPASM
Cerebral vasospasm is a clinically significant vasoconstric­
tion of the cerebral vessels in the circle of Willis that causes 
worsening neurological status precipitated by extravasated 
blood in the subarachnoid space. Vasospasm is a neuro­
logical emergency and is primarily treated by augment­
ing cerebral blood flow, decreasing intracranial pressure 
and decreasing cerebral metabolic rate.57 The mainstay 
of improving cerebral blood flow is triple H therapy (i.e., 
hypertension, hemodilution, and hypervolemia) by increas­
ing cerebral perfusion pressure, decreasing blood viscosity, 
and improving cardiac output. Patients presenting to the 
interventional suite with vasospasm will have failed con­
ventional therapy and are critically ill, with neurological 
deficits. A general anesthetic should be administered for 
this procedure because of the urgency of the procedure 
and ongoing neurological deficits. Endovascular therapy 
involves the infusion of vasodilators and angioplasty of 
the affected vessels.58 Infusion of calcium channel blockers 
can cause significant bradycardia and hypotension, which 
should be aggressively treated in the patient with vaso­
spasm because this can exacerbate cerebral ischemia.59 
Angioplasty is a last resort for the treatment of vasospasm 
because of the risk for vessel rupture and hemorrhage.
References
	 1.	 Bush WH, Swanson DP. Acute reactions to intravascular contrast 
media: types, risk factors, recognition, and specific treatment. AJR Am 
J Roentgenol. 1991;157(6):1153–1161.
	 2.	 Beaty AD, Lieberman PL, Slavin RG. Seafood allergy and radio­
contrast media: are physicians propagating a myth? Am J Med. 
2008;121(2):e1–e4.
	 3.	 American College of Radiology Committee on Drugs and Contrast 
Media. ACR manual on contrast media. 8th ed; 2012. http://www.acr.
org/∼/media/ACR/Documents/PDF/QualitySafety/Resources/Con­
trast%20Manual/2013_Contrast_Media.pdf.
	 4.	 Pannu N, Wiebe N, Tonelli M. Prophylaxis strategies for contrast-
induced nephropathy. JAMA. 2006;295(23):2765–2779.
	 5.	 Tepel M, van der Giet M, Schwarzfeld C, Laufer U, Liermann D, Zidek 
W. Prevention of radiographic-contrast-agent-induced reductions 
in renal function by acetylcysteine. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(3):
180–184.
	 6.	 Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV, Holleman JH, et al. Prevention of 
contrast-induced nephropathy with sodium bicarbonate: a random­
ized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291(19):2328–2334.
	 7.	 McCartney MM, Gilbert FJ, Murchison LE, Pearson D, McHardy K, 
Murray AD. Metformin and contrast media: a dangerous combina­
tion? Clin Radiol. 1999;54(1):29–33.
	 8.	 Anastasian ZH, Strozyk D, Meyers PM, Wang S, Berman MF. Radia­
tion exposure of the anesthesiologist in the neurointerventional suite. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114(3):512–520.
	 9.	 Kemerink GJ, Frantzen MJ, Oei K, et  al. Patient and occupa­
tional dose in neurointerventional procedures. Neuroradiology. 
2002;44(6):522–528.
	10.	 Standards for basic anesthetic monitoring. Approved by the Ameri­
can Society of Anesthesiologists House of Delegates October 21, 1986, 
and last amended on October 20, 2010, with an effective date of July 
1, 2011. In: ASA standards, guidelines and statements. October 2010. 
http://www.asahq.org/For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-
Statements.aspx.
	11.	 Arepally A, Oechsle D, Kirkwood S, Savader SJ. Safety of conscious 
sedation in interventional radiology. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 
2001;24(3):185–190.
	12.	 Haslam PJ, Yap B, Mueller PR, Lee MJ. Anesthesia practice and clini­
cal trends in interventional radiology: a European survey. Cardiovasc 
Interv Radiol. 2000;23(4):256–261.
	13.	 Mueller PR, Wittenberg KH, Kaufman JA, Lee MJ. Patterns of anes­
thesia and nursing care for interventional radiology procedures: a 
national survey of physician practices and preferences. Radiology. 
1997;202(2):339–343.
	14.	 Harshfield DL, Teplick SK, Brandon JC. Pain control during interven­
tional biliary procedures: epidural anesthesia vs I.V. sedation. AJR Am 
J Roentgenol. 1993;161(5):1057–1059.
	15.	 Kuzgunbay B, Turunc T, Akin S, Ergenoglu P, Aribogan A, Ozkardes 
H. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy under general versus combined 
spinal-epidural anesthesia. J Endourol. 2009;23(11):1835–1838.
	16.	 Schenker MP, Martin R, Shyn PB, Baum RA. Interventional radiology 
and anesthesia. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(1):87–94.
	17.	 Statement on nonoperating room anesthetizing locations. Approved 
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists House of Delegates Octo­
ber 15, 2003, and amended on October 22, 2008. In: ASA standards, 
guidelines and statements. October 2008. http://www.asahq.org/For-
Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.aspx.
	18.	 Boyer TD, Haskal ZJ. American Association for the Study of Liver Dis­
eases practice guidelines: the role of transjugular intrahepatic porto­
systemic shunt creation in the management of portal hypertension. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2005;16(5):615–629.
	19.	 Haskal ZJ, Martin L, Cardella JF, et al. Quality improvement guide­
lines for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunts. J Vasc Interv 
Radiol. 2003;14(9 Pt 2):S265–S270.
	20.	 Rodríguez-Roisin R, Krowka MJ. Hepatopulmonary syndrome: a 
liver-induced lung vascular disorder. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(22):
2378–2387.
	21.	 Hoeper MM, Krowka MJ, Strassburg CP. Portopulmonary hyperten­
sion and hepatopulmonary syndrome. Lancet. 2004;363(9419):
1461–1468.
	22.	 DeGasperi A, Corti A, Corso R, et al. Transjugular intrahepatic por­
tosystemic shunt (tips): the anesthesiological point of view after 150 
procedures managed under total intravenous anesthesia. J Clin Monit 
Comput. 2009;23(6):341–346.
	23.	 Yonker-Sell AE, Connolly LA. Mortality during transjugular 
intrahepatic 
portosystemic 
shunt 
placement. 
Anesthesiology. 
1996;84(1):231–233.
	24.	 Scher C. Anesthesia for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;47(2):21–28.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
160
	25.	 Pivalizza EG, Gottschalk LI, Cohen A, Middelbrook M, Soltes G. Anes­
thesia for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt placement. 
Anesthesiology. 1996;85(4):946–947.
	26.	 Chalasani N, Clark WS, Martin LG, et al. Determinants of mortality in 
patients with advanced cirrhosis after transjugular intrahepatic por­
tosystemic shunting. Gastroenterology. 2000;118(1):138–144.
	27.	 Rozentsveig V, Neulander EZ, Roussabrov E, et  al. Anesthetic con­
siderations during percutaneous nephrolithotomy. J Clin Anesth. 
2007;19(5):351–355.
	28.	 Stoller ML, Wolf Jr JS, St. Lezin MA. Estimated blood loss and trans­
fusion rates associated with percutaneous nephrolithotomy. J Urol. 
1994;152(6 Pt 1):1977–1981.
	29.	 Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, et al. Regional anesthesia in 
the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: Ameri­
can Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine evidence-based 
guidelines (third edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35(1):64–101.
	30.	 Vesely TM. Air embolism during insertion of central venous catheters. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2001;12(11):1291–1295.
	31.	 Erickson KM, Cole DJ. Carotid artery disease: stenting vs endarterec­
tomy. Br J Anaesth. 2010;105(suppl 1):i34–i49.
	32.	 Gurm HS, Yadav JS, Fayad P, et  al. Long-term results of carotid 
stenting versus endarterectomy in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 
2008;358(15):1572–1579.
	33.	 Brott TG, Hobson 2nd RD, Howard G, et  al. Stenting versus end­
arterectomy for treatment of carotid-artery stenosis. N Engl J Med. 
363(1):11–23.
	34.	 Reddy U, Smith M. Anesthetic management of endovascular proce­
dures for cerebrovascular atherosclerosis. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2012;25(4):486–492.
	35.	 Lewis SC, Warlow CP, Bodenham AP, et al. General anaesthesia ver­
sus local anaesthesia for carotid surgery (gala): a multicentre, ran­
domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;372(9656):2132–2142.
	36.	 McFarland HR, Pinkerton Jr JA, Frye D. Continuous electroencephalo­
graphic monitoring during carotid endarterectomy. J Cardiovasc Surg 
(Torino). 1988;29(1):12–18.
	37.	 Lin PH, Zhou W, Kougias P, et al. Factors associated with hypotension 
and bradycardia after carotid angioplasty and stenting. J Vasc Surg. 
2007;46(5):846–853. discussion 853–854.
	38.	 Baron JC, von Kummer R, del Zoppo GJ. Treatment of acute ischemic 
stroke: challenging the concept of a rigid and universal time window. 
Stroke. 1995;26(12):2219–2221.
	39.	 Adams Jr HP, del Zoppo G, Alberts MJ, et al. Guidelines for the early 
management of adults with ischemic stroke: a guideline from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke 
Council, Clinical Cardiology Council, Cardiovascular Radiology and 
Intervention Council, and the Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular 
Disease and Quality of Care Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary 
Working Groups: the American Academy of Neurology affirms the 
value of this guideline as an educational tool for neurologists. Circula­
tion. 2007;115(20):e478–e534.
	40.	 Nogueira RG, Schwamm LH, Hirsch JA. Endovascular approaches 
to acute stroke. I. Drugs, devices, and data. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2009;30(4):649–661.
	41.	 Grau AJ, Weimar C, Buggle F, et al. Risk factors, outcome, and treat­
ment in subtypes of ischemic stroke: the German Stroke Data Bank. 
Stroke. 2001;32(11):2559–2566.
	42.	 Brekenfeld C, Mattle HP, Schroth G. General is better than local 
anesthesia during endovascular procedures. Stroke. 2010;41(11):
2716–2717.
	43.	 Gupta R. Local is better than general anesthesia during endovascular 
acute stroke interventions. Stroke. 2010;41(11):2718–2719.
	44.	 Davis MJ, Menon BK, Baghirzada LB, et al. Anesthetic management 
and outcome in patients during endovascular therapy for acute 
stroke. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(2):396–405.
	45.	 Jumaa MA, Zhang F, Ruiz-Ares G, et  al. Comparison of safety and 
clinical and radiographic outcomes in endovascular acute stroke 
therapy for proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion with intuba­
tion and general anesthesia versus the nonintubated state. Stroke. 
2010;41(6):1180–1184.
	46.	 Gobin YP, Laurent A, Merienne L, et al. Treatment of brain arteriove­
nous malformations by embolization and radiosurgery. J Neurosurg. 
1996;85(1):19–28.
	47.	 Osborn IP. Anesthetic considerations for interventional neuroradiol­
ogy. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2003;41(2):69–77.
	48.	 Jaeger K, Ruschulte H, Herzog T, Heine J, Leuwer M, Piepenbrock S. 
Anaesthesiological and criterial care aspects regarding the treatment 
of patients with arteriovenous malformations in interventional neu­
roradiology. Minim Invasive Neurosurg. 2000;43(2):102–105.
	49.	 Heidenreich JO, Hartlieb S, Stendel R, et al. Bleeding complications 
after endovascular therapy of cerebral arteriovenous malformations. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2006;27(2):313–316.
	50.	 Serbinenko FA. Balloon catheterization and occlusion of major cere­
bral vessels. J Neurosurg. 2007;107(3):684–705.
	51.	 Guglielmi G, Vinuela F, Briganti F, Duckwiler G. Carotid-cavernous 
fistula caused by a ruptured intracavernous aneurysm: endovascular 
treatment by electrothrombosis with detachable coils. Neurosurgery. 
1992;31(3):591–596. discussion 596–597.
	52.	 Molyneux A, Kerr R, Stratton I, et  al. International Subarachnoid 
Aneurysm Trial (ISAT) of Neurosurgical Clipping Versus Endovascu­
lar Coiling in 2143 Patients with Ruptured Intracranial Aneurysms: 
a randomized trial. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2002;11(6):304–314.
	53.	 Juvela S. Prehemorrhage risk factors for fatal intracranial aneurysm 
rupture. Stroke. 2003;34(8):1852–1857.
	54.	 Jones M, Leslie K, Mitchell P. Anaesthesia for endovascular treatment 
of cerebral aneurysms. J Clin Neurosci. 2004;11(5):468–470.
	55.	 Ogilvy CS, Yang X, Jamil OA, et al. Neurointerventional procedures 
for unruptured intracranial aneurysms under procedural sedation 
and local anesthesia: a large-volume, single-center experience. J Neu­
rosurg. 2011;114(1):120–128.
	56.	 Tummala RP, Chu RM, Madison MT, Myers M, Tubman D, Nussbaum 
ES. Outcomes after aneurysm rupture during endovascular coil embo­
lization. Neurosurgery. 2001;49(5):1059–1066.
	57.	 Macdonald RL. Management of cerebral vasospasm. Neurosurg Rev. 
2006;29(3):179–193.
	58.	 Eddleman CS, Hurley MC, Naidech AM, Batjer HH, Bendok BR. 
Endovascular options in the treatment of delayed ischemic neu­
rological deficits due to cerebral vasospasm. Neurosurg Focus. 
2009;26(3):E6.
	59.	 Rosenberg N, Lazzaro MA, Lopes DK, Prabhakaran S. High-dose 
intra-arterial nicardipine results in hypotension following vaso­
spasm treatment in subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 
2011;15(3):400–404.
161
The pediatric patient population presents unique chal­
lenges to its anesthesia providers. These challenges are 
multiplied when administering an anesthetic in a non-—
operating room anesthesia (NORA) location. Evidence 
indicates that NORA procedures have an increased risk 
for patients, especially with regard to respiratory events. 
“Inadequate oxygenation/ventilation was the most com­
mon respiratory related remote location claim in the ASA 
closed claims database, occurring seven times more fre­
quently than in [the] operating room.”1 Other respiratory 
events include difficult intubation, esophageal intuba­
tion, and aspiration of gastric contents.1 “One out of 200 
sedations required some form of airway rescue ranging 
from bag masking to emergency intubation.”2 In part, the 
increased risk to the patient is due to inadequate moni­
toring,1 the limited availability of specialized equipment, 
and decreased access to skilled assistance. Other concerns 
include oversedation and failure to adequately assess the 
patient’s comorbidities and risks. Children with coexisting 
diseases as reflected by a higher American Society of Anes­
thesiologists (ASA) physical status, children under the age 
of 1 year, and patients presenting for emergent procedures 
are also at higher risk for adverse events.3
The NORA arena is often unpredictable because of 
urgent or emergent add-on cases with changing procedural 
requirements, varying locations, and inadequate prepro­
cedural preparation time. The remote location personnel 
often lack experience with critical situations and may not 
be able to appropriately assist with or anticipate the anes­
thesiologist’s needs. In summary, these challenges require 
the anesthesiologist to be self-reliant, flexible, familiar with 
the procedures, and prepared for the unexpected.
Pediatric Anesthesia in Remote 
Locations
When working with children, the anesthesiologist needs to 
take into consideration the age-dependent physiology, psy­
chological state, and pediatric comorbidities.
Preoperative Considerations
Children have distinctively different anesthetic require­
ments than adults. The preoperative considerations will be 
largely influenced by the child’s physiology and preexist­
ing medical conditions.4 Neonates aged 0 to 28 days have 
a transitional physiology while adapting to extrauterine 
life. This period may be prolonged depending on the ges­
tational age at delivery. The respiratory, circulatory, and 
metabolic systems are affected during this transitional 
phase. Because of an immature central nervous system, 
young infants are at risk for central apnea, as well as 
apnea in response to hypoxia and hypothermia.5 This risk 
is increased by anemia, younger gestational age at birth, 
and a history of apneic periods. In addition, administration 
of sedatives, opioids, or volatile anesthetics significantly 
increases the risk for postprocedural apneic episodes.6 
Rather than an increase in respiration and sympathetic 
tone, hypoxia can lead to bradycardia and hemodynamic 
depression. Cardiac output in young infants is largely 
heart rate–dependent; thus a heart rate under 60 beats/
min necessitates chest compression to maintain end-organ 
perfusion.7 Other differences to consider in the neonatal 
cardiovascular physiology include the presence of a pat­
ent foramen ovale and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). 
Anesthesia induction generally decreases systemic vascu­
lar resistance. Because neonates have a higher pulmonary 
vascular resistance than older children and adults, which 
can further increase during a stressful induction, potential 
exists for reversal of the typically left-to-right to a right-to-
left shunt.8 A shunt reversal should be considered in all 
cases of unexpected arterial oxygen desaturation. This is of 
particular interest in children who receive large amounts 
of intravenous fluids, because this can lead to a reopening 
of a functionally closed PDA within the first 2 weeks of life 
and lead to shunt reversal. Desaturations because of shunt 
reversal or inadequate oxygen supply are particularly pro­
nounced in small children because of their high metabolic 
rate. Oxygen consumption is up to three times higher than 
in adults.9
Another important factor in the anesthetic management 
of neonates is temperature control. Because of its large ratio 
of body surface area to volume, lack of subcutaneous fat, 
and poor temperature regulation, the neonate is prone to 
heat loss.10 Hypothermia again predisposes the neonate to 
apnea and bradycardia. Other side effects of hypothermia 
include shivering with increased oxygenation consump­
tion, potential coagulation abnormalities, and increased 
discomfort during emergence. For these reasons, moni­
toring and maintenance of normal temperature remains 
important for all age groups.
As children’s physiology transitions from neonatal to 
adult state, their respiratory, cardiac, and central nervous 
systems mature. Some of the characteristics of the neo­
nate may persist. For example, 50% of children 1 year of 
age have a probe patent foramen ovale and 30% of the 
adult population still has a probe patent foramen ovale.11 
This necessitates meticulous avoidance of air bubbles in all 
intravenous lines to prevent a potentially dangerous para­
doxical air embolus.
Pediatric Anesthesia in the 
Radiology Suite
CHRISTINA D. DIAZ and ROSE CAMPISE-LUTHER
18
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
162
The normal vital signs in children will approach adult 
values over time, but vary significantly across age groups 
(Table 18-1).
The most common medical conditions that one will 
encounter while taking care of children include respiratory 
infections, asthma, obstructive sleep apnea, and more com­
mon congenital diseases such as Down syndrome (trisomy 
21) and sickle cell disease.
A child in daycare or school may have up to 14 upper 
respiratory tract infections (URIs) per year.12 A respiratory 
tract infection increases the perioperative risk for respira­
tory complications, such as laryngospasm, bronchospasm, 
thick airway secretions, mucous plugs, and croup.3 The risk 
may be increased by the choice of anesthetic (i.e., airway 
manipulation) and the age of the patient. Younger children 
are at higher risk, mainly because of the smaller airway 
diameter.13 All children with a URI develop an increased 
airway reactivity that can persist for 6 weeks after the ini­
tial symptoms. In cases of severe symptoms, an elective pro­
cedure probably should be postponed for 4 weeks.14
Another risk group is the increasing number of children 
with preexisting reactive airway disease. Among patients 
with asthma, great variability exists in disease severity and 
compliance with medications. A thorough history con­
cerning triggering agents and the frequency and severity 
of attacks should be obtained, and an elective procedure 
should potentially be postponed until optimal pulmonary 
status is achieved.15
A third group at risk for airway complications is children 
with obstructive sleep apnea and/or upper airway obstruc­
tion secondary to airway hypotonia or adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy. These children are exquisitely sensitive to the 
respiratory depressant effects of sedatives, anesthetics, and 
opioids and are at risk for complete upper airway obstruc­
tion and respiratory arrest. They require a high level of 
vigilance, meticulous drug titration, and a low threshold 
for advanced airway management to ensure adequate ven­
tilation and oxygenation.3,16,17 Children with developmen­
tal delays such as cerebral palsy may be at higher risk for 
airway obstruction because they are known to have up to a 
40% decrease in their palatal width.18
Among the commonly encountered congenital problems 
is Down syndrome. These children are prone to upper air­
way obstruction secondary to a small midface structure, a 
large tongue, and in some cases low baseline muscle tone. 
They also have a smaller-than-normal trachea, which 
requires downsizing the expected endotracheal tube size 
for age by 0.5 to 1.19 Another feature of the syndrome is a 
connective tissue abnormality that can make intravenous 
catheter placement a challenge and lead to atlantooccipi­
tal instability. The latter can place the child at risk for cord 
compression during intubation and should be evaluated 
after 1 year of age. In addition, children with Down syn­
drome may present with hypothyroidism and congenital 
heart defects. Even without a documented congenital heart 
defect, these patients have a high incidence of bradycardia 
with higher doses of anesthetics.20
Another frequently encountered genetic problem is 
sickle cell disease. The tendency to develop vasoocclusive 
crisis with stress, hypothermia, anemia, hypercarbia, and 
hypoxia makes these patients a high-risk group. A thor­
ough history concerning the severity and frequency of 
vasoocclusive crises should be obtained, and the transfusion 
thresholds should be discussed with the patient’s hematolo­
gist before the procedure. Preoperative determination of a 
hemoglobin level may be helpful. The anesthetic manage­
ment needs to focus on keeping these children warm, well 
hydrated, comfortable, and well oxygenated.21
An understanding of a child’s psyche and developmental 
age is imperative in planning an anesthetic. Reasoning with 
a child may not be possible, depending on the child’s age 
and general fear of the unknown.22 Parental influence will 
have a great impact on the overall experience as well as the 
anesthesiologist’s ability to interact with the child. Paren­
tal separation from the child can be a significant stressor to 
a young child.3 Children are able to feel the parent’s fear 
and anxiety, even if neither child nor parent is verbalizing 
it. The parent’s honest and appropriate preparation of the 
child for the procedure will allow the anesthesiologist more 
flexibility in choosing the anesthetic. Parental dishonesty 
about the procedure can cause unnecessary trauma and 
undermine the ability to form a trusting relationship with 
the treating physician. Patients who require multiple anes­
thetics, such as those undergoing radiation therapy, may 
develop a distrust that can complicate further treatments 
and patient care.23
The stress of a traumatic anesthesia induction can lead 
to maladaptive behavior in more than half of the children 
who experience it.24 The anesthesiologist should employ 
comfort measures in light of the child’s potential anxiety. 
Measures may include parental presence, the use of a pre­
medication, or walking the child through the procedure 
before the actual event. The appropriate comfort measure 
must be chosen to match the setting. For example, a parent 
who may become incapacitated or obstructive may not be 
suited to be present at induction. Premedication with oral 
midazolam has been shown superior to parental presence 
during induction24 but may lead to prolonged sedation after 
a short procedure. Even with a preoperative plan in place, 
the anesthesiologist must exhibit situational flexibility.18
In planning the anesthetic, the anesthesiologist needs to 
know the procedure to be performed, the location of the pro­
cedure, and the age, physiology, and medical history of the 
Table 18-1  Normal Range of Vital Signs in the Pediatric 
Patient
Age Group
Heart Rate 
(beats/min)
Systolic Blood 
Pressure* 
(mm Hg)
Respiratory 
Rate 
(breaths/min)
Neonate 
(<30 days)
120-160
60-75
40-60
1-6 mo
110-140
65-85
25-40
6-12 mo
100-140
70-90
20-35
1-2 yr
90-130
75-95
20-30
3-5 yr
80-120
80-100
18-28
6-8 yr
75-115
85-105
18-25
9-12 yr
70-110
90-115
15-25
13-16 yr
60-110
95-120
9-15
>16 yr
60-100
100-125
9-15
*As measured using an oscillometric blood pressure device.
Modified from Gottlieb EA, Andropoulos DB. Pediatrics. In: Miller R, ed. Basics 
of anesthesia. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011:548, 550.
18  •  Pediatric Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
163
patient.4 The anesthesia equipment necessary will largely 
depend on the location and type of procedure. There will be 
compatibility problems with the equipment in some loca­
tions. In other locations, problems of space availability due 
to the presence of other equipment may be an issue. Access 
to the patient may also be limited.
When preparing for the anesthetic, the age and weight 
of the patient will dictate the sizes of the equipment. Vari­
ability is greater in children than in adults in the sizes of air­
way equipment, intravenous setups, vascular access, fluid 
requirements, and drug dosages.25 The preparation of the 
endotracheal tube should include the availability of the cal­
culated tube size and one size larger and smaller than calcu­
lated (Table 18-2). When using a cuffed endotracheal tube, 
the calculated tube size should be decreased by 0.5. In cases 
of procedures with an unsecured airway, the appropriate-
size airway equipment must still be present.
The availability and quality of the ventilators can signifi­
cantly vary, depending on the institution and location. The 
anesthesiologist may be faced with older and less sophisti­
cated equipment in contrast to the operating room. These 
ventilators may not be able to adequately accommodate 
the needs of the neonates or patients requiring special ven­
tilation settings. For example, the requirement for a longer 
circuit may lead to rebreathing without using higher gas 
flows, inadequate tidal volume delivery, and erroneous 
end-tidal gas readings. High-frequency /oscillator ventila­
tion may not be possible in many remote locations. Even if 
a ventilator is present, the appropriate size bag-valve-mask 
and oxygen source must always be available.
The intravenous catheter placement may be signifi­
cantly more challenging in the pediatric patient secondary 
to lack of cooperation and smaller vasculature. Additional 
personnel will be necessary to hold the child, place, and 
secure the intravenous line. The parents may or may not be 
helpful. If the intravenous line is going to be placed awake, 
comfort measures in the form of local analgesics and dis­
traction techniques should be used if possible. The available 
local anesthetics may include a eutectic cream, lidocaine 
applied via a needleless system, or an intradermal injection 
of lidocaine. Another option may be the use of a vapocool­
ant spray.22 One should have a variety of catheter sizes and 
the appropriate fluid setup ready before starting. At our 
institution, a large tertiary care children’s hospital, we use 
a buretrol intravenous line setup for children 5 years of age 
and under or weighing under 20 kg to prevent accidental 
overhydration. For children under 5 kg, the buretrol is ini­
tially filled with only 50 mL of crystalloid and in children 
over 5 kg it is filled with 100 mL.
The requirements of different age groups must be con­
sidered when choosing IV fluids. Most children will do well 
with a balanced salt solution such as 0.9 percent normal 
saline, lactated Ringer’s solution, or Plasmalyte.26 A good 
guideline for the calculation of the maintenance fluid is the 
4-2-1 rule: 4 mL/kg for the first 10 kg, an additional 2 mL/
kg for the second 10 kg, and an additional 1 mL/kg for each 
kilogram over 20 kg. The amount of fluid to be adminis­
tered depends on the time of the last oral intake. The nil per 
os (NPO) guidelines for radiology procedures are the same 
as for operating room procedures (Table 18-3), but parents 
may not adhere to these guidelines.4,27 Reasons for the non­
compliance include a fear of the child suffering while NPO 
Table 18-2  Endotracheal Tube Sizes
Age Group
Uncuffed ETT Size 
(ID mm)
Cuffed ETT Size 
(ID mm)
Preterm
2.5-3.0
NA
Term
3.0-3.5
3.0-3.5
1-6 mo
3.5
3.5
7-12 mo
4.0
3.5-4.0
1-2 yr
4.5
4.0-4.5
3-4 yr
4.5-5.0
4.5
5-6 yr
5.0-5.5
4.5-5.0
7-8 yr
5.5-6.0
5.0-5.5
9-10 yr
6.0-6.5
5.5-6.0
11-12 yr
6.5-7.0
6.0-6.5
13-14 yr
7.0-7.5
6.5-7.0
14+ yr
NA
7.0-7.5
Calculation of appropriate tube size for uncuffed endotracheal 
tubes
Divide the age by 4 and add 4 (for ages >1 yr). Example for a 8 year old: 
8 ÷ 4 + 4 = 6
Depth of insertion
Multiplying the ID of the ETT by 3 yields the proper depth of insertion 
to the lips in cm. Example:
4 mm ETT × 3 = 12 cm for depth of insertion.
ETT, Endotracheal tube; ID, internal diameter.
Modified from Gottlieb EA, Andropoulos DB. Pediatrics. In: Miller R, ed. Basics 
of anesthesia. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011:554.
Table 18-3  American Society of Anesthesiologists Nil Per 
Os Guidelines
Ingested Material
Minimum Fasting Period (hr)
Clear liquids
  Examples include water, juice 
without pulp (apple or white 
grape juice), clear tea, black 
coffee
2
Breast milk
4
Infant formula
6
Nonhuman milk
  Nonhuman milk is similar to 
solids in gastric emptying time; 
the amount ingested must be 
considered when determining 
the appropriate fasting time
6
Light meal
  Typically toast and clear liquids. 
Meals including fatty foods 
or meat may prolong gastric 
emptying time. Both the 
amount and type of foods 
ingested must be considered 
when determining the appro­
priate fasting time
6
These recommendations apply to healthy patients of all age groups 
scheduled to undergo elective procedures. They are not intended for 
women in labor. Following these guidelines does not guarantee 
complete gastric emptying.
Modified from Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of 
pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: 
application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures. 
Anesthesiology. 1999;90(3):896-905.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
164
and the perception that radiology procedures are not equal 
to surgical procedures. A careful history of the patient’s last 
oral intake should be obtained. In cases of an NPO violation, 
the procedure should be postponed or the airway secured 
with an endotracheal tube. Some evidence in the literature 
indicates that hyperhydration with 20 mL/kg periopera­
tively may be beneficial in the prevention of postoperative 
nausea and vomiting.28
Neonates are at risk for hypoglycemia because of their 
immature liver function and lack of glucose storage capa­
bility. Unless frequent glucose monitoring can be provided, 
neonates in the first week of life should receive D10W at the 
maintenance rate (4 mL/kg/hr). After the first week, full-
term babies who have been fed will tolerate a fast of sev­
eral hours and will not require dextrose in their fluids.29 It 
is essential to avoid administering bolus doses of dextrose-­
containing fluids because of the risk of hyperglycemia. Chil­
dren with metabolic disorders that lack gluconeogenesis, 
such as with acyl coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase defi­
ciency disorders and glycogen storage diseases, also may 
require supplemental glucose.
Drug dosages must be adjusted for the pediatric popula­
tion. Factors that affect the dosage include weight, volume 
of distribution, and liver and kidney function. “Although 
children need higher doses by body weight than adults, they 
also react with respiratory depression and airway obstruc­
tion more quickly than adults do.”18 The medications and 
their indication may differ from those in adult practice.
Because of the higher incidence of laryngospasm and 
bradycardia in the pediatric patient, succinylcholine (2 mg/
kg/dose intramuscularly or 0.5 to 2 mg/kg intravenously) 
and atropine (0.02 mg/kg intramuscularly or intrave­
nously) must always be available. The first drug of choice 
during resuscitation is epinephrine. The resuscitation dose 
for pediatric patients is 10 mcg/kg. Most other vasoactive 
drugs are not commonly used in this population.30 The 
most frequently used medications for procedural sedation 
in radiology include chloral hydrate, midazolam, metho­
hexital, pentobarbital, dexmedetomidine, fentanyl, and 
ketamine. A newer agent that is gaining popularity for 
imaging studies is dexmedetomidine.31 For a general anes­
thetic, inhalational agents or intravenous medications can 
be used. In certain locations outside the operating room, a 
total intravenous anesthetic (TIVA) with a hypnotic agent 
may be the only option. Common choices for TIVA include 
propofol, midazolam, and methohexital (Table 18-4).
The intraoperative management and the choice of anes­
thetic depend on the procedure and the child. Factors that 
influence the choice between a general anesthetic and pro­
cedural sedation include the invasiveness, length, and level 
of stimulation of the procedure. Even though some proce­
dures can be done with the patient awake or with sedation, 
a general anesthetic may still be required if a child cannot 
cooperate.22
When inducing for a general anesthetic, we often choose 
an inhalational induction for pediatric patients to spare them 
the stress of an awake intravenous catheter placement. The 
exception is children who are at risk for aspiration or have 
preexisting conditions that preclude an inhalational induc­
tion. A mask induction has a higher risk for laryngospasm 
and other adverse respiratory events because of its slower 
transition through the stages of anesthesia.13
Intraoperative monitoring should follow the ASA stan­
dard guidelines whenever possible. At a minimum, heart 
rate, oxygen saturation, end-tidal carbon dioxide, and blood 
pressure should be monitored routinely.32,33 During proce­
dures with limited patient access, such as radiation therapy 
and magnetoencephalography (MEG) scans, it is necessary 
to ensure that the monitors are visible from outside the pro­
cedure room at all times. Efforts need to be made to protect 
the child and the anesthesiologist in locations with radia­
tion exposure.
The patient recovering from a NORA procedure presents 
unique challenges. A dedicated area or personnel may not 
be available for the patient’s recovery. The nurses assist­
ing the anesthesiologist during sedation or administration 
of an anesthetic often cannot stay with the recovering 
patient because they have to participate in the next sched­
uled procedure. Using the operating room postanesthesia 
care unit for recovery after a NORA procedure involves 
transporting the patient to that area during a vulnerable 
phase. Younger children are also at risk for emergence 
delirium. Although not always present, emergence delirium 
occurs most commonly between the ages of 2 and 5 years 
and is a state of significant agitation, inconsolability, and, 
frequently, unawareness of their surroundings. While 
not completely understood, emergence delirium has been 
linked to painful procedures, inhalational anesthetics, and 
shorter anesthesia times.3
Adequate monitoring of the patient has to be ensured. 
The disposition of the patient after recovery needs to be 
discussed with the proceduralist and family of the patient 
before the procedure. Patients are discharged home after 
the majority of NORA procedures. The discharge criteria 
depend again on the procedure, the anesthetic, and the 
child. The risk for postoperative apnea and bradycardia will 
determine if the ex-premature infant can be discharged or 
has to be observed for 23 hours. In general, the younger the 
patient’s gestational and postconceptual ages, the greater 
the risk for postoperative apnea.6 Other patients who may 
require postoperative observation are those with obstruc­
tive sleep apnea or sickle cell disease and children who have 
undergone a procedure with increased risk for postopera­
tive bleeding, such as liver biopsy or arterial angiography. 
(See Box 18-1 for a Preoperative Checklist.)
Specific Areas of Radiology 
Procedures
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a medical imaging 
technique using a strong magnetic field and radio waves to 
create two- or three-dimensional images of the soft tissue 
and bony structures of the body. To generate the images, 
coils sometimes need to be placed over the body area of 
interest. This may interfere with airway devices and patient 
positioning.
The magnetic field warrants special precautions to avoid 
injuries to patients and personnel. Ferromagnetic objects 
will be pulled into the magnetic field of the scanner. If the 
object, such as surgical implants or shrapnel, is embedded 
in the patient, the scanner may move it or generate heat 
18  •  Pediatric Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
165
and cause thermal injury. Ferromagnetic objects outside 
the scanner such as oxygen tanks and laryngoscopes may 
turn into projectiles. The Joint Commission published a 
Sentinel Event Alert in 2008 listing eight types of potential 
injuries (Box 18-2).
Another area of concern in the MRI suite is the potential 
interference by the electromagnetic field with the moni­
toring equipment. All medical equipment must be MRI 
compatible or used only outside the scanner area. The 
monitoring equipment may not be optimal for the pediatric 
patient because only limited sizes are available. Because 
of the smaller size of the pediatric patient, a child placed 
in the scanner will be physically farther away from the 
anesthesiologist than an adult patient and therefore less 
accessible should an issue arise.34
Younger children may require sedation and/or anesthe­
sia for an MRI scan because of the associated loud noises 
and lack of understanding of the foreign environment. The 
procedure is not painful, so neonates are frequently able to 
sleep through the scan after being fed. This action is known 
in our institution as “feed and bundle.” Infants weigh­
ing 10 kg or less may require only oral chloral hydrate for 
sedation. Children weighing more than 10 kg commonly 
receive intravenous anesthetics such as pentobarbital, mid­
azolam, or dexmedetomidine.3 The anesthetic sometimes 
needs to be escalated to a general anesthetic with propofol 
Table 18-4  Common Hypnotic Drugs, Dosages, Duration, and Properties
Drug
Dosage and Route
Onset and Duration
Of Note
Chloral hydrate
50-100 mg/kg PO
Onset: 10-20 min
Maximal effect: 30-60 min
Duration: 4-8 hr
Oral medication.
Commonly used on children under 10 kg
Prolonged sedation
Midazolam
0.5-0.75 mg/kg PO
0.025-0.5 mg/kg IV
0.2-0.3 mg/kg intranasal
0.1-0.15 mg/kg IM
PO: onset 10-20 min, duration 1-2 hr
IV: Onset 1-3 min, duration 20-30 min
Intranasal: Onset 5 min, duration 30-60 min
IM: Onset 5min, duration 2-6 hr
Versatile administrative routes
Caution when combined with other 
sedatives
Intranasal route is very irritating
May have paradoxical reaction
Pentobarbital
2-6 mg/kg PO
1-3 mg/kg IV
IV: Onset 3-5 min, duration 15-45 min
Oral: Onset 15-60 min, duration 1-4 hr
Long history of use for radiological 
imaging
Prolonged wake-up time
Children often irritable on emergence
Methohexital
0.75-2 mg/kg IV
20-35 mg/kg rectal
IV: Onset 1 minute, duration 7-10 min
Rectal: Onset <10 min
Shorter duration of action, good for CT 
scans
Rectal route associated with apneas
Fentanyl
1-3 mcg/kg IV
IV: Onset 1 min, duration 30-60 min
Used primarily as an adjunct to sedation 
when performing painful procedures
Risk for hypoventilation and apnea when 
used in conjunction with other 
sedatives
Etomidate
0.1-0.4 mg/kg IV
IV: Onset 30-60 seconds, duration 2-10 min
Minimal effect on hemodynamics
Can suppress adrenal axis
Generally used for induction of an 
anesthetic
Ketamine
6-10 mg/kg PO
3-7 mg/kg IM
1-2 mg/kg IV
PO: Onset 30 min
IV: Onset 30 seconds, duration 5-10 min
IM: Onset 3-4 min, duration 15-30 min
Maintains respiration unless combined 
with other sedatives
Possible hallucination and delirium
Associated with drooling
Analgesic properties
Nitrous oxide
Up to 50% in 50% oxygen for 
sedation
Up to 70% in 30% oxygen for 
induction of anesthesia
Rapid onset
Requires continuous flow for maintenance
The patient desaturates quickly when 
apneic
Analgesic properties
Odorless
May cause nausea and vomiting
Dexmedetomidine
Load 0.5-1 mcg/kg over 10 min
Infusion 0.2-1 mcg/kg/hr
Slow onset, usually requires load
Maintains respiration
Risk for bradycardia
Minimal analgesic properties.
Propofol
1-3 mg/kg boluses 100-200 mcg/
kg/min
Onset 30 seconds
Duration 3-10 min depending on single 
dose
Should be used only by practitioners 
skilled at airway management/
intubation
Can easily achieve general anesthetic 
levels and loss of airway reflexes
Painful on injection
Sevoflurane
2%-3% in oxygen
MAC 2.5-3.3
Rapid onset
Requires continuous flow
Exclusively used by anesthesiologists
Always a general anesthetic
Loss of airway reflexes, increased risk 
for laryngospasm at lighter levels of 
anesthesia
CT, Computed tomography; MAC, monitored anesthesia care.
Modified from Cravero JP, Blike GT. Review of pediatric sedation. Anesth Analg. 2004;99:1355-1364; Lexicomp Pharmacopeia. http://www.lexi.com.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
166
or inhalational agents. Because of the lack of stimulation 
during the procedure, the general anesthetic bears the risk 
for significant hypotension, necessitating careful titration 
of medications used. Parental presence, watching a movie, 
and rewards such as stickers and toys may help older chil­
dren undergo the scan without sedation. (See Box 18-3 for 
a Magnetic Resonance Imaging Checklist.)35
COMPUTER TOMOGRAPHY
Computer tomography (CT) uses computer-processed x-ray 
images to generate two- and three-dimensional pictures. 
The scan is painless but involves a significant exposure to 
radiation. It is of short duration, allowing even younger 
patients with some parental coaching to complete the scan 
without sedation. Additionally, the placement of sand­
bags on children’s extremities can limit movement. In the 
neonate, the feed and bundle technique may be an option. 
However, if sedation is required, the anesthetic should be 
chosen carefully and with consideration of the short dura­
tion of the procedure. Because many CTs are scheduled as 
an outpatient procedure, parents frequently expect to leave 
shortly after completion of the scan.36
When a CT scan requires intravenous contrast, place­
ment of a large antecubital intravenous line is preferred to 
allow for administration by a power injector and the quick 
distribution to the central vascular system. When perform­
ing a cardiac CT, the anesthesiologist may be asked to slow 
or briefly arrest the heart to produce optimal imaging. This 
can be achieved with esmolol or adenosine but will require 
a general anesthetic. For three-dimensional reconstruction 
images, the child needs to be completely immobile and may 
require a general anesthetic as well.35
Because of radiation, the patient and anyone staying in 
the room during the scan should have appropriate shield­
ing. If the anesthesiologist chooses to leave the room, the 
monitors must always be clearly visible. (See Box 18-4 for a 
Computed Tomography Checklist.)
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy uses focused beams of ionized photons 
to target tumor cells in specific areas of the body. Because 
the ionized energy destroys all tissue in its path, the patient 
must remain immobile to avoid excess damage of healthy 
tissue and limit the side effects. The radiation therapist will 
calculate the allowable total dose of radiation per patient. 
When the patient moves, the radiation therapy lost to 
the healthy tissue may not be repeated. A simulation ses­
sion usually precedes the initiation of therapy. Molds and 
masks are created during that time to limit movement by 
the patient and determine the coordinates of the treatment 
Box 18-1  Pediatric Anesthesia Preoperative Checklist for Outside the Operating Room
Preoperative
 □ Thorough review of medical history and physical assessment of 
patient
 □ Consider upper respiratory tract infection, obstructive sleep 
apnea, syndromes, comorbidities, age-related concerns
 □ Understand the anticipated procedure
 □ Discuss the needs of the proceduralist and anesthesiologist 
with staff
 □ Obtain anesthesia consent
 □ Verify procedure consent
 □ Premedication and/ or parental presence
Setup
ASA monitoring: capnography, pulse oximeter, electrocardiography, 
blood pressure, temperature
 □ Need appropriate sizes
 □ Able to view monitors at all times
 □ May need to be MRI compatible
 □ May need to be viewed by video camera or remote viewer
 □ Machine check and scavenging system
 □ Bag-valve-mask (either self-inflating or flow-regulated)
 □ Suction
 □ Oxygen source (central gas supply or tank with sufficient 
residual gas)
 □ Infusion pumps
 □ Appropriate fluids and intravenous access supplies
 □ Appropriate-sized airway equipment
 
□ Calculated endotracheal tube size (±1 size)
 
□ Difficult airway cart (if needed)
 □ Drugs (know the appropriate doses)
 
□ Hypnotics
 
□ Opioids
 
□ Paralytics
 
□ Infusions (depending on case: vasopressors, inotropes, vasodilators)
 
□ Emergency drugs
Location
 □ Examine resources and available personnel
 □ Consider lighting (flashlight backup)
 □ Check positioning of anesthesia equipment
 □ Prepare for accessibility of the patient during the procedure
 □ Examine the ability to see procedure and monitors during anesthesia
 □ General anesthesia versus monitored anesthesia care and sedation
 □ Induction
 □ Placement of ASA monitors
 □ Mask or intravenous induction
 □ Place or confirm intravenous access
 □ Airway management
Maintenance
 □ Positioning
 □ Inhalationals, infusions, intermittent boluses
 □ Blankets or warming devices (e.g., Bair Hugger, 3M, St. Paul, Minn.)
Recovery
 □ Possible parental presence
 □ Timing and location of emergence
 □ Location of recovery (recovery room, day surgery, or procedure 
location)
 □ Transport with oxygen and monitors
 □ Discharge criteria: special considerations
 
□ Former premature infant
 
□ Apneas, croup, laryngospasm, upper or lower respiratory tract 
infection
 
□ Increased bleeding risk
 
□ Other comorbidities
ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists.
18  •  Pediatric Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
167
area. Radiation therapy also may be used to eradicate bone 
marrow stem cells before a bone marrow transplant. Radia­
tion therapy usually involves daily treatments, 5 days per 
week, for a variable number of successive weeks.37 For bone 
marrow eradication, the patient may have to undergo mul­
tiple treatments per day.
Because of the large amounts of radiation used during a 
treatment, the patient is the only person who may remain in 
the room. The room is sealed with a large leaded door, and 
access to the patient is limited. To appropriately monitor the 
patient, a video camera needs to be focused on the patient, 
and an additional camera needs to be focused on the moni­
tor. The ASA recommended standard monitors should be 
used, including end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring.36
Radiation therapy is painless, but the positioning of the 
patient, especially while in a face mask, may cause some 
discomfort. Some patients have reported an unusual odor 
when undergoing radiation therapy of the brain. Older 
patients are generally able to participate in the therapy, 
but younger patients commonly need an anesthetic. 
The need for immobility should be a consideration when 
choosing the anesthetic. A general anesthetic can be insti­
tuted using TIVA, with or without a secured airway, or an 
inhalational anesthetic, which would require placement 
of an airway device. Children undergoing radiation ther­
apy may be inpatients or outpatients and usually have a 
permanent central venous access, which minimizes the 
trauma associated with repeated intravenous line place­
ments and the trauma of the anesthetics. Because nausea 
is frequently associated with radiation therapy, antinau­
sea medication should be available.
As mentioned previously, recovering these patients 
can be challenging. There may be no additional person­
nel available to watch the recovering patient in the radia­
tion therapy area. It may be necessary to transport these 
patients to the postanesthesia care unit of the operating 
room on a monitor with available oxygen. (See Box 18-5 
for a Radiation Therapy Checklist.)
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY
A variety of procedures are performed in the interventional 
radiology suite. They can range from a gastrostomy tube 
exchange to the coiling of intracranial arteriovenous mal­
formations. Some procedures are done under ultrasound 
guidance, and others require the use of fluoroscopic imag­
ing. Depending on the procedure, varying degrees of pain 
may be associated with it. The parents often expect their 
children to be asleep or at least unaware of the procedure 
and without any distress or pain.18
Most interventional radiology suites are not designed 
to accommodate anesthesiologists and their equipment, 
Box 18-2  Joint Commission Sentinel Event 
Alert: Preventing Accidents and Injuries in 
the Magnetic Resonance Imaging Suite
The following types of injury can and have occurred during the 
MRI scanning process:
	1.	 “Missile effect” or “projectile ” injury, in which ferromagnetic 
objects (those having magnetic properties) such as ink pens, 
wheelchairs, and oxygen canisters are pulled into the MRI 
scanner at rapid velocity.
	2.	 Injury related to dislodged ferromagnetic implants, such as 
aneurysm clips, pins in joints, and drug infusion devices.
	3.	 Burns from objects that may heat during the MRI process, 
such as wires (including lead wires for both implants and 
external devices) and surgical staples, or from the patient’s 
body touching the inside walls (the bore) of the MRI scanner 
during the scan.
	4.	 Injury or complication related to equipment or device mal­
function or failure caused by the magnetic field. For example, 
battery-powered devices (laryngoscopes, microinfusion 
pumps, monitors, etc.) can suddenly fail to operate; some 
programmable infusion pumps may perform erratically; and 
pacemakers and implantable defibrillators may not behave 
as programmed.
	5.	 Injury or complication due to failure to attend to patient 
support systems during the MRI. This is especially true for 
patient sedation or anesthesia in MRI arenas. For example, 
oxygen canisters or infusion pumps run out and staff must 
either leave the MRI area to retrieve a replacement or move 
the patient to an area where a replacement can be found.
	6.	 Acoustic injury from the loud knocking noise that the MRI 
scanner makes.
	7.	 Adverse events related to the administration of MRI contrast 
agents.
	8.	 Adverse events related to cryogen handling, storage, or 
inadvertent release in superconducting MRI system sites.
From The Joint Commission Sentinel Event Alert, issue 38, February 14, 2008.
Box 18-3  Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Checklist
Remove all metal objects and cards with magnetic strips (credit 
cards, badges) from patient, parent, and self
Use magnetic resonance imaging–compatible equipment only
Use appropriate-size monitoring equipment
Provide ear plugs or headphones for patients and parents staying 
in the magnetic resonance imaging suite
Determine anesthetic technique: Sedation or general (with or 
without secured airway)
Discuss with team any special requirements (e.g., breath holds, 
contrast [oral or intravenous], positioning, coil placement)
Box 18-4  Computed Tomography Checklist
Shield patient and parents
Use appropriate-size monitoring equipment
Ensure monitor is visible to anesthesiologist
Determine anesthetic technique: Sedation or general
 
□ May be short
Box 18-5  Radiation Therapy Checklist
Ensure that patient remains immobile
Prepare for anesthesiologist being unable to stay in room
Ensure visibility of patient and monitor via camera
Use appropriate-size monitoring equipment
Consider positioning devices (e.g., face mask)
Determine anesthetic technique: Sedation or general
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
168
resulting in limited space and access to the patient. The pro­
cedures are usually performed with dimmed lights to opti­
mize visualization for the radiologist. It can be very difficult 
to follow the procedure because the monitor displaying the 
procedural images may not be visible where the anesthesi­
ologist is located.
Unless located in a children’s hospital, the staff in the 
radiology suite may not be familiar with the needs of a pedi­
atric patient. Cases are often posted on short notice and at 
any time of day, limiting the preoperative preparation time.
Within the interventional radiology suite, the procedures 
may be grossly divided into two categories: endovascular 
and lymphatic procedures and nonvascular procedures. 
Examples of endovascular procedures include vascular 
access, coiling of vascular malformations, and sclero­
therapy. During these procedures, intravenous contrast is 
used to visualize the structures. When using these contrast 
dyes in children, it is important to calculate the allowable 
dye load before the start of the procedure. Reactions to the 
intravascular contrast include nausea, vomiting, broncho­
spasm, hypertension, hypotension, flushing, renal failure, 
seizures, anaphylaxis, and cardiac arrest. Some reactions 
may occur immediately upon administration, while others 
may appear later.38
Sclerotherapy is used to treat vascular and lymphatic 
malformations. The procedure involves accessing the mal­
formation, potentially draining its contents, and injecting 
various agents aimed at causing an inflammatory pro­
cess and the eventual scaring and shrinkage of the lesion. 
Accessing the pediatric vessels can be more challenging 
because of their overall smaller size in contrast to those of 
adults. Ethanol can be used as a sclerosing agent. Prob­
lems encountered with high doses of ethanol can include 
intoxication, coagulopathy, increased pulmonary artery 
pressures, and possible cardiovascular collapse. Another 
common sclerotherapy agent is sodium tetradecyl sul­
fate (STS). It is a detergent-based chemical that disrupts 
the lining of the vessel and may result in urticaria, necro­
sis, and allergic reactions. Additional sclerosing agents 
include hypertonic saline and other osmotic agents, other 
detergents, and chemical irritants such as erythromycin, 
polyiodinated iodine, and chromated glycerin. All scle­
rosants produce hemolysis when injected into the vascular 
bed, leading to hematuria. The child should be adequately 
hydrated and the urine alkalinized to prevent precipitation 
of hemoglobin in the renal tubules and to prevent renal fail­
ure. Because of the risk for extravasation and possible reac­
tions to the sclerosing agents, the patient needs to remain 
motionless. Therefore a general anesthetic is recommended 
for sclerotherapy procedures.39
For intracranial vascular malformations, the common 
treatment modality is endovascular coiling and glue. Before 
the treatment of the malformation, examination of the 
lesion usually involves a cerebral angiogram or other imag­
ing modality (MRI angiogram). The diagnostic imaging 
may be accomplished with sedation or a general anesthetic. 
Because of the risk for intravascular injury and hemorrhage 
with movement, a general anesthetic is usually required 
during the treatment. In light of the potential hemodynamic 
instability involved with the procedure, an arterial line may 
be a useful tool, and vasoactive agents should be immedi­
ately available. As with sclerotherapy, the anesthesiologist 
should be cognizant of the maximum amount of dye allow­
able for the child. Because of the large variability in patient 
sizes, the fluid boluses accompanying the administration of 
dye need to be carefully accounted for to diminish the risk 
for fluid overload, especially in infants.40
The nonvascular procedures in the interventional 
radiology suite may range from gastric or duodenal tube 
exchanges to biopsies of the liver, kidneys, bones, or tumors 
and drainage of abscesses and pleural effusions. The anes­
thetic strategy has to be adapted to the needs of the proce­
duralist, the invasiveness of the procedure, and the ability 
of the child to cooperate.18 (See Box 18-6 for an Interven­
tional Radiology Checklist.)
NUCLEAR MEDICINE
Nuclear medicine or nuclear imaging produces images 
by detecting radiation emitted from radioactive tracer 
material injected into the bloodstream. The materials, 
depending on the compound, can evaluate the function 
of different organ systems and diagnose disease processes. 
Nuclear imaging is used in the surveillance and diagnosis 
of cancer (bone scan), detection of seizure foci and evalu­
ation of cerebrovascular disease (single-photon emission 
computer tomography [SPECT] and positron emission 
tomography[PET]),41 and evaluation and follow-up of uri­
nary reflux disease (renal scans). Nuclear imaging is one 
of the oldest imaging modalities and is painless except for 
the placement of an intravascular catheter. The radionu­
clides are physiologically harmless and nonallergenic, but 
all bodily fluids should be handled with radiation safety 
precaution.42
Children have to remain motionless during the scan, 
which in younger children usually requires sedation or a 
general anesthetic. It is necessary to be aware of the tim­
ing of the imaging when planning the anesthetic. Children 
are injected with the radioactive tracer and then imaged 
at exact predetermined intervals to optimize the diagnos­
tic value of the scan. (See Box 18-7 for a Nuclear Medicine 
Checklist.)
Box 18-6  Interventional Radiology Checklist
Shield patient and self
Calculate allowable dye load
Determine anesthetic technique: Sedation or general
Consider need for pain management
Use appropriate-size monitoring equipment
Discuss need for complete immobility
Discuss positioning of the patient and equipment
Box 18-7  Nuclear Medicine Checklist
Place peripheral intravenous access and administer tracer 
before scan
Time the scan appropriately after tracer administration
Determine anesthetic technique: Sedation or general
Discuss need for patient to remain motionless for the scan
Use appropriate-size monitoring equipment
18  •  Pediatric Anesthesia in the Radiology Suite
169
MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY
The magnetoencephalography (MEG) scan is the measure­
ment of magnetic fields produced by naturally occurring 
electrical currents of the brain to map brain activity. The 
fields are measured by using magnetometers that are formed 
by superconducting quantum interference devices.43 MEG 
scans are used to localize diseased areas of the brain, such 
as localizing epileptic foci before surgery. Because the mag­
netic fields produced by the electrical currents of the brain 
are minuscule, extensive shielding from interfering mag­
netic fields of the earth and electrical equipment is required. 
Therefore equipment used to monitor the patient must be 
located outside the MEG scanner.44
During the scan, the patient is placed into the shielded and 
sealed room, which allows minimal access to the patient. 
When the room is opened, magnetic interference enters 
the room and requires recalibration of the scanner before 
proceeding with the examination. No metallic material can 
be taken into the room. The examination is painless and 
quiet, and the bed and scanner do not move. The exam may 
require electrodes to be glued to the patient’s scalp, which 
in younger patients may have to be done under anesthesia.
The choice of anesthetic agents should be influenced by 
the drug’s effect on brain activity. Midazolam should be 
avoided when using the MEG scan to localize epileptic foci 
because of the high failure rate associated with its use. Chlo­
ral hydrate used as premedication seems to have only a small 
effect on the scan. The scan can be performed using sedation 
or a general anesthetic, but the anesthetic must ensure that 
the child remains motionless for at least 1 hour. Lighter lev­
els of anesthesia should be used to reduce the potential for 
interference with electrical brain activity. Dexmedetomidine 
has been shown not to suppress brain activity but to ensure 
patient immobility.45,46 Older children may be able to toler­
ate the scan without sedation. As with any procedural seda­
tion or anesthetic, appropriate monitoring needs be ensured.
Monitoring the patient in the MEG scanner involves 
cables threaded through shielded channels in the wall. The 
oxygen supply, breathing circuit, and end-tidal gas sam­
pling line are also fed through this channel to the equipment 
located outside the scanner. (See Box 18-8 for a Magneto­
encephalography Scan Checklist.)
Conclusion
The remote location of the NORA area is a special chal­
lenge to the pediatric anesthesiologist. Sick children, poor 
access, and locations distant from the operating room with 
unfamiliar personnel can add to the stress of the procedure. 
Although stated earlier in the chapter, it bears repeating 
that the challenges presented in the NORA suite require 
the pediatric anesthesiologist to be self-reliant, flexible, and 
familiar with the procedures to provide the best possible 
patient care. When rendering a pediatric anesthetic in the 
NORA suite, the practitioner must expect, and be prepared, 
for the unexpected.
References
	 1.	 Metzger J, Posner KL, Domino KB. The risk and safety of anesthesia at 
remote locations: the U.S. closed claim analysis. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2009;22(4):502–508.
	 2.	 Cravero JP. Risk and safety/anesthesia for procedures outside the 
operating room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2009;22(4):509–513.
	 3.	 Collins CE, Everett LL. Challenges in pediatric ambulatory anesthesia: 
kids are different. Anesthesiol Clin. 2010;28(2):315–328.
	 4.	 Gozal D, Gozal Y. Pediatric sedation/anesthesia outside the operating 
room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2008;21(4):494–498.
	 5.	 Rigatto H, Brady JP, de la Torre Verduzco R. Chemoreceptor reflexes 
in the preterm infant: the effect of gestational age and postnatal age on 
ventilatory response to inhalation of 100% and 15% oxygen. Pediatrics. 
1975;55(5):604–613.
	 6.	 Coté CJ, Zaslatsky A, Downes JJ, et al. Postoperative apnea in former 
preterm infants after inguinal herniorrhaphy: a combined analysis. 
Anesthesiology. 1995;82(4):809–822.
	 7.	 Kattwinkel J, Perlman JM, Aziz K, et al. Neonatal resuscitation: 2010 
American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resusci­
tation and emergency cardiovascular care. Pediatrics. 2010;126(5):
1400–1413.
	 8.	 De Souza D, McDaniel G, Baum V. Cardiovascular physiology. In: 
Davis P, ed. Smith’s anesthesia for infants and children. 8th ed. St. Louis: 
Mosby; 2008:87.
	 9.	 Sands SA, Edwards BA, Kelly VJ, et al. A model analysis of arterial 
oxygen desaturation during apnea in preterm infants. PLoS Comput 
Biol. 2009;5(12):e1000588.
	10.	 Sinclair JC. Thermal control in premature infants. Annu Rev Med. 
1972;23:129–148.
	11.	 Hasan A, Parvez A, Ajmal MR. Patent foramen ovale: clinical signifi­
cance. J Ind Acad Clin Med. 2004;5(4):339–344.
	12.	 Revai K, Dobbs LA, Nair S, et al. Incidence of acute otitis media and 
sinusitis complicating upper respiratory tract infection: the effect of 
age. Pediatrics. 2007;119(6):e1408–e1412.
	13.	 Lerman J. Perioperative respiratory complications in children. Lancet. 
2010;376(9743):745–746.
	14.	 Tait AR, Malviya S. Anesthesia for the child with an upper respiratory 
infection: still a dilemma? Anesth Analg. 2005;100(1):59–65.
	15.	 Woods BD, Sladen RN. Perioperative considerations for the patient 
with asthma and bronchospasm. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103(suppl 1):
i57–i65.
	16.	 Brown KA, Laferrière A, Lakheeram I, Moss IR. Recurrent hypoxemia 
in children is associated with increased analgesic sensitivity to opiates. 
Anesthesiology. 2006;105(4):665–669.
	17.	 Sander JC, King MA, Mitchell RB, et al. Perioperative complications 
of adeno-tonsillectomy in children with obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome. Anesth Analg. 2006;103(5):1115–1121.
	18.	 Kannikeswaran N, Mahajan PV, Sethuraman U, et al. Sedation medi­
cation received and adverse events related to sedation for brain MRI in 
children with and without developmental disabilities. Pediatr Anesth. 
2009;19(3):250–256.
	19.	 Shott SR. Down syndrome: analysis of airway size and a guide for 
appropriate intubation. Laryngoscope. 2000;110(4):585–592.
	20.	 Kraemer FW. Bradycardia during induction of anesthesia with sevo­
flurane in children with Down syndrome. Anesth Analg. 2012;111(5):
1259–1263.
	21.	 Firth PG. Anesthesia and hemoglobinopathies. Anesth Clin. 
2000;27:321–336.
	22.	 Neuhäeuser C, Wagner B, Heckmann M, Weigand MA, Zimmer KP. 
Analgesia and sedation for painful interventions in children and 
adolescents. Dtsch Aerztebl Int. 2010;107(14):241–247.
	23.	 Chorney JM, Kain ZN. Family-centered pediatric perioperative care. 
Anesthesiology. 2010;112(3):751–755.
Box 18-8  Magnetoencephalography Scan 
Checklist
Understand implications of shielded room
 
□ No access to patient
 
□ Monitors outside the room, with cables and circuit threaded 
through wall
Use appropriate-size monitoring equipment
Avoid magnetic dust being introduced into room (i.e., no shoes)
Remove all metal objects
Allow parental presence if room is large enough
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
170
	24.	 Kane ZN, Caldwell-Andrews A, Blount R, et al. Parental presence dur­
ing induction during anesthesia versus sedative premedication: which 
intervention is more effective? Anesthesiology. 1998;89:1147–1156. 
discussion 9-10A.
	25.	 Committee on Drugs. Section on Anesthesiology, American Academy 
of Pediatrics. Guidelines for the elective use of conscious sedation, 
deep sedation and general anesthesia in pediatric patients. Pediatrics. 
1985;76(2):317–321.
	26.	 Paut O, Lecroix F. Recent developments in the perioperative fluid man­
agement of the pediatric patient. Curr Opin Anesth. 2006;19(3):268–277.
	27.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee. Practice guidelines 
for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce 
the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients 
undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Practice 
Parameters. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(3):495–511.
	28.	 Yogedran S, Asokumar B, Cheng DC, Chung F. A prospective randomized 
double blind study of the effect of intravenous fluid therapy on adverse 
outcomes on outpatient surgery. Anesth Analg. 1995;80(4):682–686.
	29.	 Bennett EJ, Daughety MJ, Jenkins MT. Fluid requirements for neonatal 
anesthesia and operation. Anesthesiology. 1970;32(4):343–350.
	30.	 Kleinman ME, Chameides L, Schexnayder SM, et  al. Pediatric 
advanced life support: 2010 American Heart Association guidelines 
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular 
care. Pediatrics. 2010;126(5):1361–1399.
	31.	 Metzner J, Domino KB. Risks of anesthesia or sedation outside the 
operating room: the role of the anesthesia care provider. Curr Opin 
Anesthesiol. 2010;23:523–531.
	32.	 Standards for basic anesthetic monitoring (last amended by the 
House of Delegates October 20, 2010). http://www.asahq.org/for-
members/standards-guidelines-and-statements.aspx.
	33.	 American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Pediatric 
Dentistry, Coté CJ, Wilson S, Work Group on Sedation. Guidelines 
for monitoring and management of pediatric patients during and 
after sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures: an update. 
Pediatrics. 2006;118(6):2587–2602.
	34.	 Laurence AS. Sedation, safety and MRI. Br J Radiol. 2000;73:
575–577.
	35.	 Macias C, Chumpitazi C. Sedation and anesthesia for CT: emerging 
issues for providing high-quality care. Pediatr Radiol. 2011;41(suppl 2):
S517–S522.
	36.	 Eichhorn V, Henzler D, Murphy M. Standardizing care and monitoring 
for anesthesia or procedural sedation delivered outside the operating 
room. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2010;23:494–499.
	37.	 McFayden G, Pelly N, Orr RJ. Sedation and anesthesia for the 
patient undergoing radiation therapy. Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 
2011;24(4):433–438.
	38.	 Singh J, Daftary A. Iodinated contrast media and their adverse 
reactions. J Nucl Med Technol. 2008;36:69–74.
	39.	 Berenguer B, Burrows PE, Zurakowski D, Mulliken JB. Sclerotherapy 
of craniofacial venous malformations: complications and results. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1999;104(1):1–11.
	40.	 Dorairaj IL, Hancock SM. Anesthesia for interventional neuroradiology. 
Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2008;8(3):86–89.
	41.	 Chiron C, Raynaud C, Dulac O, et  al. Study of the cerebral blood 
flow in partial epilepsy of childhood using the SPEC. J Neuroradiol. 
1989;16(4):317–324.
	42.	 Mason KJ, Koka BV. Anesthesia outside the operating room. In: Coté CJ, 
ed. A practice of anesthesia for infants and children. 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders; 2009:998.
	43.	 Cohen D. Magnetoencephalography: detection of the brain’s electri­
cal activity with a superconducting magnetometer. Science. 1972;
175:664–666.
	44.	 Szmuk P, Kee S, Pivalizza EG, et  al. Anesthesia for magnetoen­
cephalography in children with intractable seizures. Pediatr Anesth. 
2003;13(9):811–817.
	45.	 Talke P, Stapelfeldt C, Garcia P. Dexmedetomidine does not reduce 
epileptiform discharges in adults with epilepsy. Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 
2007;9:195–199.
	46.	 Koenig M, Mahmoud MA, Fujiwara H, et al. Influence of anesthetic 
management on quality of magnetoencephalography scan data in 
pediatric patients. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(2):321–336.
171
Providing anesthesia in the magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) environment differs from that in the operating room. 
The static magnetic field necessitates that all monitors, 
devices, and machines be nonferrous. The gradient mag­
netic field can interfere with electrocardiographic (ECG) 
tracing and is the main source of acoustic noise. Radiofre­
quency field energy is transferred into heat, so the patient 
usually becomes warm when more energy is absorbed. If too 
much heat is transferred to the patient, burns may occur.
Because of the desire to minimize ionizing radiation and 
the ability of MRI to provide better imaging of some tis­
sues and tissue planes, a gradual increase has occurred in 
the use of MRI not only for diagnosis but also as a part of 
treatment procedures.1 In a tertiary care hospital in which 
a sick patient population often has multiple comorbidities, 
patients are frequently unable to lie flat, still, or comfort­
ably. Thus a corollary increase is seen in the request for 
anesthetic support.
This chapter presents some of the issues faced when 
anesthetizing a patient in the MRI suite. Training and prep­
aration are needed before caring for a patient in the MRI 
environment. The MRI room should be inspected to make 
sure it is suitably prepared for the emergency and contin­
gency situations, such as airway difficulty and cardiorespi­
ratory collapse requiring resuscitation. Primarily because 
of acoustic noise during MRI, staff must be prepared to 
monitor the patient remotely after the onset of the anes­
thetic. Constant vigilance is required before bringing any­
thing into the MRI room, because several commonly used 
anesthetic devices have not been tested to determine if they 
are even conditionally MRI safe.
With the increase in the number and type of interven­
tional procedures done in the MRI suite, a correspond­
ing rise has occurred in the amount of anesthetic support 
needed. The MRI suite should be viewed as a non–operating 
room anesthesia location that requires not only an anes­
thetic machine, monitors, cart, and drugs but also constant 
vigilance for the safety of both patients and staff.
Training and Personnel
As a requirement to practice anesthesia in MRI in our insti­
tution, individuals must attend an orientation lecture and 
video about MRI safety. This orientation includes a tour of 
the facility to highlight areas of concern, such as the mag­
netic zone and corresponding safety zones. The operating 
room safety checklist2 has been expanded for MRI to include 
not only the patient’s MRI checklist but also a personal pat-
down before entering zone 4 with the patient. Table 19-1 
lists the zones in the MRI area.
In addition to the MRI technologist, our institution 
requires that a nurse be present whenever an anesthetic is 
administered. This policy applies to both diagnostic scans 
and procedures. Having a nurse assist during the anesthetic 
administration acknowledges the fact that the patient 
who requires an anesthetic for a diagnostic scan often has 
comorbidities. This practice began after a situation in which 
a patient needed a preoperative MRI for surgical planning. 
Administration of a general anesthetic began with the anes­
thesiologist and an MRI technologist present in the room. 
The patient developed cardiopulmonary arrest after the 
induction of general anesthesia. The ensuing resuscitation 
was unsuccessful. A review of the events led to the require­
ment to treat such cases as they would be handled in the 
main operating room. Whenever a therapeutic procedure 
is performed, the interventionalist must also be present in 
the MRI suite.
The Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging Suite
Although the operating room table is the center of the oper­
ating room, the magnet is the central, space-occupying 
mass in the MRI suite. The two issues that must be addressed 
are whether the patient bed is fixed or can be docked and 
undocked and whether access to the patient exists for emer­
gent exit.
If the bed is fixed to the MRI scanner, a general anesthetic 
will require induction of the patient on an MRI-compatible 
stretcher before being transferred to the bed. The stretcher 
is left in MRI zone 4 in case the patent must be quickly evac­
uated. A bed that docks and undocks allows for mobility to 
position the patient as needed for induction of an anesthetic 
and quick transfer from the bore of the magnet.
Emergency access always should be assessed when a 
patient enters zone 4. An area in zone 3 should be avail­
able with adequate space, oxygen, suction, and outlets 
for resuscitation of a patient if needed. An MRI bay must 
meet basic criteria that allow for an anesthetic to be pro­
vided safely. For example, if an MRI bay does not allow 
adequate space for entry and exit of zone 4 or fails to pro­
vide an adequate number of electrical outlets for standard 
Anesthesia Concerns in 
the Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging Environment
RAMON MARTIN
19
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
172
anesthesia equipment necessary in zone 3 for a resuscita­
tion, that bay should considered unsafe and not used as 
an anesthetic site. In some institutions, older MRI bays do 
not fit these criteria. For all new construction, a member 
of the anesthesia staff should be involved in the planning 
stages to ensure there is no compromise for providing a 
safe anesthetic.
MRI zone 3 is the buffer zone where resuscitation should 
be done. Most of the emergency scenarios such as cardio­
pulmonary collapse, difficult airway, and allergic or ana­
phylactic reactions require instruments that might not be 
MRI safe, as well as a variety of support personnel, not all 
of whom may be cognizant of MRI safety, and the patient 
should be moved as quickly as possible to zone 3. Although 
zone 2 is preferred for resuscitation, the urgency of the situ­
ation might dictate a short transit to begin emergent resus­
citative maneuvers.
Patient Selection
A poor quality of continuous ECG tracing is one the most 
serious limitations in monitoring an anesthetized patient 
in the MRI suite. If a patient is at risk for cardiac ischemia 
or further injury in the setting of recent ischemic stress, 
the benefit of anesthetizing the patient for MRI should be 
weighed against that risk. Technological advances will 
eventually overcome this limitation.3 Cardiac MRI does 
allow for visualization of global cardiac function. This type 
of MRI requires frequent breath-holding, but techniques 
that allow for free breathing have been reported.4,5
Known difficult intubation or prior history of allergic 
reaction to medication or contrast dye must be considered 
before entering zone 4. However, unanticipated difficult 
intubation or an anaphylactic reaction to contrast dye 
requires quick action and exit from zone 4. Plans to deal 
with contingency situations should be in place before a 
patient is brought into the MRI suite.
Remote Monitoring
The biological effects of magnetic and radiofrequency cur­
rents are subtle and continue to be studied.6-8 The acoustic 
noise, mainly from gradient magnetic fields, leads to the 
need to remotely monitor the patient. The Occupational 
Noise Exposure Standard states that a permissible expo­
sure limit over 8 hours is 90 dBA.9 More than 85 dBA 
requires a hearing protection program. In our institution, 
the 8-hour equivalent sound levels in the three MRI bays 
that regularly provide anesthesia are between 87 and 93 
dBA. Although comfortable hearing protection is avail­
able for patients, anesthesia providers often have difficul­
ties hearing the pulse oximeter tone when more than 1 or 
2 feet from the monitor. Although developing technolo­
gies will allow for sound deadening with transmission of 
monitor tones through headphones, this technology is not 
widely available. Remote monitoring is routinely done in 
these cases.
Remote monitoring is accomplished by a slave moni­
tor that displays vital signs and end-tidal gases, a view of 
the anesthesia ventilator and settings by either direct line 
of sight or a remote camera, and a view of the patient in 
the bore of the magnet by a camera linked to a display next 
to the vital signs monitor. This is generally done when the 
patient is stable after the induction of the anesthetic. If an 
intervention is needed during the course of the scan, the 
scan is halted until the issue is resolved.
Devices in Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging
In addition to standard monitoring devices, patients with 
multiple comorbidities or who are in the recent postopera­
tive period may require or have already attached to them 
monitors or devices that have not been screened for MRI 
safety.10 In response to emergent situations, devices may be 
used that have not been assessed for MRI safety. The follow­
ing case report illustrates such an instance.
A 62-year-old man was scheduled for MRI of the brain 
and total spine after a fall. He became restless and occa­
sionally combative, and anesthesia support was requested 
to ensure that the patient held still and remained comfort­
able for the duration of the examination. Because of the 
uncertainty of his nil per os (NPO) status and the length of 
the examination, the patient received a general anesthetic 
with a rapid sequence induction. The airway examination 
did not raise any preoperative concerns before intubation. 
After taking the patient into the MRI room, standard moni­
tors were attached. The patient was preoxygenated before 
a rapid sequence induction was performed. The vocal cords 
were not visualized on the first and second attempts at 
intubation. A Fastrach laryngeal mask airway (LMA, San 
Diego, Calif.) was placed. After breath sounds were auscul­
tated, an endotracheal tube (ETT) was uneventfully placed. 
The patient was placed on the ventilator and, with stable 
vital signs, the scan was initiated. Figure 19-1 shows the 
Table 19-1  Magnetic Resonance Imaging Zones
Zone
Description
Zone 1
Zone 1 consists of all areas freely accessible to the 
general public. This zone includes the entrance to the 
MRI facility, and the magnet poses no hazards in these 
areas.
Zone 2
Zone 2 acts as a buffer between zone 1 and the more 
restrictive zone 3. Here, patients are under the general 
supervision of MRI personnel. Normally, these areas 
are also safe from the magnet. Zone 2 may include the 
reception area, dressing room, and interview room.
Zone 3
Access to zone 3 should be restricted by a physical 
barrier. Only approved MRI personnel and patients 
who have answered a medical questionnaire and 
interview are allowed inside zone 3. The MRI 
control room and/or computer room are located 
within zone 3.
Zone 4
Zone 4 is strictly the area within the walls of the MRI 
scanner room, sometimes called the magnet room. 
Access into the MRI scanner room should be available 
only by passing through zone 3. Zone 4 is sometimes 
considered to be inside zone 3 because it does not 
have a direct entrance to unrestricted areas. Zones 
3 and 4 are sometimes collectively referred to as the 
MRI suite.
19  •  Anesthesia Concerns in the Magnetic Resonance Imaging Environment
173
scan obtained. After discussion with the MRI technologist, 
it was decided that the ETT was probably the reason for 
the signal drop out. The scan was halted, and with a tube 
changer the Fastrach ETT was replaced with a Sheridan 
ETT (Teleflex, Research Triangle Park, NC). An examina­
tion of the packaging for the Fastrach gave no indication 
of MRI safety. An examination of the actual Fastrach ETT, 
however, showed a reinforced coil running the length of the 
tube. A hand-held magnet placed close to the ETT revealed 
magnetic attraction.
This event led to an appraisal of other devices and moni­
tors used or encountered in the operating room. Devices that 
contained no markings about MRI safety were given partic­
ular scrutiny. Table 19-2 lists the gradient magnetic attrac­
tion of commonly used devices, none of which are listed 
in the 2009 Edition of the Reference Manual for Magnetic 
Resonance Safety Implants and Devices.11 Only the Epimed 
epidural catheter (Johnstown, NY) is actually labeled as not 
being safe for use in the MRI environment. Many devices 
that are used frequently and ubiquitously were found to 
have some magnetic attraction. The Sheridan ETT has a 
valve for the pilot balloon that, when left lying against the 
face (Figure 19-2), may account for artifact in a scan of the 
brain. Testing is being done to measure heat generated by 
each of these devices. Methods are being developed to stan­
dardize a testing system to quickly evaluate any monitor or 
device for which there is no readily identifiable information 
about MRI safety.12
Drug delivery to patients, either as a part of the anesthetic 
or for delivery of ongoing medications and fluids, requires 
planning as well. Commonly used infusion pumps are not 
MRI safe. These pumps are left outside of zone 4 and con­
tinue to function with extra lengths of tubing to reach the 
patient. These pumps should never be brought into the room 
because magnetic attraction causes imaging distortion and 
possible pump malfunction. MRI-compatible pumps are 
under development. Current models on the market are the 
B. Braun SpaceStation MRI pump (Melsungen, Germany), 
the Covidien MRidium IV pump (Mansfield, Mass.), and the 
Harvard Apparatus MRI Syringe Pump (Holliston, Mass.). 
These pumps can be used for the delivery of intravenous 
anesthetic agents because they have adequate drug librar­
ies or flexible dosing parameters. The cartridges and tub­
ing for these pumps are not compatible with conventional 
MRI-unsafe pumps. If a patient is receiving a continuous 
infusion of medication through a conventional pump, the 
pump must be left outside the MRI room in zone 3, using 
extra tubing, or the infusion must be switched to an MRI-
compatible pump.
Figure 19-1  Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and cervical 
and thoracic spine with a Fastrach endotracheal tube (LMA, San Diego, 
Calif.) in place.
Table 19-2  Degrees of Deflection and Force for 
Commonly Used Devices
Device
α(0)
Force [=mg tan(α)]
Sheridan ETT
5
1.9458
LMA
2
1.7475
Fastrach ETT
90
3.1769
Reinforced ETT
90
4.9923
Laser Shield ETT
0
0
Laser Flex ETT
30
2.0866
Arrow Central Line
0
0
Edwards Swan Gantz
15
5.2146
Edwards Swan Gantz CCO
12
7.0912
B. Braun Epidural Catheter
0
0
Arrow Epidural Catheter
2.5
1.2138
Epimed Epidural Catheter
90
4.5385
Medtronic Atrial Wire
90
4.5385
Medtronic Ventricular Wire
90
4.5385
Figure 19-2  Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in a patient intu­
bated with a Sheridan endotracheal tube (Teleflex, Research Triangle 
Park, NC). The pilot balloon is lying against the right cheek.
SECTION 3  •  Practices and Principles
174
Although advances have been made in MRI-implant­
able defibrillators, at present no external defibrillators are 
available that are MRI safe. If either cardiac arrhythmias 
or cardiac instability are noted during a scan, the patient 
must be removed from zone 4 before using an external defi­
brillator. In situations in which the likelihood of cardiac 
instability or arrhythmias exists, the placement of external 
defibrillator or pacing pads should be considered before the 
induction of an anesthetic. Placement of defibrillator pads 
cannot be done in zone 4 because the foil backing on the 
pads increases the chance for skin burns where the pads 
contact the skin. The risk for arrhythmia or instability must 
be weighed against the potential gain of proceeding with 
the scan.
Anesthetic Concerns With 
Computerized Axial Tomography
The combination and number of imaging and procedural 
interventions in computed tomography (CT) has increased. 
This increase is associated with a parallel increase in the use of 
anesthetic support, just as in the MRI suite. Another similarity 
is the evolution of technology to include fluoroscopy and posi­
tron emission tomography (PET) in the case of CT. Unlike with 
MRI cases, ionizing radiation is the sole reason for monitoring 
remotely during anesthetic delivery for CT procedures.
Remote Monitoring
The time required for CT scans is short in contrast to MRI 
scans. It is rare to have to provide anesthetic support to get 
a patient through a diagnostic scan. Exceptions are patients 
with developmental delays or neurosurgical patients who 
require a head CT when leaving the operating room and 
intermittently in the days after a craniotomy. It is the bur­
geoning use of CT for procedures such as biopsies, aspiration 
of fluid collections, placement of drains, and ablation of solid 
tumors that has led to an increase in the use of anesthesia 
services. This patient population often has increasing medi­
cal comorbidities, including baseline opioid intake and body 
mass index. Many of these procedures are done in lieu of 
more invasive operations.
CT scans emit more ionizing radiation than fluoroscopy 
and standard x-rays, so it is necessary to leave the CT room 
during imaging. A single chest CT scan can deliver more 
than 100 times the radiation dose of anteroposterior and 
lateral chest x-rays.13 Because of this, the patient must be 
monitored remotely. Because the scans are of short dura­
tion, all that is required to visualize the monitors and venti­
lator is a window, an audio link, and a speaker to hear the 
pulse oximeter.
When CT scanners incorporate other imaging technol­
ogies such as fluoroscopy or PET, anesthesiologists must 
use protective care. Fluoroscopy is used for the manipula­
tion of needles for biopsy or abscess drainage. It is then 
feasible to stay in the CT room with a lead apron and 
thyroid shield. A radiation badge also should be worn. 
Cataract development is a risk for exposure, and consid­
eration should be given to wearing leaded glasses.14 With 
PET imaging, injection of radio isotopes into the patient 
beforehand makes the patient another source of radiation 
exposure. Although the isotopes have short half-lives, 
if a Foley catheter is in place, the urine collected in the 
bag is the highest source of radiation. The collecting bag 
should be shielded and disposed of by nuclear medicine 
technicians.
Bore of the Computed 
Tomography
The increase in the bore size of the CT scanners from 70 to 
85 cm responds to the increasing incidence of obesity15 and 
the need for clearance of needles, airway and intravenous 
tubing, and monitor cables. The positioning and padding 
of the patient is important to prevent nerve or soft tissue 
damage from excess pressure. Attention should be paid to 
decreasing cables and tubing to allow the patient to go into 
and out of the bore of the scanner smoothly to decrease the 
possibility of catching or dislodgement.
Contrast Dye Anaphylactic 
Response
Intravenous contrast dye is frequently injected through the 
same line that is used by the anesthesiologist for medications 
and fluids. An autoinjector is commonly used to quickly 
instill precise amounts of the contrast agent. Although ana­
phylactic reactions and extravasation of the contrast agent 
are rare, these potential events must still be kept in mind. 
The intravenous line must be checked for patency and 
secured before positioning the patient to minimize the risk 
for extravasation. Anaphylactic reactions require quick, 
definitive treatment of any respiratory or cardiac instabil­
ity.16 The ability to remove the patient quickly from the CT 
bore and to reposition the patient for possible resuscitative 
measures is an important part of any contingency plan that 
must always be ready for implementation.
Summary
MRI is a unique and challenging environment that, when 
combined with the increasing use of therapeutic techniques, 
is at the forefront of patient treatment by proceduralists 
outside the operating room. Because patients are required 
to hold still yet still need to be comfortable, anesthesia ser­
vices are needed. It is important for anesthesia providers to 
be cognizant of the ramifications of the different MRI field 
strengths, to recognize the potential pitfalls and dangers to 
the patient and staff, and to work with the MRI staff to pro­
vide a safe anesthetic experience.
Unlike MRI, CT does not put constraints on monitors, 
devices, and ventilators. The potential cumulative effect 
of ionizing radiation makes remote monitoring a necessity 
when providing anesthetic care. Given the wide range of 
procedures being done in CT instead of the operating room, 
this locale has to be recognized for its role in providing less 
invasive but effective treatment for specific conditions. 
Anesthesia care is an integral part of our ability to treat 
these increasingly sick, complex patients.
19  •  Anesthesia Concerns in the Magnetic Resonance Imaging Environment
175
References
	 1.	 Jacobs MA, Ibrahim TS, Owerkerk R. MR imaging: brief overview and 
emerging applications. Radiographics. 2007;27:1213–1229.
	 2.	 Weiser TG, Haynes AB, Lashofer A, et  al. Perspective in quality: 
designing the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist. Int J of Qual Health Care. 
2010;22:365–370.
	 3.	 Wu V, Benbash IM, Ratnayaha K, et al. Adaptive noise cancellation 
to suppress electrocardiography artifacts during real-time interven­
tional MRI. J Mag Reson Imaging. 2011;33:1184–1193.
	 4.	 Odille F, Uribe S, Batchelor PG, et al. Model-based reconstruction for 
cardiac cine MRI without ECG or breath holding. Mag Reson Med. 
2010;63:1247–1257.
	 5.	 Beer M, Stamm H, Machenn W, et al. Free breathing cardiac real-time 
cine MR without ECG triggering. In J Cardiol. 2010;145:380–382.
	 6.	 Bradley JK, Nyekiova M, Prere DL, Lopez LD, Crawley T. Occupational 
exposure to static and time-varying gradient magnetic field in MR 
units. J Mag Res Imaging. 2007;26:1204–1209.
	 7.	 Franco G, Perduri R, Murolo A. Health effects of occupational expo­
sure to static magnetic fields used in magnetic resonance imaging: a 
review. Med Lav. 2008;99:16–28.
	 8.	 Feychting M. Health effects of static magnetic fields: a review of epide­
miological evidence. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2005;87:241–246.
	 9.	 Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1970: OSHA Hearing Conserva­
tion Program Amendment. Fed Reg. 1981;46:162.
	10.	 Fosling PA, McBrien ME. Winder RJ Magnetic resonance com­
patible equipment: read the small print!. Anesthesia. 2003;58(1). 
87–87.
	11.	 Shellock FG. Reference manual for magnetic resonance safety, implants 
and devices. Los Angeles: Biomedical Research Publishing Group; 
2009.
	12.	 ASTM International. Standard test method for measurement of magneti­
cally induced displacement force on medical devices in the magnetic reso­
nance environment. West Conshohocken, PA, F2052–06.
	13.	 Mettier Jr FA, Juda W, Yoshizumi TT, Mahesh M. Effective doses in 
radiology and diagnostic nuclear medicine: a catalogue. Radiology. 
2008;248(1):254–263.
	14.	 Anastasian ZH, Strozyk D, Meyers PM, Wang S, Berman MF. Radia­
tion exposure of the anesthesiologist in the neurointerventional suite. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114(3):512–520.
	15.	 Uppot RN, Shahini DV, Hahn PF, Gervais D, Meuller PR. Impact of 
obesity on medical imaging and image-guided interventions. AJR Am 
J Roentgenol. 2007;188(2):433–440.
	16.	 Bush WH, Sanson DP. Acute reactions to intravenous contrast media: 
type, risk factors, recognition and treatment. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
1991;157(6):1153–1161.
178
When requests for anesthesia assistance outside the main 
operating room first occurred more than a decade ago, they 
were regarded as nuisance calls and often ignored. The 
requests were haphazard and usually asked for an urgent 
response in a remote location where nurse-administered 
moderate sedation was not sufficient to sedate a patient for 
a procedure or diagnostic study. This request was further 
complicated by the fact that most patients had multiple 
comorbidities. The response to this problem has evolved into 
the practice of non–operating room anesthesia (NORA). 
NORA’s challenge is to coordinate anesthesia in reaction to 
its service requests. It involves multiple issues—preoperative 
assessment, standardized procedure room requirements, 
standardized anesthetic equipment, knowledge of the pro­
cedure, availability of backup help, having the procedural­
ists take some ownership of the patient, and being involved 
in the planning of any new procedure rooms. Macario1 has 
noted other issues in scheduling cases in locations outside 
the operating room, as follows:
   
	1.	 Scheduling differences in NORA locations make it diffi­
cult to assess demand for anesthesia staff.
	2.	 Cancellation and rebooking of cases is not always passed 
on to the anesthesia scheduler.
	3.	 NORA locations are not interchangeable as in the main 
operating room.
	4.	 Turnover time in NORA locations can be longer than in 
the main operating room.
	5.	 NORA services are generally small with a variable daily 
workload.
	6.	 The geographical distance between locations might 
necessitate separate staff rather than a staff covering 
residents or certified registered nurse anesthetists.
   
In spite of these issues, the central need was and still is, as 
in the main operating room, a predictable schedule.
This chapter briefly summarizes the associated issues 
that have to be dealt with before scheduling and provid­
ing anesthesia care in NORA locations. A discussion of the 
developing approaches to scheduling cases and procedures 
will follow. The approach our institution has taken will be 
presented, detailing problems noted and solutions tried. 
The final discussion will be about where scheduling needs 
to move forward to best serve the needs of the patient, staff, 
and hospital.
Associated Background Issues
PHYSICAL SPACE
The procedure room has to be large enough to allow ade­
quate room for all members of the care team to function, 
as well as anesthetic equipment, imaging apparatus, and 
tables or trays. Doors must be large enough to allow easy 
entry of a bed. Adequate electric outlets and suction, 
standard gases, and waste anesthetic gas disposal outlets 
are needed. Needless to say, almost all of the locations 
available for use did not meet these requirements. Some 
accommodations to allow procedures were made in most 
locations, but some spaces were so small and inadequate 
that they could not be used because of patient safety 
concerns. With subsequent rebuilding, most locations 
are now adequate and safe for anesthetizing patients. 
A nitrous oxide yoke is no longer a requirement in 
NORA locations because of changes in anesthetic tech­
niques and practice, as well as abuse potential in remote 
locations.
STANDARDIZED ANESTHETIC EQUIPMENT
The goal of NORA rooms is to replicate what is avail­
able in the main operating room from the anesthesia 
machine to the equipment cart. Drug dispensers in each 
location are stocked with standard anesthetic medica­
tions. The anesthesia machines are smaller models than 
those in the main operating room for portability. In the 
computed tomography (CT) scanner area, the anesthesia 
machine is moved out of the procedure room to a nearby 
storage room when not in use. Emergency airway equip­
ment such as C-Mac (Karl Storz, El Segundo, Calif.) or 
Glidescope (Verathon, Bothell, Wash.) and a fiberoptic 
difficult airway cart are conveniently located in each 
location.
The use of ionizing radiation in NORA locations is 
common in most areas except for the area of magnetic reso­
nance imaging (MRI). Proper shielding, which consists of 
a lead apron, vest and thyroid protector, lead eyewear (to 
minimize cataract formation2), and clear lead screens, is 
available and important to the long-term health of the 
anesthesia caregiver.
Scheduling Anesthesia 
Services Outside the 
Operating Room
RAMON MARTIN
20
20  •  Scheduling Anesthesia Services Outside the Operating Room
179
Knowledge of the Procedure
Because many NORA cases occur during nights and week­
ends, all staff who take overnight call in the main operating 
room are rotated through the non–operating room locations 
so that they have some familiarity with each area and the 
procedures done. A non–operating room block of lectures 
has been added to the weekly educational series to update 
members of our department about advances in the various 
non–operating room areas. Talks about radiation and MRI 
safety also occur. Several staff anesthesiologists present to 
the non–operating room location staff about anesthetic 
issues, particularly the intersection of moderate sedation 
and anesthesia. This new educational emphasis highlights 
the decision-making needed to decide which technique to 
use and how to go about scheduling anesthesia support.
AVAILABILITY OF HELP FOR EMERGENCIES
The daily roster of non–operating room personnel 
includes a team leader, who is able to quickly respond 
to any emergent situation such as unanticipated diffi­
cult intubation. Two or three anesthesia technicians are 
daily assigned to NORA locations and quickly respond 
to emergencies. The anesthesiologist who runs the main 
operating room is apprised regularly throughout the day 
by the non–operating room team leader and is attuned to 
quickly provide help as needed.
PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT
Every patient undergoing a procedure undergoes a preop­
erative anesthetic assessment. The Preoperative Evaluation 
Service (PES), housed within the hospital, was established 
to provide this service for the main operating room. Outpa­
tients with procedures in non–operating room areas have 
also been gradually added to this service. However, the PES, 
which was already full with patients from the main operating 
room, has become overburdened with the non–operating­ 
room volume. This overloading has led to a restructuring 
of how patients from the non–operating room are seen and 
evaluated. More non–operating room cases have the preop­
erative assessment done on the day of the procedure in that 
location. Inpatients undergoing procedures on the same 
day are also seen in the procedure location. Inpatients for 
the next day are seen by the main operating room call team 
on the previous night. The system for non–operating room 
preoperative evaluations is evolving to be separate from 
the PES, a brick-and-mortar service for the main operating 
room, to a more mobile preanesthesia assessment service 
that covers both inpatients and outpatients. This is being 
done in conjunction with each location, providing a place 
to interview a patient; it also requires old records and refer­
ral notes to be as complete as possible.
OWNERSHIP OF A PATIENT
For proceduralists who view themselves as “just doing a 
case,” the task of knowing their patients’ medical back­
grounds is a required effort before assuming responsibility for 
moderate sedation. This task is made harder when patients’ 
medical conditions or drug requirements disqualify them 
for moderate sedation. It is generally the moderate sedation 
nurse who initiates the request for anesthesia support. This 
reflects the fact that historically the proceduralist often did 
not know and take “ownership” of the patient, even for the 
brief period of the procedure. This has led to an increased 
emphasis during moderate sedation training and yearly talks 
about the use of anesthesia and knowing the patient well. 
With time, it is hoped that this training will lead to proce­
duralists knowing the patients better so that they will take 
ownership of “their” patients.
BOOKING CASES
The decision was made early in the process to keep the 
scheduling office for the main operating room as the funnel 
for entry to book elective cases. This provides a consistent, 
central place that interacts with the anesthesia scheduling 
office to ensure that the preoperative anesthesia assessment 
is scheduled and that procedures are put in the appropriate 
time slots. Procedures that need to be done within 24 hours 
are booked through the main operating room front desk 
and are treated as add-on cases.
The Schedule
Table 20-1 shows the daily non–operating room schedule 
for 2013. This schedule has expanded over the past sev­
eral years because of an increase in the number of places 
where anesthesia is provided, as well as an increase in vol­
ume, resulting in the need for more days of coverage. These 
changes have been incremental over time. The caseload 
has been adjusted after reviewing usage and discussing this 
with the clinicians in each location on a 6-month or yearly 
basis. Such a schedule would be classified by Dexter et al3 
as fixed or block time. This encourages regularly scheduled 
cases on Monday through Friday from 7:30 am to 4 pm to be 
in synch with those in the main operating room. As men­
tioned earlier, the call to the surgical booking department 
also generates a date and time for the patient to be seen for 
preoperative assessment.
Two issues exist with such a fixed schedule. The increase 
in non–operating room cases has overwhelmed the capac­
ity of the preadmitting test center. The other issue stems 
from the inpatient or outpatient urgent or emergent cases. 
These issues will be discussed further.
The non–operating room locations are listed last on the 
daily schedule for the main operating room. This rank­
ing does not minimize their importance, but it serves to 
remind the main operating room anesthesia and front 
desk staff about the overall flow of cases in all locations. 
At present, each non–operating room location has its own 
­case-tracking software that is unique and does not commu­
nicate across departments. An integrated software system, 
EPIC (Verona, Wis.), is being readied for use and will allow 
all departments to see and directly interact with the sched­
uling system.
Figure 20-1 is an example of the yearly contract drawn 
up by the financial section of the anesthesia department. 
This contract states the clinical coverage responsibilities, 
reimbursement, and charges for cases that are done out­
side the regularly scheduled time. The contract is discussed 
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
180
with and signed off by the corresponding financial section 
of each department where services are provided. As men­
tioned earlier, even though the contract is negotiated and 
signed yearly, it is amended if substantive changes are 
needed in clinical coverage.
The impact of this fixed or block schedule for NORA has 
been widely felt. As mentioned earlier, the increased visits to 
the PES are being mitigated by an evolving non–operating 
room preoperative assessment service. This is being developed 
in conjunction with the main operating room to take care of 
both elective and last-minute in-house patients for both the 
non–operating room location and the main operating room. 
Just as has been demonstrated for the PES, it is hoped that 
the service will prove its worth by decreasing the incidence 
of last-minute case cancellations so that more cases can be 
handled efficiently.
The expansion of anesthesia to non–operating room 
locations has resulted in the establishment of area-specific 
postanesthesia care units in high-volume areas. These 
operate not only during the day, Monday through Friday, 
but also nights and weekends. The cardiovascular recovery 
room (CVRR) takes patients from the catherization and 
electrophysiology laboratories, angiography suite, and the 
interventional neuroradiology (INR) suite. The anesthesia 
attending physician who provides support for transesopha­
geal echocardiography and cardioversions also covers the 
CVRR. The endoscopy suite has its own recovery area. 
Anesthetic coverage is provided by attending physicians 
assigned to endoscopy procedures for the day. After hours, 
requests for assistance are covered by the main operating 
room call team.
Along with the scheduled non–operating room cases, 
a steady increase has occurred in the number of proce­
dures performed during nights and weekends. These are 
covered by the main operating room call team. Some 
procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangio­
pancreatography and some angiography procedures can 
be done in the main operating room, in a hybrid operat­
ing room that has built-in fluoroscopic equipment. The 
number of procedures in the remaining areas is relatively 
small and is still handled by the main operating room call 
team. This is being followed closely to determine if and 
when either a separate non–operating room call team or 
an extra attending specifically for those cases is needed. 
Requests to provide anesthetic support for diagnostic 
tests (MRI and positron emission tomography [PET]) dur­
ing nights and weekends are receiving increased scru­
tiny, with attending-level discussions taking place before 
each case.
The expansion of anesthesia care in the non–operating­ 
room setting has sparked the realization that a lot of 
interaction occurs between the main operating room and 
non–operating room settings, which thus provides an 
opportunity for anesthesiologists to be the brokers for these 
transfers. Examples are as follows:
   
	1.	 Preoperative angiogram and embolization of large vas­
cular tumors before surgical excision.
	2.	 Perforated viscus in the endoscopy suite that needs to be 
transferred emergently to the main operating room for 
exploration.
	3.	 A patient with a pelvic crush injury secondary to a 
motor vehicle accident who goes to the angiography/
invasive radiology suite first for angiographic emboliza­
tion of pelvic bleeding vessels before going to the main 
operating room for stabilization of long-bone fractures
	4.	 Cerebral angiogram and possible coiling of a ruptured 
aneurysm. If the aneurysm cannot be coiled, the patient 
is transferred to the main operating room for a craniot­
omy and aneurysm clipping.
	5.	 Tract preparation in the angiography suite before going 
to the main operating room for lithotripsy of a renal 
­calculus.
   
Operating rooms have only recently begun to incorpo­
rate imaging techniques into their design and function, 
and a steady, consistent advance has been seen in tech­
niques outside the main operating room. These advances 
include the activities of interventional pulmonologists, as 
well as advances in cervical and prostate brachytherapy, 
chemoembolization, and various ablation techniques for 
solid tumors. Advances in imaging technology, such as 
7-tesla MRI and functional imaging with PET and CT, 
still require a patient to be very still, occasionally with 
Table 20-1  Daily Schedule of Coverage for Outside 
the Operating Room
Time
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
am
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
pm
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
Endo 
(2 rms)
am
FPC
FPC
pm
FPC
am
Rad Onc
Rad Onc
Rad Onc
pm
Rad Onc
Rad Onc
Rad Onc
am
MRI
MRI
pm
am
CT
CT
CT
CT
pm
CT
am
Angio
Angio
Angio
Angio
pm
Angio
Angio
Angio
am
INR
INR
pm
INR
am
Cath
Cath
Cath
Cath
Cath
pm
Cath
Cath
Cath
Cath
Cath
am
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
pm
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
am
CVRR
CVRR
CVRR
CVRR
CVRR
pm
CVRR
CVRR
CVRR
CVRR
CVRR
am
AMIGO
AMIGO
AMIGO
AMIGO
pm
AMIGO
AMIGO
AMIGO
AMIGO
Radiation Oncology (L2): Rad Onc
Angiography/Interventional Radiology (L2): Angio
Cardiac Cath Laboratory (L2): Cath
Electrophysiology Laboratory (L2): EP
Interventional Neuroradiology (L1): INR
CT Scan for Ablations, etc. (L1): CT
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (L1): MRI
Endoscopy Suite (ASB2): Endo
Family Planning Clinic (A Main): FPC
Cardiovascular Recovery Room (Shapiro L2): CVRR
Advanced Multi-Image Guided Operating Suite (L2): AMIGO
20  •  Scheduling Anesthesia Services Outside the Operating Room
181
MEMORANDUM
TO: 
Executive Director, Surgical Services and Imaging
FROM: 
Executive Director, Anesthesiology
 
DATE: 
 
 
RE: 
Anesthesia Services Agreement
_______________________________________________________________________________
The purpose of this memorandum is to specify the terms of agreement between Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital (BWH) and the Brigham and Women’s Physicians Organization – Anesthesia 
(BWPOA) relative to providing anesthesia care for ____ patients provided at the Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital.
Coverage/Financial Arrangement:
1. BWPOA will provide anesthesia services for BWPOA in a room exclusively for ______ from 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday (9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Wednesday).
2. BWH will reimburse BWPOA a total of $_____ for each physician, each day (estimated 
at $______ per month) less related professional receipts billed by BWPOA (estimated at 
$_______ per month). In the event a session exceeds the scheduled timeframe, BWH will 
compensate BWPOA at the rate of $_____ per hour.
3. Each month BWH will initiate a transfer of $________ from ______________ to 
____________ to fund the current month per the rates outlined in item #2 above.
4. Patient receipts associated with this activity have been considered in the monthly transfer. 
Any surplus or deficit resulting from actual patient receipts vs. estimates outlined above will be 
settled on a quarterly basis in arrears.
Operations/Reporting:
1. BWHE will schedule patients through the operating room scheduling office (2-7448) at least 
48 hours in advance. If within 48 hours the slots for patient bookings for BWHE have not been 
utilized, the anesthesia staff will be deployed elsewhere. BWHE will be charged the agreed 
upon day rate unless the BWPOA Scheduling Office and BWPOA Finance Manager have 
been notified in writing at least 48 hours in advance that the Anesthesia services are not 
required.
2. Bookings that occur after the 48-hour deadline must be handled via discussion with the 
Anesthesia Clinical Director or his/her designee. Although every effort will be made to provide 
anesthesia services as requested, no guarantees are made for bookings less than 48 hours 
in advance.
3. Anesthesia staff will be available for the _____ Suite during the agreed upon blocks. Block 
time utilization will be reviewed quarterly to optimize scheduling for BWH and BWPOA.
4. BWPOA will send a quarterly report to you summarizing case volume, billing and collections 
for anesthesia related services provided in the _____ suite.
Term: One-year agreement beginning October 1, 20__ automatically renewed on May 1st for the following 
fiscal year.  Notice of termination given by BWH required before May 1st for termination effective the 
following September 30th.
Agreed: _________________________  
           Agreed: _______________________
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Date: ___________________________  
           Date: _________________________
Figure 20-1  Anesthesia services agreement for outside the operating room.
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
182
breath-holding; this frequently requires anesthetic sup­
port because these techniques are increasingly aligned 
with procedures. This also provides opportunities for anes­
thesiologists to be involved in discussions with interven­
tionalists about what they are doing and about planning 
for new procedure areas.
As non–operating room activities continue to increase, 
there might be a question as to whether the non–operating 
room should be separate from the main operating room. The 
integration of main operating room and non–operating­ room 
activities does not support this suggestion. The schedule 
should be integrated and accessible by all parties involved. 
However, the following differences still exist between the 
two:
   
	1.	 Separate preanesthetic and postanesthetic care areas 
are used in high-volume locales. With the regular pres­
ence of anesthesiologists, this separation also provides 
support for nurses who provide moderate sedation.
	2.	 A mobile preanesthetic assessment service is used to 
ensure that both inpatients and outpatients receive a 
thorough evaluation before their procedure to address 
any medical issues and minimize the chances of last 
minute ­cancellations.
	3.	 If current trends continue, it may be necessary to add 
another call position for nights and weekends to do 
non–operating room procedures. The physical distance 
to some locations, combined with the potential acuity of 
patients with multiple comorbidities, makes it impracti­
cal and unsafe for a staff to cover both the main operat­
ing room and remote locations with residents.
	4.	 Effects of bundled payments on the flow of care must 
be assessed. This might shift some treatments from the 
main operating room to the non–operating room loca­
tion, where the overall cost of some procedures is less.
These points require regular reflection as to their efficacy 
and cost-effectiveness when all costs are included and 
should evolve in parallel with changes in health care.
Summary
The “schedule” for the non–operating room is more than a 
daily and weekly list of procedures to be anesthetized. It is 
the codification of a shift in diagnostic and treatment areas 
where care was initially provided by nurses using moderate 
sedation. More complex procedures and sicker patients have 
led to the increasing need for anesthetic support. The driv­
ing engine behind this is the development of proceduralists 
using imaging techniques. Although some techniques are 
being incorporated into operating rooms, the interventional­
ists are varied and well into a movement that will continue to 
increase. The schedule reflects the breadth of this movement, 
and anesthesiologists have a significant role in this shift.
References
	1.	 Macario A. Proper scheduling of anesthesiology services outside of the 
operating room suite. Medscape Anesthesiology. December 29, 2009.
	2.	 Anastasian ZH, Strozyk D, Meyers PM, Wang S, Berman MF. Radia­
tion exposure of the anesthesiologist in the neurointerventional suite. 
Anesthesiology. 2011;114(3):512–520.
	3.	 Dexter F, Epstein RH. Scheduling of cases in an ambulatory center. 
Anesthesiol Clin North Am. 2003;21:387–402.
183
Approximately 20,000 medical students take the Hippo­
cratic Oath each year.1 They vow to spend the next 10 
years learning the art and science of medicine, but little 
do they know that reality also involves economics and 
administrative problem-solving. In today’s world of bulg­
ing hospital networks and multitiered reimbursements, 
the days of doctors making house calls are long gone. 
Consolidation in health care is transforming medicine as 
hospitals, private firms, and even health insurance com­
panies acquire physician practices at a rapidly growing 
rate. The shift away from independent physician solo 
practices to systems that employ doctors is intended to 
make health care less fragmented and less expensive by 
building infrastructures that foster better care coordina­
tion and take advantage of economies of scale. Health 
care is a $2.8 trillion business, according to the 2012 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, and it oper­
ates on the same set of principles that run Fortune 500 
companies.4
Similar to the growth of ambulatory surgeries in the 
1990s, an explosive growth of non–operating room pro­
cedures has occurred over the past decade. Today, medical 
proceduralists perform a wide variety of procedures, rang­
ing from simple needle biopsies to complicated vascular 
stents. From 1996 to 2006, the volume of surgical and 
nonsurgical procedures performed at freestanding ambu­
latory centers tripled, largely as a result of procedures 
performed outside the operating room, whereas those per­
formed at hospitals remained the same.2 The most common 
procedures performed include endoscopy of large intestine 
(5.7 million), endoscopy of small intestine (3.5 million), 
extraction of a lens (3.1 million), injections of agent into 
spinal canal (2.0 million), and insertion of a prosthetic lens 
(2.6 million).2
The current challenge and concurrent opportunity for 
anesthesiologists is to decide how to expand our services 
in a changing health care environment that is safe, effi­
cient, and financially sound. The goal of this chapter is 
to examine the financial and operational implications of 
non–operating room anesthesia. It is presented in the for­
mat of a business plan, starting with market analysis and 
opportunity, competitive landscape, comparative advan­
tage, and a logistics section with a focus on financial 
analysis and operational infrastructural analysis. Other 
issues such as scheduling and staffing are discussed in 
other chapters.
Market Analysis
MARKET TRENDS
Some argue that fee-for-service fuels much of U.S. health 
care spending and results in excessive usage, but it is also 
important to recognize that the same financial incentive 
also propels medical advances. In the 1990s, minimally 
invasive surgical techniques led to a growth in ambulatory 
surgeries. Fast-forward 20 years to 2013, the next set of 
innovations prompting changes is minimally invasive pro­
cedures performed outside the operating room.
These nonsurgical procedures are appealing. From the 
patient’s perspective, it means a less invasive approach and 
faster recovery. It also appeals to the patient who is too sick 
to undergo a traditional surgical treatment. From the hos­
pital’s perspective, minimally invasive procedures mean 
shorter length of stays, higher volume, less overhead cost, 
and of course the satisfaction of making medical advance­
ments. While market forces are at work, as long as there 
is a demand, there will be a supply to meet. As a result, the 
demand for anesthesia outside the operating room also has 
grown. And yet, many practices may be in a difficult situa­
tion if they are unable to staff these procedures efficiently. 
The failure to properly manage these procedures creates 
erratic coverage and unhappy proceduralists.
NEW CUSTOMERS
The operating room has traditionally served as the anes­
thesiologist’s home. Anesthesiologists are increasingly per­
ceived as natural masters of operating room management as 
they make strides in leadership, efficiency, scheduling, and 
cost effectiveness. Customers traditionally have included 
patients, surgeons, and hospital management. With the rise 
of non–operating room anesthesia (NORA) cases, the spe­
cialty now has an additional set of nonsurgical customers 
that demand and value anesthesiologists’ services.
Unlike surgeons, proceduralists such as medical interven­
tionists and radiologists have different needs. For example, 
they do not perform painful procedures that require multi­
modal postoperative pain management. In addition, they and 
the nurses around them are often unused to working with 
anesthesiologists and thus unfamiliar with their particular 
needs. Given that NORA cases are often short procedures, 
they demand faster room turnover and rapid recovery.
Financial and Operational 
Analysis for Non–Operating 
Room Anesthesia
CAITLIN J. GUO and ALEX MACARIO
21
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
184
AN OPPORTUNITY
As the aging population grows older and sicker, it is inevi­
table that the number of procedures performed outside the 
operating room will continue to increase in the next decade. 
The chart in Figure 21-1 shows the large increases in the 
population aged 65 and older from 3.1 million people in 
1900 to 35 million in 2000 and projected to 72 million in 
2030.
Table 21-1 illustrates the dramatic increase in anesthesia 
professional participation in the two most common NORA 
procedures, esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy. 
By 2015, anesthesia services will be involved in over half 
of these procedures.
The anesthesiology community is adjusting its prac­
tice to meet the NORA demand. Without appropriate pre­
procedural and postprocedural care, cancellation and 
rescheduling from unanticipated medical complexity will 
certainly rise. Thus early risk stratification of patients and 
planned anesthesia service can greatly improve efficiency 
and reduce cost. Most surgical patients currently undergo 
a preoperative assessment by a member of the anesthesia 
team. In contrast, the evaluation of patients for NORA pro­
cedures may be lacking despite the fact that some of these 
patients are ill enough to be hospitalized. The anesthesia 
group needs to work with the hospital and proceduralists 
to ensure that proper infrastructure is in place to optimize 
scheduling and provide safe care of these patients. The 
question “Is it safe for proceduralists with minimal train­
ing in airway and pharmacology to perform the procedure, 
manage comorbidities, and supervise administered seda­
tion?” is often raised. Everyone wants to avoid the use of 
unplanned anesthesia on an emergency basis.
When tallied together, the costs of procedural cancel­
lation, emergent anesthesia usage, and unforeseen hospi­
talizations are expensive and should be minimized. Thus it 
is important that anesthesiologists take a leadership role 
by creating appropriate policies and systems of care to 
preemptively avoid complications and delays and improve 
efficiency.
Competitive Landscape
COMPETITORS
Many providers such as registered nurses, dentists, and oral 
surgeons deliver sedation that might be considered com­
petition to anesthesiologists. However, many NORA cases 
require deep sedation or general anesthesia, in particular 
patients with complex comorbidities or those who previ­
ously failed routine sedation. Because of difficulty in coor­
dination of services or resources, some hospitals may elect 
to outsource contracts with an outside anesthesia group 
to provide consistent and reliable services. This represents 
a loss of business for the existing group. Thus when faced 
with the question “Can you provide coverage to our new 
location outside the operating room?” the answer should be 
yes, “Let’s get together and discuss how we can optimally 
do this for everyone involved.”
0
20,000,000
40,000,000
60,000,000
80,000,000
100,000,000
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
Population 65+ by age: 1900–2050
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census
Age 65–74
Age 75–84
Age 85+
Figure 21-1  Chart of population 65 years of age and over by age: 1900 to 2050. (Compiled by the U.S. Administration on Aging. Projected future growth of 
the older population: chart of population 65 and over by age: 1900 to 2050. Compiled by the U.S. Administration on Aging using the Census data. Department 
of Health & Human Services, Administration on Aging. http://www.aoa.gov/aoaroot/aging_statistics/future_growth/future_growth.aspx.)
Table 21-1  Predicted Anesthesia Professional Participation Rates (%) for Colonoscopy and Esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
by Year
Condition
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Colonoscopy (%)
23.9
27.6
31.3
34.9
38.6
42.3
46.0
49.7
53.4
EGD (%)
24.4
28.0
31.5
35.1
38.7
42.2
45.8
49.3
52.9
EGD, Esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
From Inadomi JM, Gunnarsson CL, Rizzo JA, Fang H. Projected increased growth rate of anesthesia professional–delivered sedation for colonoscopy and EGD in 
the United States: 2009 to 2015. Gastrointest Endosc. 2010;72(3):580-586.
21  •  Financial and Operational Analysis for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
185
BARRIERS TO ENTRY
The addition of anesthesia service is perceived to add time 
and cost. As a result, many proceduralists have historically 
been reluctant to ask for coverage. In addition, unfamiliar­
ity with anesthesia care also causes reluctance.
From an anesthesia perspective, cultural and opera­
tional barriers exist to practicing outside the comfort zone 
of the surgical suite. Traditionally, anesthesiologists reside 
in the operating room. Most find experiences outside the 
operating room to be unpleasant because of ergonomi­
cally unfavorable physical space, poor ancillary support, 
lack of backup equipment, distance from the recovery 
room, and dealing with a new set of providers who may 
not understand anesthesiologists’ approach to safe care. 
In regard to staffing, too few anesthesiologists are avail­
able to provide guaranteed coverage to all of the subspe­
cialists. This lack creates delays and frustration, especially 
when dealing with add-on cases. Financially speaking, 
proceduralists may find it more economically favorable 
to rely on sedation nurses for most of their cases and 
use emergent anesthesia on demand. This situation may 
worsen when procedure reimbursements are bundled into 
one case payment.
Comparative Advantages
As anesthesiologists, our knowledge and technical skills 
in providing anesthesia are without peer. Patient safety 
is undoubtedly the most important service we offer. 
Although it may be unrealistic to always have anesthesia 
coverage for every proceduralist because the cost would 
be too high, it is possible to take an active role in designing 
the appropriate infrastructure to maximize efficiency and 
reduce cost.
As the line between surgery and procedure blurs, it is 
more important than ever to engage the proceduralists to 
obtain anesthesia evaluations. The goal is to identify the 
medically complex patients early and match them with 
appropriately trained providers to better risk-stratify their 
comorbidities.
It is important that we apply the same concepts of man­
agement to settings outside the operating room with the 
goal being to improve coordination and efficiency. The cur­
rent system is chaotic. Most proceduralists and anesthesi­
ologists share common frustrations of difficult scheduling 
and frequent delays. We must integrate ourselves in the 
procedural suites permanently, the same way we did in the 
operating room many decades ago.
Financial Considerations
BILLING AND MONITORED ANESTHESIA 
CARE REIMBURSEMENT
Unlike routine anesthesia billing, procedures performed 
outside the operating room are confronted with a differ­
ent set of rules. Most surgical anesthetics are provided 
in a form of general or regional technique. In con­
trast, the majority of procedures performed outside the 
operating room are carried out with sedation. For simple 
procedures such as gastrointestinal endoscopies, seda­
tions provided by anesthesiologists may not be easily 
reimbursed. Instead, the fees are bundled with the pro­
fessional fees and paid to the proceduralists. Because of 
the lack of financial incentives, anesthesia coverage has 
been slow to grow.
Monitored anesthesia care services are payable only 
if medically reasonable and necessary. Indications for 
monitored anesthesia care include the nature of the pro­
cedure, patient’s clinical condition, and potential need to 
convert to a general or regional anesthetic. It is a billable 
service when provided by a qualified member of the anes­
thesia team.
BASIC ECONOMICS
The three simple variables in managerial economics are 
cost, revenue, and volume. The three are intimately related; 
careful planning and optimizing of these variables are 
greatly beneficial.
Cost
Traditional cost accounting includes variable and fixed 
costs (Figure 21-2).
Total cost = Fixed cost + Variable cost × Volume
The fixed cost remains constant, whereas the variable 
cost is directly related to volume.
Fixed costs, also known as overhead costs, do not vary 
with patient encounters and are shared among the group. 
They remain constant even if anesthetics are not provided. 
These costs include administrative overhead, facilities cost, 
utilities, and upkeep of shared equipment such as anesthesia 
machines, monitors, bronchoscopes, and echo machines. 
Although fixed costs are generally viewed as constant in the 
short run or within a given surgical volume, it is important 
to remember that they are long-term variable costs. As an 
organization grows, it is inevitable that overhead and capi­
tal costs will grow.
$
Variable cost
Fixed cost
Volume
Figure 21-2  Total cost as a function of volume, including fixed and 
variable costs.
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
186
Variable costs, on the other hand, are those associated 
with each patient encounter and are thus volume depen­
dent. Typical variable costs of providing an anesthetic are 
the wages of the anesthesiology team, wages of the preoper­
ative and postoperative recovery staff, drugs administered, 
laboratory or diagnostic studies, and equipment used in the 
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative care set­
tings. Unlike a manufacturing plant, in which end products 
are identical, the variable cost per patient can differ signifi­
cantly from one patient to another.
Revenue
Revenue is a function of price and volume. The more vol­
ume a practice sees, the more revenue it generates. A key 
variable in this equation is the payer mix, which affects 
the price; a favorable ratio benefits a practice.
Total revenue = Price × Volume
This is a relative simplification of the revenue equation. 
In reality, many variables are involved in anesthesia bill­
ing, including relative value units (RVUs), time, case mix, 
patient mix, and payer mix.
Cost Volume Profit Analysis
Putting the previously mentioned three variables together 
is the cost volume profit analysis. The cost volume profit 
model is often used in managerial economics for short-run 
decision-making. It is used to calculate the break-even point 
and help a firm project a target volume. By changing the 
variables in the model, break-even points can be obtained 
(Figure 21-3).
Although the model demonstrates a simple economic 
theory clearly, it does carry the following several lineariz­
ing assumptions:
   
	□	 Constant sales price
	□	 Constant total fixed cost
	□	 Constant variable cost per unit
	□	 Units sold equals units produced
	□	 Constant sales mix
   
Because the end products in health care are not iden­
tical, the unit variable cost and sales price are not con­
stant. In addition, the payer mixes can differ significantly 
and are constantly in flux. The model can be adapted to 
use the average cost and price for a given institution. In 
addition, the cost volume profit model assumes a clear 
division between fixed and variable costs, which may be 
true in the short run. However, in the long run, all costs 
are variable as the group brings in additional staff and 
invests in new capital.
An Example Analysis
Let’s take the cost volume profit model and apply it to an 
anesthesia group that is considering off-site expansion to 
determine the optimal committed coverage.
When faced with an expansion, most anesthesia groups 
will start with on-demand services, which minimize fixed 
cost and accrue only variable cost. At the early stages, this is 
a sensible approach. The demand for our services is largely 
unknown because the proceduralists are also at their initial 
stages of expansion. Committing scheduled blocks may be 
unnecessary.
Although cost efficient, on-demand services are often 
associated with significant delays and frustration and are 
not long-term solutions. In addition, the costs associated 
with overuse of staff are expensive. It is therefore important 
for the practice to constantly reevaluate its position on com­
mitted versus on-demand coverage (Figure 21-4).
A Toward B.  Moving from point A toward B represents a 
practice that was previously at its break-even point and is 
now providing on-demand coverage for the new procedural 
suite. In the short term, moving from point A to B reflects a 
profit as the practice is using its staff from 80% to 90%, but 
in reality, this is a short-lived effect because of burdensome 
cost associated with overuse.
point b.  Let’s assume growth of volume has occurred 
from the proceduralist side, the practice is now providing 
1 day per week of committed coverage, and it hired a new 
anesthesiologist and bought a new anesthesia machine, 
$
Profit
Volume
Loss
Revenue
Total cost
Figure 21-3  Cost volume profit analysis. Profit in $ (y-axis) is the dif­
ference between revenue and cost and is a function of volume in units 
(x-axis). At low volume, there is a loss as total cost exceeds revenue. 
At the break-even point, cost is equal to revenue. Volume beyond the 
break-even point generates a profit.
A
B
C
$
Volume
Cost (1 days)
Cost (2 days)
Cost (on demand)
Revenue
Figure 21-4  Cost volume analysis for variable coverage. In this model, 
revenue curve remains constant, Total revenue = price × volume, and 
the cost curve varies depending on how much coverage is provided.
21  •  Financial and Operational Analysis for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
187
thus establishing cost curve 1 and point B as the new break-
even point.
From a management perspective, the practice should 
consider committed coverage when volume approaches the 
break-even point of the new cost curve to allow more growth.
B Toward C.  Similar break-even analysis can be carried 
out for 2, 3, 4, or 5 days of committed coverage. The pre­
viously described analysis provides a dynamic view of the 
relationships among cost, revenue, and volume. It can be 
used to guide a practice in defining the optimal committed 
coverage when negotiating with the hospital and the pro­
ceduralist group.
Operational Infrastructure
UTILIZATION RATE
Anesthesia administered outside the operating room covers 
a variety of specialties, each with its own scheduling needs, 
so early planning is crucial. Specialty-specific anesthesia 
usage rates can be very useful in distributing staff efficiently 
and committing to blocked coverage. Both underusage and 
overusage are costly and unproductive. Most operating room 
management sources quote an optimal utilization rate 
of 0.8.3 Rates lower than 0.8 are associated with wasted 
resources in which staff are paid until 5 pm and often leave 
at 3 pm, while rates higher than 0.9 leave very little room 
for add-on cases and are associated with overusage when 
procedures run overtime.
Tools such as surgical score cards promote transparency 
and adequate reporting, and they can be easily implemented 
to use outside the operating room. They can track core mea­
sures such as usage, on-time starts, and delays. Specialties 
that underuse their block time should have less committed 
coverage, whereas specialties that overuse their block time 
should have more committed coverage. Of course, this is a 
dynamic process and should be constantly reassessed.
STAFFING
Optimal distribution of staffing to match workload is impor­
tant. Underusage represents a scenario in which a team is 
scheduled to work 10 hours but works only 8 hours. Overus­
age represents a team that is scheduled to work 10 hours but 
in reality works 12 hours and incurs costs of overtime pay. It 
is thus important to match the staff availability to workload.
To illustrate, we will schedule two interventional radiology 
cases into room 1, each lasting 2.5 hours. We will schedule 
three cases into room 2, with the first two lasting 2.5 hours 
and the last one 4 hours (Figure 21-5).
In both scenarios, the anesthesia team is scheduled to 
work a 9-hour day. Matching of workload to staffing has 
not been optimized. In scenario 1, there are 3 hours of 
underusage. In scenario 2, there are 2 hours of overusage. 
Awakening patients more quickly or reducing the turnover 
time will not improve the overall efficiency.
The key to maximizing resources is to allocate appropri­
ate time to each service. Optimizing staffing costs is find­
ing the best balance between overtime and finishing early. 
In examining historic data, if one service is consistently 
running late, the allocated anesthesia block should be 
extended. For example, if a radiologist performs 12 hours’ 
worth of cases once every other week, it is more optimal 
to assign a 12-hour anesthesia block on those days. That 
way, the team is expected to stay for 12 hours when they 
arrive and will not be frustrated by having to stay late. 
From a financial perspective, the cost of overusage will be 
reduced as well.
The next step when considering whether to expand cur­
rent staff involves examination of existing usage by com­
paring scheduled anesthesia time with actual used time. A 
group with high overusage cost will have a difficult time 
expanding without new staff and capital cost. Such expan­
sion will involve the addition of both fixed and variable costs 
and may involve negotiating a subsidy from the hospital. 
In a fee-for-service environment facility, fees to the hospital 
may be large enough to subsidize anesthesia staffing care 
in locations outside the operating room, especially if this 
staffing leads to increased service throughout NORA cases. 
Because of the large overhead of hospitals, hospital manag­
ers aim to have a high census and high turnover of cases in 
the NORA suite.
A group with lower staff usage can expand easily with 
only variable cost. In this scenario, initial coverage is pro­
vided by using existing resources. However, as the volume 
for off-site services grows over time, the cost of overusage 
will inevitably burden the existing staff and should prompt 
the group to add new shifts or members if needed.
EQUIPMENT AND ANCILLARY SUPPORT
Although the bulk of anesthesia cost involves staffing, 
equipment and ancillary support also add costs, especially 
Scenario #2: Over-utilization
8AM
9 hrs block of anesthesia coverage
Over-utilized
time (2 hrs)
Case # 1
Case # 2
Case # 3 (4 hrs)
5PM
9 hrs block of anesthesia coverage
Scenario #1: Under-utilization (each case is 2.5 hrs plus 1 hr turnover)
Under-utilized
time (3 hrs)
8AM
5PM
Case # 2
Case # 1
Figure 21-5  Underused hours reflect how early the room finishes. In 
scenario 1 in the figure, if an anesthesiologist and a radiology nurse 
were scheduled to work from 8 am to 5 pm and instead the room finished 
at 2 pm (including 1 hour turnover time), this would result in 3 hours 
of underused time. The excess staffing cost would be 33% (3 hours/
9 hours). In contrast, for scenario 2, 11 hours of cases handled outside 
the operating room are performed with staff scheduled to work 9 hours. 
This means that the excess staffing cost is 44% (2 hours/9 hours = 22%, 
which is then multiplied by a “fudge” factor of 2 to include the addi­
tional monetary and morale cost of staff staying late). (From Macario A. 
Staffing and case scheduling for elective out-of-operating room cases. ASA 
Refresher Course. 2009;37:129-140.)
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
188
in off-site care. With the expansion of NORA procedures, 
a need is developing for more easily mobile anesthesia 
machines and monitoring and equipment setups. If a loca­
tion is sufficiently busy, having an anesthesia machine 
permanently there may be optimal. Such a setup must take 
into account the smaller geographical spaces and multiple 
off-site locations. In addition, support staff such as anesthe­
sia technicians and pharmacy staff allocated to the surgical 
suite may not be available to support the team providing 
anesthesia care outside the operating room in a timely fash­
ion. Thus development of infrastructures, such as mobile 
anesthesia machines, onsite automated drug dispensers, 
and stocked supply carts that allow the anesthesiologist to 
efficiently turn over rooms, is crucial.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND RECOVERY
Along with the challenge of being in a remote location with 
poor ancillary support, perhaps the greatest difficulties 
most anesthesiologists face in locations outside the operat­
ing room are preprocedure evaluation and postoperative 
care. Although most procedural suites have recovery units 
that care for patients after receiving sedation provided by 
the proceduralist, the units are not equipped to deal with 
patients with high American Society of Anesthesiologists 
(ASA) classifications or those who have undergone deep 
sedation or received a general anesthetic. Thus anesthe­
siologists may find themselves having to transport their 
patients from the procedural suite to a distant recovery 
room. This process causes significant delay and negatively 
affects the overall work flow.
Flexible nursing staff handling patients in recovery in 
both the main and procedural recovery units can help alle­
viate this issue. Many operating rooms that handle cases in 
two locations already employ flexible nursing staff to work 
in both the ambulatory and the main recovery rooms. The 
ambulatory surgery center closes down after all the patients 
have recovered, and the remainder of the nursing staff tran­
sition to the main recovery room. The same can be done 
with procedures outside the operating room, with recovery 
nurses assigned to work in both the procedure suite and the 
main recovery room.
ELECTRONIC SCHEDULER
Many operating rooms have adopted electronic schedulers 
with the goal to improve process flow. Electronic schedulers 
offer many advantages, such as real-time updates on proce­
dural changes, patient status, room readiness, and staffing 
changes, and they offer the scheduler a global sense of the 
workday. Features such as electronic interface between the 
procedural and anesthesia scheduler can further improve 
real-time communication.
However, scheduling for off-site locations at many facil­
ities is still completed on paper, even in institutions that 
have adopted an electronic scheduler. The process often 
involves multiple pieces of paper being faxed back and 
forth and finally taped to the operating room schedule on 
the day of the procedure. Taking this one step further, in 
institutions that have already implemented the electronic 
medical record (EMR), incorporating the scheduler into 
the EMR can be advantageous. Linking the scheduler 
with the medical record allows providers direct access to 
patient charts and can help identify patients with particu­
lar preoperative and postoperative needs, such as a history 
of malignant hyperthermia or postoperative nausea and 
vomiting. Because remote locations are often distant from 
the operating room, tools that facilitate communication 
can reduce delays and foster a better working relationship.
OPTIMAL UTILIZATION OF RESOURCES
In an ideal world, staffing and cash flow are unlimited and 
constant anesthesia coverage can be provided anywhere 
and at any time. In reality, resources are scarce and must 
be prioritized.
For an anesthesia group that is looking at expan­
sion for off-site procedures for the first time, taking into 
consideration all of the financial and operational impli­
cations, the goal should be to maximize the existing infra­
structures and accrue only variable cost. At the early 
stages of expansion, it is unclear how much coverage will 
be needed. Because most proceduralists are also in their 
early stages of expansion, on-demand coverage may be 
the simplest form of meeting the need. From a staffing 
and ancillary support perspective, on-demand coverage 
involves increasing current usage rates and possibly over­
use of manpower. From a financial perspective, savings 
from fixed cost can offset the cost of overuse. Although 
wage is technically a variable cost, in reality the cost of 
an anesthesia provider falls somewhere between a vari­
able and a fixed cost. Thus the addition of staff may not be 
the first step in providing coverage for groups that do not 
have preexisting high usage rates.
Assume that same anesthesia group is approaching the 
second stage of expansion where there is a continued demand 
for its services from the proceduralists. Using the cost volume 
profit analysis, we see that volume is approaching the break-
even point. The group is now looking into investing in more 
capital and adding new staff, thus shifting the cost curve 
upward to allow growth. From a staffing and scheduling 
perspective, the group is now considering committed cover­
age. Such analysis should be further used for multiple days of 
blocked time as volume continues to grow.
In reality, expansion is multifaceted; the same anesthe­
sia groups are concurrently asked to provide coverage for 
radio­logy, gastroenterology, and cardiology. The cost vol­
ume profit analysis can be carried out across the various 
specialties to determine the best strategy for providing simul­
taneous coverage. Using tools such as surgical scorecards, 
the group can analyze the true anesthesia usage rates across 
the different specialties and determine what the optimal 
committed coverage should be and negotiate appropriately.
Take the example of MRI and electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT). Both are typically elective procedures that do not 
have high demand for anesthesia; thus daily 9 o’clock to 
5 o’clock committed coverage may not be necessary. 
Instead, staff can be shared; the same staff can provide ECT 
care in the morning and transition to MRI in the afternoon. 
The key is to match staff with predicted demand. Because 
both procedures are elective and can be scheduled ahead 
of time, having an electronic scheduler that enables all 
involved parties to see the allotted appointments can be 
valuable (Table 21-2).
21  •  Financial and Operational Analysis for Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
189
Conclusion
Going forward, NORA procedures will be an integral part 
of every anesthesia practice. As medical proceduralists con­
tinue to advance their skills, the line between surgery and 
procedure narrows. Although anesthesia coverage is often 
fragmented today, NORA can be provided in a safe, efficient, 
and financially sound way with the appropriate setup and 
financial incentives. As proceduralists continue to build 
NORA suites, it is important for anesthesiologists to take 
initiatives to shape the infrastructure and integrate other 
anesthesiologists to assume leadership roles so that our ser­
vices become indispensable, like those in an operating room.
References
	1.	 Association of American Medical Colleges. Table 1: U.S. medical 
school applications and matriculants by school, state of legal resi­
dence, and sex. 2013. https://www.aamc.org/download/321442/
data/2013factstable1.pdf.
	2.	 Cullen K, Hall M, Golosinskly A. Ambulatory surgery in the United 
States, 2006. National Health Statistics Reports. http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr011.pdf.
	3.	 Tyler DC, Pasquariello CA, Chen C. Determining optimum operating 
room utilization. Anesth Analg. 2003;96:1114–1121.
	4.	 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National health expenditures 
2012 highlights. 2012. http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-
and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpend­
Data/Downloads/highlights.pdf.
Table 21-2  Sample Weekly Schedule for Procedures Outside the Operating Room*
Day
GI
Cardiology/EP
IR
Neurological IR
Vascular IR
Bronchoscopy
MRI/CT
ECT
Mon
8-5
8-5
1-5
8-5
1-5
8-12
Tues
8-5
8-5
1-5
8-5
8-12
Wed
8-5
8-5
1-5
8-5
Thurs
8-5
8-5
1-5
8-5
8-12
Fri
8-5
8-5
1-5
8-5
1-5
8-12
CT, Computed tomography; ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; EP, electrophysiology; GI, gastroenterology; IR, interventional radiology; MRI, magnetic resonance 
imaging.
*This is an example of a defined schedule for procedures outside the operating room that allows committed coverage across multiple specialties. The schedule 
can be adjusted over time to account for any changes in volume or new specialties that may get added.
190
Sedation for medical procedures performed outside the 
operating room has been traditionally provided by proce­
duralists and their proxies. However, as these procedures 
have steadily increased in both number and complexity, 
anesthesiologists have been increasingly asked to provide 
care in non–operating room settings. Given the technical 
demands of many of these procedures and the comorbidities 
of the patient population, this increase makes sense. Unfor­
tunately, the cost of anesthesiologist-directed care and the 
availability of anesthesia providers have limited the use of 
anesthesia-provided sedation in many non–operating room 
settings. This chapter reviews the various options for pro­
cedural sedation by non–anesthesia providers, the data on 
effectiveness and safety of these practices, available policies 
and guidelines, and the cost considerations involved.
Traditionally, sedation for off-site procedures is typically 
achieved with a benzodiazepine (midazolam) and opioid 
(fentanyl or meperidine) combination,1 targeted to mod­
erate sedation2 and overseen by the proceduralist. These 
agents often provide effective and safe sedation.3 However, 
because of the increasing number and sophistication of 
many non–operating room procedures, deficiencies related 
to this approach have emerged. The onset of sedation can 
be delayed, and some patients cannot be sedated adequately 
and/or have a poor experience with the procedure. In addi­
tion, significant postsedation side effects occur, including 
nausea, vomiting, and prolonged sedation.
Another problem encountered during non–operating 
room procedures involves controlling the depth of sedation. 
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) endorses 
a continuum of depth of sedation, ranging from minimal 
sedation to general anesthesia (Table 22-1).2 Patients may 
be inadvertently sedated to a depth greater than planned; 
therefore the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
states that providers must be able to rescue patients from at 
least one depth greater than the intended level. In most care 
settings, proceduralists are credentialed to provide moder­
ate sedation without further assistance. Unfortunately, the 
fact remains that many procedures require deep sedation to 
achieve adequate procedural conditions and patient comfort.
A study from the Cleveland Clinic evaluated the occur­
rence of deep sedation in patients having several standard 
endoscopic procedures. Eighty healthy outpatients were 
evaluated for the frequency of inadvertent deep sedation 
when patients were sedated with midazolam and meperi­
dine targeted to achieve moderate sedation.4 Deep sedation 
occurred at some time during the procedure in 68% of all 
patients, but varied by procedure type—45% for colonos­
copy, 60% for esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), 80% 
for endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), and 85% for endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). ERCP and 
EUS were independent predictors of deep sedation. This 
study confirms what many providers involved in endos­
copy already know—many patients receive deep sedation 
for their procedures despite the goal of moderate sedation.
As a result of these deficiencies, alternatives to “tradi­
tional” moderate sedation have developed and include a 
variety of sedative agents and techniques. Approaches to 
improving sedation by nonanesthesiologists focus on three 
generic categories: using different agents to improve moder­
ate sedation, using other techniques for reducing pain and 
anxiolysis, or using propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol). Propo­
fol is a sedative that is nearly ideal for many non–operating­ 
room procedures because it has rapid onset and offset of 
deep sedation with minimal side effects. Because it routinely 
leads to deep or greater depths of anesthesia, its use for non–
operating room procedures is a potential problem for those 
not trained in the provision of anesthesia. However, given 
the advantages of propofol, extensive investigation into its 
use has been done by nonanesthesiologists. The remainder 
of this chapter explores in more detail the approaches to 
procedural sedation used by nonanesthesia providers, with 
an emphasis on the use of propofol. Although a majority of 
the information can be applied to generic non–operating 
room procedures, most of the available data are specific to 
gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy.
Practice Patterns in Non–
Operating Room Sedation
Sedation practice in the non–operating room setting varies 
widely throughout the world. This is exemplified by routine 
diagnostic GI endoscopy. In the United States, it is frequently 
assumed most patients want sedation for endoscopy. A study 
of U.S. gastroenterologists found that more than 98% of rou­
tine endoscopies are performed with sedation and approxi­
mately 25% of these providers now use propofol sedation.5 
In addition, 68% of gastroenterologists using conventional 
sedation would consider using propofol if it were easily avail­
able. When propofol was used, it was provided by anesthesia-
trained personnel in almost 90% of cases, with the remainder 
being directed by the endoscopist. Large regional variations 
are seen in the use of propofol from a low of 7% in the North­
east to a high of 37% in the Mid-Atlantic region. This varia­
tion appears to be driven by local reimbursement policies for 
sedation. In addition, an increasing number of more complex 
non–operating room procedures are performed in the United 
States.6 These factors have led to a dramatic increase in the 
need for high-quality sedation.
Anesthesia and 
Competitive Strategies
JOHN M. TRUMMEL and SOPHIA VAN HOFF
22
22  •  Anesthesia and Competitive Strategies
191
A review of sedation practice in 19987 revealed that in 
much of the world outside the United States and United 
Kingdom, the norm was for unsedated routine endoscopy. 
However, by 2006 this standard had begun to change in 
Europe; an observational study of 6004 patients under­
going colonoscopy8 found that 17% of patients had no 
sedation, 53% had moderate sedation, and 30% had deep 
sedation. More recently, Ladas et al9 collected data regard­
ing the sedation rate for EGD and colonoscopy in Europe, 
North America, Asia, Africa, and Australia. No data were 
available from the last three continents, so questionnaire 
surveys were mailed to gastroenterologists in those loca­
tions. For upper GI endoscopy, rates of sedation varied in 
European countries from less than 20% to more than 75%; 
in the United States and Australia, over 98% of upper GI 
endoscopies were performed with sedation; in Asian coun­
tries many areas performed upper GI endoscopies without 
sedation, although some centers reported a 100% seda­
tion rate. Finally, the surveys showed that 25% to 50% of 
patients received sedation in African countries. The authors 
note that the survey respondents reported that in as many 
as 46% of the countries, monitoring was not available in 
the majority of endoscopy suites; this lack of monitor­
ing could be a factor in the low sedation rate. The rates of 
sedation for colonoscopy were shown to be quite variable 
among countries and among centers within each country. 
Sedation medication varied as well, although it was noted 
that propofol has been used in each country that responded 
to the survey. These data support an increasing expectation 
and use of sedation for endoscopy worldwide.
Propofol Use by 
Nonanesthesiologists
Propofol is used extensively in non–operating room sedation 
practice by both anesthesia-trained and nonanesthesiolo­
gist providers. Non–operating room settings where propofol 
frequently is given by nonanesthesiologists include the GI 
endoscopy suite, the electrophysiology laboratory, and, to a 
lesser degree, both diagnostic and interventional radiology 
areas. Propofol is a unique intravenous medication available 
as an oil-in-water emulsion for induction or maintenance of 
moderate-to-deep sedation and general anesthesia through 
facilitation of inhibitory neurotransmission mediated by 
gamma–aminobutyric acid (GABA). It is highly lipid-soluble, 
which results in an onset of action that is rapid; awakening 
from a single bolus dose is very rapid as well, because of a 
short initial redistribution half-life of 2 to 8 minutes. Propo­
fol is cleared partly via hepatic conjugation and renal elimi­
nation of those inactive metabolites, but it also likely has a 
component of extrahepatic metabolism as the clearance 
of propofol exceeds hepatic blood flow. Propofol has many 
effects on the organ systems. It decreases arterial blood pres­
sure as a result of a drop in systemic vascular resistance, 
cardiac contractility, and preload. It is a profound respira­
tory depressant and causes dose-dependent apnea while it 
inhibits hypoxic ventilatory drive and depresses the normal 
response to hypercarbia at sub–general anesthetic doses. It 
has antipruritic properties as well as antiemetic effects.10
Propofol is preferred by many endoscopists and patients 
and has been shown in multiple studies to be associated with 
a faster induction of sedation and faster full recovery time, 
higher postprocedure patient satisfaction, and quicker antici­
pated return to baseline function. Dewitt et al11 demonstrated 
these findings in a prospective randomized, single-blinded trial 
of 80 consecutive patients who were randomized to receive 
either sedation with nurse-administered propofol sedation or 
midazolam and meperidine for EUS procedures. Nayar et al12 
performed a retrospective analysis comparing outcomes of 
1000 EUS procedures performed with anesthesia-assisted 
propofol sedation (propofol deep sedation) and 1000 EUS 
procedures performed under conventional sedation using 
midazolam and meperidine titrated to moderate sedation and 
found that sedation time, induction time, and intraprocedural 
time were significantly shorter in the propofol group. Ran­
domized trials by Cohen,13 Sipe et al,14 and Ulmer et al15 that 
compared endoscopist-directed propofol (EDP) with traditional 
sedation with opioids and benzodiazepines in patients under­
going endoscopy or colonoscopy found that EDP resulted in 
faster onset of sedation, faster recovery, and similar or better 
patient satisfaction.
Not surprisingly, the use of propofol by non–anesthesia 
trained providers has led to some controversy. Anesthesi­
ologists are concerned that propofol can induce general 
anesthesia and apnea very rapidly and that nonanesthesi­
ologists lack sufficient airway expertise to rescue patients 
who receive propofol. The package insert for propofol 
states that propofol should be administered only by persons 
trained in rescue from unintended general anesthesia. At 
least 12 states in the United States have laws or regulations 
regarding nursing practice that prevent the administration 
Table 22-1  Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation and Analgesia
Minimal Sedation 
(Anxiolysis)
Moderate Sedation/Analgesia 
(“Conscious Sedation”)
Deep Sedation/Analgesia
General Anesthesia
Responsiveness
Normal response 
to verbal 
stimulation
Purposeful* response to verbal 
or tactile stimulation
Purposeful* response 
following repeated or 
painful stimulation
Unarousable even with 
painful stimulus
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be required
Intervention often required
Spontaneous ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Frequently inadequate
Cardiovascular function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
May be impaired
Committee of Origin: Quality Management and Departmental Administration.
*Reflex withdrawal from a painful stimulus is not considered a purposeful response.
Approved by the American Society of Anesthesiologists House of Delegates on October 27, 2004, and amended on October 21, 2009. Table from ASA statement 
on continuum of depth of sedation. http://www.asahq.org.
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
192
of propofol to nonintubated patients. However, propofol 
has been and continues to be administered in the GI endos­
copy suite without anesthesia-trained personnel. Several 
protocols have been described, but the generic term for 
this practice is nonanesthesiologist administration of pro­
pofol (NAAP). In the gastroenterology literature, it is also 
frequently referred to as EDP. Nonanesthesiologists believe 
that propofol is safe if used according to the principles that 
underlie safe procedural sedation with any agent—namely, 
slow titration to the desired level of sedation and awareness 
of individual variability in pharmacological response.
Two protocols for EDP sedation exist: nurse-administered 
propofol sedation (NAPS) and balanced propofol sedation 
(BPS). In NAPS a trained registered nurse’s sole responsibili­
ties are patient monitoring and the administration of propofol, 
titrated to deep sedation. BPS combines several drugs in small 
doses, including fentanyl, midazolam, and propofol. Both the 
nurse and endoscopist participate in all dosing decisions that 
involve propofol. The nurse has primary responsibility for 
monitoring the patient, but the nurse also may perform brief 
tasks such as assisting with tissue acquisition. Both methods 
of sedation have been studied extensively, and gastroenter­
ologists claim that these practices are safe for many patients.
Anesthesiologists counter that anesthesia care in remote 
locations, such as the GI endoscopy suite, poses a signifi­
cant risk for the patient. This risk has been shown with 
data from the ASA closed claims database, with risks to the 
patient related to oversedation and ventilatory failure. The 
severity of these injuries was greater than those occurring 
within the operating room, and more than half of all seda­
tion-related complications resulted in death.16 In addition, 
data from closed claims indicate that risk for complications 
increases when the number of agents used to provide seda­
tion is greater than two. This may call into question the use 
of BPS by nonanesthesiologists, especially when a dedicated 
sedation provider is not used.
Safety of Propofol in the Non–
Operating Room Setting
Many studies have sought to define the frequency of seda­
tion-related complications and adverse events with propo­
fol sedation. A prospective analysis by Cote et al17 found 
that the rate of airway modifications in patients given pro­
pofol by a certified registered nurse anesthetist with a goal 
of deep sedation during advanced endoscopy (ERCP, EUS, 
and small bowel enteroscopy) was 14.3% (114 of 799 
patients). Airway modifications included chin lift, modi­
fied face mask ventilation, and nasal airway placement. 
In this study, hypoxemia (blood oxygen saturation [Spo2] 
<90%) occurred in 12.8%, hypotension requiring vaso­
pressors in 0.5%, and early procedure termination in 0.6%. 
No patients required bag-mask ventilation or endotracheal 
intubation. Other than the inability to give informed con­
sent, there were no exclusion criteria. The authors found 
that body mass index (BMI), male sex, and ASA class 3 or 
higher were independent predictors of airway modifica­
tions. They concluded that propofol can be safely used for 
advanced endoscopic procedures when administered by a 
trained professional. They proposed that the highest-risk 
groups should be managed by professionals trained in 
advanced airway interventions and that lower-risk popu­
lations can be managed safely by professionals with less-
intensive airway training (gastroenterologist-supervised, 
nurse-administered propofol).
Complications of NAAP versus the use of standard moder­
ate sedation for endoscopy have been evaluated. Two recent 
reviews demonstrated that the rate of sedation-related 
adverse events during endoscopy performed under seda­
tion with a benzodiazepine and opioid combination versus 
propofol is comparable.18,19 The study by Dewitt et al11 of 
80 patients had no major complications (intubation, hospi­
talization, permanent neurologic impairment, or death) in 
patients receiving midazolam/meperidine or propofol, but 
the patient population included only ASA class 1 or 2 adults 
and was small. The study of EUS by Nayar et al12 had a total 
of six complications in 1000 persons in the propofol group, 
including perforation, aspiration, three patients with apnea 
requiring intubation, and hypotension. The only compli­
cation was prolonged somnolence in the group receiving 
moderate sedation, which received midazolam/meperidine.
Sharma et al20 retrospectively reviewed 324,737 patients 
who were sedated by endoscopists using traditional opioid/
benzodiazepine sedation and reported a rate of 8 cardiopul­
monary deaths per 100,000 patients and 9.3 cardiorespi­
ratory complications in every 1000 cases. In comparison, 
Rex et al21 collected the largest summary of the experience 
of endoscopy performed with EDP using multiple reports 
in the literature. This review included the outcome of 
646,080 endoscopic procedures and revealed 11 endotra­
cheal intubations, no permanent neurologic injuries, and 
4 deaths, all in patients with ASA status 3 or higher. The 
main significant complication was a rate of bag-valve-mask 
ventilation of only 0.1%. Limitations of this study include 
data that were self-reported by centers or endoscopists, 
some centers that collected safety data retrospectively, no 
tracking of late-occurring sedation complications, and a 
heterogeneous patient population. These two large evalu­
ations appear to indicate that complications of NAAP for 
endoscopy are similar or less than those encountered dur­
ing traditional sedation.
Wehrmann and Riphaus22 analyzed 9547 interventional 
endoscopic procedures performed over a 6-year period in 
which propofol sedation was by nonanesthetist physicians 
who were certified in internal medicine, intensive care, 
and cardiorespiratory resuscitation who were not involved 
in the procedures. Procedures included 5347 interven­
tional procedures using upper GI endoscopy, 3937 ERCPs, 
and 236 EUSs. They found a 1.4% rate (135 in 9547) of 
adverse sedation-related events, defined as those that 
caused premature termination of the procedure, bag-valve-
mask ventilation, endotracheal intubation, or unexpected 
intensive care admission. Forty patients required assisted 
ventilation (0.4%); 9 patients required endotracheal intu­
bation (0.09%); 28 were admitted to the intensive care unit 
(0.3%); and 4 patients died, 3 potentially related to seda­
tion-related side effects (0.03%). Independent risk factors 
were emergency procedures and total propofol use greater 
than 100 mg. These rates of complications are significantly 
higher than those found in other studies of EDP and cer­
tainly lead one to proceed with caution in more advanced 
endoscopic procedures. In addition, although NAAP was 
used for these patients, the use of highly trained physicians 
22  •  Anesthesia and Competitive Strategies
193
solely responsible for the sedation is a higher level of care 
than provided in many proposed NAAP protocols.
At this time, propofol remains the gold standard for pro­
cedural sedation. The use of propofol as a sole agent for 
procedural sedation often requires deep sedation for most 
patients because propofol has no inherent analgesic proper­
ties. BPS attempts to use a combination of sedative agents, 
including propofol, to attain the advantages of propofol 
while achieving a state of only moderate sedation. BPS ver­
sus propofol alone or opioid/benzodiazepine sedation has 
been compared in many studies. BPS has decreased the rate 
of bag-mask ventilation during upper endoscopic proce­
dures from approximately 1 in 300 procedures using only 
propofol to approximately 1 in 1000 procedures.23 It has 
been shown that it is possible to titrate EDP administration 
to moderate sedation if propofol is given with small doses 
of opioids and benzodiazepines rather than used as a sin­
gle agent.13,24 Patel et al4 showed that endoscopists using 
opioids/benzodiazepines produce deep sedation in more 
than half of patients, which is more often than with BPS.13 
Clarke et al25 found no deaths or endotracheal intubations 
in more than 28,000 procedures over 7 years using a com­
bination of propofol, fentanyl, and midazolam, targeting 
moderate sedation. A randomized control trial by van Natta 
and Rex compared the use of propofol titrated to deep seda­
tion to various combinations of propofol, fentanyl, and/or 
midazolam titrated to moderate sedation for colonoscopy.24 
This study involved 200 patients, randomized to one of four 
treatment arms: propofol alone titrated to deep sedation; 
propofol and fentanyl; propofol and midazolam; or propo­
fol, midazolam, and fentanyl, all titrated to moderate seda­
tion. Combining propofol with midazolam, fentanyl, or both 
allowed a significant reduction in propofol use, without an 
impact on patient satisfaction or postprocedural recovery. 
A slight reduction was seen in preprocedural efficiency (the 
time between initiation of sedation and when the patient is 
ready for colonoscopy). It appears that combination ther­
apy with propofol can achieve effective moderate sedation 
for colonoscopy, but caution is warranted because this 
study was small. Further study into combination therapy 
targeted to moderate sedation for routine endoscopy is 
needed, especially in terms of safety.
Propofol use in the non–operating room setting is 
increasing in Europe. Propofol use was evaluated in Italy 
by Repici et al.26 They assessed the efficacy and safety of 
BPS administered by nonanesthesiologists for colonoscopy. 
They included 1593 patients with ASA class 1 or 2 with a 
Mallampati score of less than 2,who did not have obstruc­
tive sleep apnea, and who received one dose of midazolam 
and low-dose propofol. Moderate sedation was achieved in 
98% of patients, and deep sedation occurred in 2%. No seri­
ous adverse events were observed. The authors conclude 
that BPS provides the endoscopist the ability to minimize 
the dose of propofol needed to target moderate sedation 
and that if patients are carefully selected, BPS can be safely 
administered by nonanesthesiologist endoscopists.
Switzerland may have the greatest national experience 
with widespread NAAP practice. Heuss et al27 studied the 
trends on the practice of endoscopic sedation in this coun­
try over the last 20 years. They note that because propo­
fol use is not restricted to anesthesiologists, the country 
has to some extent become a testing ground for the broad 
application of NAAP for GI endoscopy. The authors sent 
a questionnaire to all active board-certified Swiss gastro­
enterologists in January 2010. They had a 78% response 
rate and received data regarding 263,370 GI endoscopies 
(EGDs, colonoscopies, EUSs, and ERCPs). More than 80% of 
their procedures were performed with sedation, and 73% 
of respondents used propofol without an anesthesiologist 
present. The overall sedation-related complication rate 
was 0.14%, and the mortality rate was 0.0018%, with four 
deaths. These results are similar to the morbidity and mor­
tality rates (0.18% and 0.0014%, respectively) reported in 
data from 2003 in Switzerland. The authors conclude that 
their data support the position that the presence of only a 
single nurse for both administering propofol and carrying 
out duties relating to endoscopy is safe and that an anesthe­
siologist need not be present when propofol is being used.
Although the vast majority of research regarding seda­
tion with propofol in the non–operating room setting has 
been done in the GI suite, NAAP has also been evaluated 
for use in cardiac electrophysiology procedures, but the 
data are much more limited. Sayfo et al28 describe the out­
come of proceduralist-directed, nurse-administered propo­
fol sedation (PDNAPS) in patients undergoing implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) procedures. This was a ret­
rospective review of 672 procedures; any ICD-related pro­
cedure was included, and no control group was included. 
Patients were excluded if an anesthesiologist was present, if 
they were intubated before the procedure, or if they did not 
receive propofol. Propofol was administered by a regis­tered 
nurse, guided by the electrophysiologist; other medications 
(midazolam, fentanyl, or others) were used at the discre­
tion of the electrophysiologist. The outcomes included seri­
ous adverse events, such as procedural death, unexpected 
transfer to an ICU, respiratory failure requiring intuba­
tion or bag-mask ventilation, and hypotension requiring 
vasoconstrictor or inotrope support, as well as nonserious 
adverse events, such as hypotension requiring fluid resus­
citation and hypoxemia requiring augmented respiratory 
support with nonrebreather mask, oral airway, or jaw lift. 
They found that 10% of patients had serious adverse events 
and 38.7% had nonserious adverse events. No procedural-
related deaths occurred. Independent predictors of serious 
adverse events included longer procedure duration and 
biventricular implant. The authors conclude that proce­
duralist-directed, nurse administered propofol sedation 
(PDNAPS) for shorter ICD procedures, including single- 
and dual-chamber implants, generator changes, and defi­
brillation threshold testing have acceptable rates of serious 
adverse events and manageable nonserious adverse events 
and should be considered for further study. However, biven­
tricular implants and other complex procedures and proce­
dures such as lead repositioning that have variable duration 
should be done with an anesthesiologist.
Kottkamp et  al29 evaluated whether BPS, titrated to 
achieve deep sedation, was feasible and safe for catheter 
ablation of atrial fibrillation. Sedation was initiated with mid­
azolam, fentanyl, and propofol in 650 patients in Germany 
and Switzerland, given by a nurse under the supervision of 
an electrophysiologist; notably, the nurse did not have other 
responsibilities. The patients were ASA class 1 (25%), 2 
(40%), or 3 (35%). They had no major sedation-related com­
plications and no endotracheal intubations, and all patients 
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
194
maintained stable heart rate, invasive arterial blood pres­
sure, and oxygenation. They concluded that deep sedation 
by nonanesthesiologists was safe and that consultation of an 
anesthesiologist was not necessary for this procedure.
Very limited data exist on comparison of NAAP to anes­
thesiologist-directed care. A recent randomized controlled 
trial evaluated whether there was a difference in endosco­
pist-administered versus anesthetist-administered propo­
fol in terms of safety and patient satisfaction.30 Although 
the study included only 90 ASA class 1 or 2 patients, the 
authors found that patient satisfaction scores were slightly 
higher in the endoscopist group, despite actually having 
higher pain scores in that group. They also found that the 
occurrence of minor sedation-related complications (hypo­
tension requiring increased crystalloid and desaturation of 
below 95% for 30 seconds) was higher in the anesthetist 
group. The study was quite limited by the small number 
of patients, and using this study to conclude that it is safer 
to undergo propofol sedation with an endoscopist may not 
be advisable because the overall rate of serious complica­
tions in patients with ASA class 1 and 2 undergoing routine 
endoscopy is so low. Furthermore, their definition of “com­
plications” was not consistent with events that many anes­
thetists would consider complications.
A small observational study published in 2009 attempted 
to evaluate and compare the quality of sedation provided 
for upper EUS using anesthesiologist-directed propofol ver­
sus standard moderate sedation provided by the endoscopy 
team.31 Quality was determined using expert video analysis 
of the procedural sedation using a validated scoring system. 
The study included 50 patients with 25 in each group and 
found that 52% of patients receiving moderate sedation 
exhibited an uncontrolled patient state (significant underse­
dation or oversedation) at some time during the procedure 
versus 28% of the propofol group. Of more significance, 
patients receiving midazolam and an opioid spent 7.1% of 
the procedure in an uncontrolled patient state, whereas 
patients in the propofol group experienced an uncontrolled 
state approximately 1% of the procedure time. Overall effi­
ciency was also considerably better in the propofol group; 
these patients experienced significantly less in-hospital and 
at-home nausea and vomiting and fell back to baseline sta­
tus more quickly. Finally, patient satisfaction was improved 
in the propofol group: 60% thought the procedure was bet­
ter than anticipated versus 21% in the standard group. It 
would be interesting to have similar data on NAAP versus 
anesthesiologist-directed care, but this type of information 
is currently unavailable.
Many studies have been done to date supporting the 
safety of nonanesthesiologist administered propofol. The 
available data suggest that rates of complications are no 
greater for NAAP compared to moderate sedation using a 
benzodiazepine/opioid combination and that NAAP seems 
to be safe for specific procedures, such as routine GI endos­
copy, with appropriately trained personnel and appropriate 
patient selection. However, certain patients (e.g. those with 
ASA class 3 status or greater, chronic opioid use, elevated 
BMI) and advanced procedures (e.g., EUS, ERCP, biventric­
ular pacemakers) may be at higher risk and warrant anes­
thesiologist-directed care. In addition, it is difficult to come 
to clear conclusions regarding the use of NAAP in other 
settings such as electrophysiology or radiology because 
the data are limited. Despite the apparent safety of NAAP, 
questions remain: Is it beneficial from an efficiency or qual­
ity standpoint to use anesthesiologists or anesthetists in 
the non–operating room setting? Should anesthesia profes­
sionals be involved in overseeing or training nonanesthesi­
ologists providing sedation? What type of presence should 
anesthesia providers have in a stand-alone endoscopy set­
ting where sedation is provided but immediate access to a 
“code” or “STAT airway” team may not be available? These 
questions become more important as NAAP appears to be 
safe and pressure to provide this type of care may become 
more common. If this practice is to be continued, careful 
patient and procedure selection is necessary and must be 
clearly defined.
Economic Considerations
Demand for anesthesia services for non–operating room 
procedures is increasing.32 From 2003 to 2009 the propor­
tion of gastroenterology procedures using anesthesia ser­
vices increased from approximately 14% to more than 30% 
and more than two thirds of anesthesia services were deliv­
ered to low-risk patients (ASA class 1 or 2), as determined 
from both Medicare and commercially insured patients.33 
The use of anesthesia service had significant cost; payments 
for anesthesia over this time doubled for Medicare patients 
and quadrupled for commercially insured patients. Every 
procedure that uses an anesthesia provider generates an 
additional fee. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
(CMS) pays an average of $155 to an anesthesia specialist 
for monitored anesthesia care for endoscopy, and private 
insurers pay an average of $437.34 Cohen16 notes that the 
average cost of anesthesia-assisted sedation during an endo­
scopic procedure is approximately $400 per case.16 Many 
gastroenterologists argue that the best method of sedation 
for most endoscopy patients is NAAP, because they believe 
this modality retains the advantages of propofol-based seda­
tion while maintaining patient safety and lowering the cost. 
EDP results in no additional charge for sedation because it 
is covered under the professional fee for performance of the 
sedation.
Several studies have attempted to estimate the costs asso­
ciated with NAAP sedation in contrast to that administered 
by an anesthesia provider. Rex et al21 estimated the cost of 
using anesthesia specialists instead of EDP in their study 
looking at 646,080 cases of EDP that had four deaths pos­
sibly related to sedation. Their estimate is based on many 
assumptions; the added cost to use an anesthesia special­
ist for all 646,080 procedures would be $286 per proce­
dure and thus $184,778,880 total. If each four decedents 
lived to be 85 years of age, resulting in 72 life-years saved, 
had anesthesia specialists prevented these deaths, the cost 
per life year saved is $2.6 million. If however, anesthesia 
specialists were used only for patients with ASA class 3 
or higher (estimated 10% of all patients), the added cost 
per life-year would be $257,000. Most experts agree that 
an acceptable cost-effectiveness range is from $50,000 to 
$100,000 per life-year saved.
More recently Hassan et al35 studied the cost-­effectiveness 
of EDP versus anesthesiologist assistance for colonoscopy. 
They estimated the cost of anesthesiologist assistance for 
22  •  Anesthesia and Competitive Strategies
195
Medicare beneficiaries at $95 and the non-Medicare cost 
of $450, the proportion of colonoscopies with anesthetist 
assistance (34.8%), and the cost of training the nurses in 
EDP. Their model outputs were projected onto the U.S. 
population and showed a 10-year saving of $3.2 billion. 
Assuming a 0.0008% mortality rate (the rate found by Rex 
et  al21), the incremental cost-effectiveness of anesthetist-
assisted colonoscopy versus an EDP policy was $1.5 million 
per life-year gained. A 31-fold increase of EDP-related mor­
tality would be required for EDP to become not cost-effective 
(incremental cost-effectiveness ratio <$50,000 per life-year 
saved). The authors do note that for EDP implementation 
to be permitted in the United States, further political steps 
may be needed because the revised CMS Hospital Condi­
tions of Participation and Interpretive Guidelines have rules 
addressing nonanesthesiologist and nonphysician practi­
tioners’ administration of anesthesia.
Several deficiencies exist with these cost analyses. First, 
only the present care models are evaluated and the cost 
impact is based on billing and a fee-for-service anesthesia 
care model. Going forward, most care will be compensated 
by bundled payments, so there will be no additional charge 
for sedation service. These bundled payments will drive care 
models that prioritize overall cost efficiency while main­
taining quality. For example, the addition of an anesthesia 
provider may allow the elimination of the sedation nurse, 
which would reduce overall cost. In addition, many impor­
tant contributions of the anesthesia provider in the GI endos­
copy suite are not accounted for, including assistance with 
the preprocedural assessment; preparation of the patient, 
including intravenous equipment and monitor placement; 
intraprocedural monitoring and administration of drugs; 
and recovery room care. The presence of an anesthesia pro­
vider also reduces some of the patient care burden from the 
proceduralist. These factors may help improve overall effi­
ciency in the endoscopic suite. If anesthesia-­provided care 
can eliminate some cost and improve efficiency, it may not 
be as expensive as portrayed by these studies.
Policy Considerations and 
Guidelines for the Use of Propofol
The ASA endorses the concept of a continuum of seda­
tion (reviewed previously) and in its 2009 Statement on 
Safe Use of Propofol36 recommends that patients given 
propofol should receive care consistent with that required 
for deep sedation, which would be care by an anesthesia 
professional.37 The ASA argues that propofol requires spe­
cial attention because of the potential for rapid, profound 
changes in sedative or anesthetic depth and the lack of 
antagonist medication. Furthermore, the ASA recommends 
that the practitioner monitoring the patient should be pres­
ent throughout the procedure and be completely dedicated 
to that task. This has led to opposition by the ASA to the use 
of propofol by nonanesthesiologists in non–operating room 
settings.
This position is opposed by many gastroenterologists. 
Also in 2009, four major gastroenterology groups, the 
American Association for the Study of Liver Disease, the 
American College of Gastroenterology, the American Gas­
troenterological Association, and the American Society 
for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, published a position state­
ment on the use of propofol by the nonanesthesiologist.38 
The statement made several significant claims about NAAP 
based on the group’s understanding of the literature. In 
terms of safety, NAAP is equivalent to standard sedation 
for upper endoscopy and colonoscopy. It appears to be 
equivalent for ERCP and EUS as well, but data are insuffi­
cient to draw definitive conclusions at this time. NAAP is 
more effective than standard sedation and more cost effec­
tive than both standard sedation and, for healthy, low-risk 
patients undergoing routine endoscopy, anesthesiologist-
administered sedation. Although the paper concluded with 
the findings that with appropriate training and patient 
selection, NAAP was safe practice, the statement fell short 
of openly advocating this practice.
In December of 2009 the CMS issued a publication with 
a key provision that only a trained medical doctor or doctor 
of osteopathy not involved in the performance of a proce­
dure could administer deep sedation or general anesthesia 
for procedural sedation.39 The American Association of 
Nurse Anesthetists took credit for the policy shortly after it 
was issued, indicating that it was the result of years of advo­
cacy. In January 2011 the CMS issued a revised appendix 
that removed mention of propofol; however, it continues to 
endorse that deep sedation can be administered only by a 
medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy not involved in the 
performance of the procedure. The ASA considers that pro­
pofol implies deep sedation; thus it becomes problematic 
for hospitals to allow nonanesthesiologists to use propofol. 
The CMS publication also states that it is not possible to pre­
dict how an individual patient will respond to medications 
administered to provide sedation and that hospitals must 
ensure that procedures are in place to rescue patients from 
a deeper level of sedation than was originally intended. This 
“rescue” requires an intervention from a practitioner with 
“expertise in airway management and advanced life sup­
port.” The CMS states that this is also consistent with the 
requirements under the Patients’ Rights standard, guar­
anteeing patients care in a safe setting. At this point, it is 
unclear where this finding leaves the future of NAAP in the 
United States.
European guidelines are also in a state of flux. In 2010 
a guideline for the nonanesthesiologist administration of 
propofol for GI endoscopy was developed through a collab­
orative effort by representatives of the European Society of 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, the European Society of Gas­
troenterology and Endoscopy Nurses and Associates, and 
the European Society of Anesthesiology (ESA).40 The guide­
line provides nonanesthesiologists with a comprehensive 
framework for propofol sedation during digestive endos­
copy. The authors concluded, after evaluating the avail­
able literature, that propofol-based sedation presents rates 
of adverse events similar to those with traditional sedation. 
However, for specific high-risk patients (ASA class 3 or 
greater, Mallampati class 3 or greater, other conditions that 
put the patient at risk for airway obstruction, patients on 
significant chronic pain medication, or anticipated lengthy 
procedures), care should be provided by an anesthesiolo­
gist. Further recommendations include patient monitoring 
by a person dedicated to NAAP and that this monitoring 
should include pulse oximetry and noninvasive blood pres­
sure measurement in all patients and electrocardiography 
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
196
in selected patients; capnography is not recommended as 
standard. Confusing the picture, the ESA general assembly 
voted to retract its endorsement of the guideline on June 
15, 2011.41 The initial support by the ESA was voted on by 
the board of directors and was unanimous, based on scien­
tific evidence; however, a majority of national societies of 
the ESA were unable to support the guideline and voted to 
retract the statement. It is unclear at this time where this 
leaves the use of propofol in many European countries.
Moderate Sedation
Although many providers would prefer to use propofol for 
off-site procedures, they are often credentialed to provide 
moderate sedation only and do not have access to propo­
fol or anesthesia services for various reasons. As previously 
mentioned, the use of a benzodiazepine and opioid combi­
nation remains the mainstay for the provision of moderate 
sedation in non–operating room anesthesia care. However, 
several studies have attempted to improve on traditional 
moderate sedation by using other sedative agents instead 
of or as an adjunct to a benzodiazepine and/or narcotic 
in the hopes of producing better sedation and reducing 
adverse effects. One major complication of combining opi­
oids and benzodiazepines is respiratory depression. Dexme­
detomidine is a highly selective alpha-2–adrenoreceptor 
agonist that typically maintains respiration while achiev­
ing a responsive sedative state. Jalowiecki compared dex­
medetomidine to either a combination of meperidine and 
midazolam or fentanyl only for sedation for outpatient 
colonoscopy.42 Although dexmedetomidine has been suc­
cessfully used for certain types of intraoperative sedation, 
this study found it was inferior to both comparison groups. 
Dexmedetomidine produced significant hemodynamic 
instability, frequently required the addition of fentanyl to 
complete the procedure, produced prolonged recovery, and 
was complicated to administer. It appears unsuitable for use 
in endoscopy.
Ketamine is an N-methyl-d-aspartate antagonist used for 
sedation and analgesia. For adults, data are limited on the 
use of ketamine or combination therapy involving ketamine 
for non–operating room procedures. This limitation is likely 
due to the dysphoria often associated with ketamine, which 
may make it unsuitable for this use. In pediatric patients, 
some of the literature suggests ketamine is useful as a seda­
tive outside the operating room.43 The following three 
studies evaluated ketamine for sedation in pediatric GI 
endoscopy. Gilger et al44 compared it to a midazolam and 
meperidine combination and found statistically signifi­
cantly fewer complications and better sedation, although 
that improvement was found to be not statistically signifi­
cant. Brecelj45 evaluated ketamine versus ketamine/mid­
azolam given by nonanesthesiologists for upper and lower 
endoscopy and found that the combination provided excel­
lent sedation without significant dysphoria, in contrast to 
ketamine alone. Finally, a study by Tosun et al46 found that 
both propofol with midazolam and propofol with ketamine 
were effective in pediatric upper endoscopy but that the ket­
amine group had more side effects. Perhaps ketamine may 
be useful in contrast to moderate sedation with an opioid 
and benzodiazepine combination but not for cases in which 
propofol is used. One side effect frequently noted with ket­
amine is laryngospasm.
Two studies evaluated the potential for the potent but 
short-acting opioid remifentanil for endoscopic sedation. 
Moerman et  al47 found that remifentanil was effective in 
colonoscopy but was associated with a higher incidence of 
patient recall and significant respiratory depression in con­
trast to propofol. A more recent study by Akcaboy et al48 
was designed to avoid these problems. Patients were ran­
domly assigned to either low-dose remifentanil to avoid 
respiratory depression or a continuous propofol infusion 
with supplemental bolus as needed. To decrease procedural 
awareness, all patients also received 2 mg of midazolam. 
Low-dose remifentanil infusion was found to be effective, 
with excellent patient satisfaction, faster recovery, and no 
significant difference in respiratory depression. The dis­
charge times were similar, but a higher incidence of nau­
sea and vomiting occurred in the remifentanil group. This 
study was relatively small, and it is not clear that remifent­
anil offers any significant advantage over standard agents.
Two additional studies evaluated modifications to tra­
ditional sedation. The first study replaced fentanyl with 
oral tramadol; both were paired with midazolam. Fentanyl 
provided significantly better analgesia with fewer postpro­
cedural side effects.49 No patients in either group had hemo­
dynamic or respiratory complications, and the authors 
concluded that fentanyl was superior to tramadol. The sec­
ond study evaluated the effect of adding diphenhydramine 
to midazolam and meperidine for colonoscopy and found 
an improvement in the quality of sedation while allowing 
a reduction in the use of midazolam and meperidine50; no 
change was seen in the length of recovery. However, closed 
claims data suggest that sedative combinations increase the 
risk for sedation-related complications,51 so caution when 
using more than two agents at a time is warranted.
Other Modalities
Alternatives and additions to intravenous sedation are 
available for GI endoscopy. Outside the United States a 
substantial number of patients undergo EGD without 
sedation.52 Hypnosis has been used to facilitate endos­
copy, although its use was unsurprisingly associated with 
greater patient discomfort and less amnesia in contrast to 
midazolam.53 The use of pharyngeal local anesthetic sprays 
is relatively common, and a meta-analysis of five random­
ized controlled trials showed that the use of spray led to less 
procedure-related discomfort and less technical difficulty.54 
A small risk for methemoglobinemia and aspiration may be 
more likely after pharyngeal anesthesia. Another adjunct 
that has been used and evaluated is music in the endoscopy 
suite. It has been shown that listening to music before the 
procedure was associated with lower doses of analgesia 
and shorter procedure times, as well as lower patient anxi­
ety levels.55 Another modality that may become available 
in the future is patient-controlled sedation in which the 
patient controls the level of sedation, typically with pro­
pofol. This is discussed in more detail in another chapter. 
Although these modalities may be useful in certain cases, 
they will not supplant traditional sedation methods in the 
near future.
22  •  Anesthesia and Competitive Strategies
197
Conclusion
To date, no studies offer a clear alternative to propofol for 
sedation in non–operating room procedures in safety, 
efficiency, or effectiveness. In addition, with the possible 
exception of ketamine and midazolam for pediatric patients 
and outside of propofol-based strategies, there appears to 
be limited ability to improve on moderate sedation with 
a benzodiazepine and opioid combination. Thus, unless 
other medications become available, propofol is by far the 
best procedural sedative agent for routine use in most non–­
operating room cases. The unresolved and controversial 
question at this time is who should be using this agent, in 
which settings, and for which patients.
Considerable data are available on the use of propofol 
by nonanesthesiologists that appear to support NAAP for 
routine GI endoscopy in healthy patients (ASA class 1 or 2) 
by appropriately trained personnel. However, for patients 
with ASA class 3 and greater or those having prolonged 
and advanced procedures, caution may be warranted. In 
addition, policy considerations and regulations may affect 
who can provide sedation in the non–operating room set­
ting. This may lead to medicolegal concerns with nonanes­
thesiologist use of propofol for sedation. As this practice 
increases, so does the potential for an adverse outcome or 
injury. Malpractice lawyers will undoubtedly scrutinize 
these cases to determine whether the duty of care between 
patient and clinician has been breached.56 Because the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration product labeling for pro­
pofol states that propofol “should be administered only by 
persons trained in the administration of general anesthesia 
and not involved in the conduct of surgical/diagnostic pro­
cedure,” the decision to proceed without an anesthesiolo­
gist for GI endoscopy may be challenged.
Although it is difficult to predict the future in the field of 
medicine, several trends in non–operating room sedation 
are likely to continue. First, the trend toward increasingly 
complex non–operating room procedures on increasingly 
sick patients will continue. This will lead to an increas­
ing demand for high-quality and cost-effective sedation 
for these procedures. In addition, significant pressure will 
continue to be placed on cost containment in medical care. 
Finally, the debate concerning who should provide sedation 
for which patients having what procedures will continue. 
As sedation experts, anesthesiologists need to maintain 
a clear voice on this issue. Until now, anesthesiologists 
have generally allowed nonanesthesiologists to control 
the debate. In the future, it is incumbent on the anesthe­
sia community to be proactive in the sedation debate and 
to define ways in which anesthesia care adds value in the 
non–operating room setting. This includes exploring ways 
to provide effective and safe anesthesia care at a reasonable 
cost to society. The ideal is to provide the highest-quality 
sedation for patients with the lowest cost.
References
	 1.	 Freeman ML. Sedation and monitoring for gastrointestinal endos­
copy. In: Yamada T, ed. Textbook of gastroenterology. 4th ed. Philadel­
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003:2818–2820.
	 2.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of depth of seda­
tion: definition of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/analge­
sia. Approved by ASA House of Delegates on October 13, 1999, and 
amended on October 27, 2004.
	 3.	 Zuccaro Jr G. Sedation and analgesia for GI endoscopy. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2006;63:95–96.
	 4.	 Patel S, Vargo JJ, Khandwala F, et al. Deep sedation occurs frequently 
during elective endoscopy with meperidine and midazolam. Am J Gas­
troenterol. 2005;100:2689–2695.
	 5.	 Cohen LB, Wecsler JS, Gaetano JN, et al. Endoscopic sedation in the 
United States: results from a nationwide survey. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2006;01:967–974.
	 6.	 Tan G, Irwin MG. Recent advances in using propofol by non-­
anesthesiologists. F1000 Med Rep. 2010;2:79.
	 7.	 Lazzaroni M, Bianchi Porro G. Preparation, premedication and sur­
veillance. Endoscopy. 1998;30:53–60.
	 8.	 Froelich F, Harris JK, Wietlisbach V, et al. Current sedation and moni­
toring practice for colonoscopy: an international observational study 
(EPAGE). Endoscopy. 2006;38:461–469.
	 9.	 Ladas SD, Satake Y, Mostafa I, Morse J. Sedation practices for gastro­
intestinal endoscopy in Europe, North America, Asia, Africa and Aus­
tralia. Digestion. 2010;82:74–76.
	10.	 Reves JG, Glass P, Lubarsky DA, et al. Intravenous anesthetics. In: 
Miller RD, ed. Miller’s anesthesia. 7th ed. Orlando, Fla: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2009.
	11.	 DeWitt J, McGreevy K, Sherman S, Imperiale TF. Nurse-administered 
propofol sedation compared with midazolam and meperidine for 
EUS: a prospective, randomized trial. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008;68:
499–509.
	12.	 Nayar DS, Guthrie WG, Goodman A, et al. Comparison of propofol 
deep sedation versus moderate sedation during endosonography. Dig 
Dis Sci. 2010;55:2537–2544.
	13.	 Cohen LB, Hightower CD, Wood DA, et  al. Moderate level seda­
tion during endoscopy: a prospective study using low-dose pro­
pofol, meperidine/fentanyl, and midazolam. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2004;59:795–803.
	14.	 Sipe BW, Rex DK, Latinovich D, et  al. Propofol versus midazolam/
meperidine for outpatient colonoscopy; administration by nurses 
supervised by endoscopists. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:815–825.
	15.	 Ulmer BJ, Hansen JJ, Overley CA, et al. Propofol versus midazolam/
fentanyl for outpatient colonoscopy: administration by nurses super­
vised by endoscopists. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003;1:425–432.
	16.	 Cohen LB. Redefining quality in endoscopic sedation. Dig Dis Sci. 
2010;55:2425–2427.
	17.	 Cote GA, Hovis RM, Ansstas MA, et al. Incidence of sedation-related 
complications with propofol use during advanced endoscopic proce­
dures. Clin Gastroenterol and Hepatol. 2010;8:137–142.
	18.	 McQuaid KR, Laine L. A systematic review and meta-analysis of ran­
domized, controlled trials of moderate sedation for routine endoscopic 
procedures. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008;67:910–923.
	19.	 Singh H, Poluha W, Cheung M, et al. Propofol for sedation during 
colonoscopy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;(4):CD006268.
	20.	 Sharma VK, Nguyen CC, Cromwell MD, et  al. A national study of 
cardiopulmonary unplanned events after GI endoscopy. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2007;66:27–34.
	21.	 Rex DK, Deenadayalu VP, Eid E, et al. Endoscopist-directed adminis­
tration of propofol: a worldwide safety experience. Gastroenterology. 
2009;137:1229–1237.
	22.	 Wehrmann T, Riphaus A. Sedation with propofol for interventional 
endoscopic procedures: a risk factor analysis. Scand J Gastroenterol. 
2008;43:368–374.
	23.	 Rex DK. Endoscopist-directed propofol. Techn Gastrointest Endosc. 
2009;11:177–180.
	24.	 van Natta ME, Rex DK. Propofol alone titrated to deep sedation ver­
sus propofol in combination with opioids and/or benzodiazepines and 
titrated to moderate sedation for colonoscopy. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2006;101:2209–2217.
	25.	 Clarke AC, Chiragakis L, Hillman LC, Kaye GL. Sedation for endos­
copy: the safe use of propofol by general practitioner sedationists. Med 
J Aust. 2002;76:158–161.
	26.	 Repici A, Pagano N, Hassan C, et  al. Balanced propofol sedation 
administration by nonanesthesiologists: the first Italian experience. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2011;17:3818–3823.
	27.	 Heuss LT, Froehlich F, Beglinger C. Nonanesthesiologist-administered 
propofol sedation: from the exception to standard practice—sedation 
and monitoring trends over 20 years. Endoscopy. 2012;44:504–511.
	28.	 Sayfo S, Vakil KP, Alqaqa’a A, et  al. A retrospective analysis of 
proceduralist-directed, nurse-administered propofol sedation for 
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator procedures. Heart Rhythm. 
2012;9:342–346.
SECTION 4  •  Financial Considerations
198
	29.	 Kottkamp H, Hindricks G, Eitel C, et  al. deep sedation for catheter 
ablation of atrial fibrillation: a prospective study in 650 consecutive 
patients. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2011;22:1339–1343.
	30.	 Poincloux L, Laquiere A, Baxin JE, et al. A randomized controlled trial 
of endoscopist vs anaesthetist-administered sedation for colonoscopy. 
Dig Liver Dis. 2011;43:553–558.
	31.	 Trummel JM, Surgenor SD, Cravero JP, et  al. Comparison of differing 
sedation practice for upper endoscopic ultrasound using expert observa­
tional analysis of the procedural sedation. J Pat Safety. 2009;5:153–159.
	32.	 Khiani VS, Soulos P, Gancayco J, et al. Anesthesiologist involvement 
in screening colonoscopy: temporal trends and cost implications in 
the Medicare population. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;10:58–64.
	33.	 Liu H, Waxman DA, Main R, Mattke S. Utilization of anesthesia ser­
vices during outpatient endoscopies and colonoscopies and associated 
spending in 2003-2009. JAMA. 2012;307:1178–1184.
	34.	 Rex DK. Effect of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services policy 
about deep sedation on use of propofol. Ann Int Med. 2011;154:622–626.
	35.	 Hassan C, Rex DK, Cooper GS, et  al. Endoscopist-directed propofol 
administration versus anesthesiologist assistance for colorectal cancer 
screening: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Endoscopy. 2012;44:456–464.
	36.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Statement on safe use of pro­
pofol. Approved by ASA House of Delegates on October 27, 2004, and 
amended on October 21, 2009.
	37.	 American Society of Anesthesiologists. Statement on granting privi­
leges to nonanesthesiologist practitioners for personally administering 
deep sedation or supervising deep sedation by individuals who are not 
anesthesia professionals. Approved by the ASA House of Delegates on 
October 18, 2006
	38.	 Vargo JJ, Cohen LB, Rex DK, et al. Position statement: nonanesthesi­
ologist administration of propofol for GI endoscopy. Gastroenterology. 
2009;137:2161–2167.
	39.	 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Revised appendix A: inter­
pretive guidelines for hospitals. Revision date December 2, 2011. 
Publication no. 100–07, Baltimore, Md: Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services.
	40.	 Dumonceau JM, Riphaus A, Aparicio JR, et al. European Society of 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, European Society of Gastroenterology 
and Endoscopy Nurses and Associates, and the European Society of 
Anesthesiology Guideline: Non-anesthesiologist administration of 
propofol for GI endoscopy. Endoscopy. 2010;42:960–974.
	41.	 Pelosi P. Retraction of endorsement—European Society of Gastro­
intestinal Endoscopy, European Society of Gastroenterology and 
Endoscopy Nurses and Associates, and the European Society of Anes­
thesiology guideline: non-anesthesiologist administration of propofol 
for GI endoscopy. Endoscopy. 2012;44:302.
	42.	 Jalowiecki P, Rudner R, Gonciarz M, et al. Sole use of dexmedetomi­
dine has limited utility for conscious sedation during outpatient colo­
noscopy. Anesthesiology. 2005;103:269–273.
	43.	 Green SM, Klooster M, Harris T, et  al. Ketamine sedation for pedi­
atric gastroenterology procedures. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2001;32:26–33.
	44.	 Gilger MA, Spearman RS, Dietrich CL, et al. Safety and effectiveness of 
ketamine as a sedative agent for pediatric GI endoscopy. Gastrointest 
Endosc. 2004;59:659–663.
	45.	 Brecelj J, Kamhi Trop T, Orel R. Ketamine with and without mid­
azolam for gastrointestinal endoscopies in children. J Pediatr Gastren­
terol Nutr. 2012;54:748–752.
	46.	 Tosun Z, Aksu R, Guler G, et al. Propofol-ketamine vs propofol-­fentanyl 
for sedation during pediatric upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. Pediatr 
Anesth. 2007;17:983–988.
	47.	 Moerman AT, Foubert LA, Herregods LL, et al. Propofol versus remi­
fentanil for monitored anaesthesia care during colonoscopy. Eur 
J Anaesth. 2003;20:461–466.
	48.	 Akcaboy ZN, Akcaboy EY, Albayrak D, et al. Can Remifentanil be a 
better choice than propofol for colonoscopy during monitored anes­
thesia care? Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2006;50:736–741.
	49.	 Hirsch I, Vaissler A, Chernin J, et al. Fentanyl or tramadol, with mid­
azolam, for outpatient colonoscopy: analgesia, sedation, and safety. 
Dig Dis Sci. 2006;51:1946–1951.
	50.	 Tu RH, Grewall P, Leung JW, et al. Diphenhydramine as an adjunct 
to sedation for colonoscopy: a double-blind randomized, placebo-­
controlled study. Gastrointest Endosc. 2006;63:87–94.
	51.	 Bhananker SM, Posner KL, Cheney FW, et  al. Injury and liabil­
ity associated with monitored anesthesia care. Anesthesiology. 
2006;104:228–234.
	52.	 Thomson A, Andrew G, Jones DB. Optimal sedation for gastrointesti­
nal endoscopy: review and recommendations. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2010;25:469–478.
	53.	 Conlong P, Rees W. The use of hypnosis in gastroscopy: a comparison 
with intravenous sedation. Postgrad Med J. 1999;75:223–225.
	54.	 Evans LT, Saberi S, Kim HM, et  al. Pharyngeal anesthesia during 
sedated EGDs: is “the spray” beneficial? A meta-analysis and system­
atic review. Gastrointest Endosc. 2006;63:761–766.
	55.	 Rudin D, Kiss A, Wetz RV, et al. Music in the endoscopy suite: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled studies. Endoscopy. 2007;39:507–510.
	56.	 Axon AE. The use of propofol by gastroenterologists: medico-legal 
issues. Digestion. 2010;82:110–112.
200
Anesthetizing patients is a complex business. The number of 
tasks to perform on a daily basis has increased dramatically, 
and the number of locations in which they are performed 
also has risen. Effectively monitoring a patient, charting 
the patient’s progress, anticipating changes in the surgical 
field, and adapting the anesthesia care requires a substan­
tial amount of multitasking. Further, delivery of anesthesia 
care outside the operating room is complicated by variability 
of locations, workspaces, monitoring equipment, and other 
medical devices, in addition to the myriad cables and connec­
tors required to keep things running. This often results in 
suboptimal physical arrangements in the non–operating 
room anesthesia (NORA) suite.
The introduction of the electronic medical record (EMR) 
and anesthesia record-keeping systems would, on the sur­
face, seem to help alleviate some of the complexity and 
multitasking involved in the care of the patient during a 
procedure. However, that industry remains immature. A 
lack of standards for device integration further complicates 
the adoption of these systems with truly automatic func­
tioning. Additionally, because a true wireless monitoring 
system is not available to the anesthesiologist, this integra­
tion comes at the cost of additional cables in the work space, 
making things even more difficult for a practitioner to func­
tion effectively.
Coupled with the difficulties described is the increasing 
need for anesthesiologists in non–operating room settings. 
The use of diagnostic endoscopy for the evaluation of 
upper and lower gastrointestinal disorders has dramati­
cally increased in the last decade.1,2 This rise in performed 
procedures comes with a concomitant increase in the use 
of trained anesthesia providers to administer sedation for 
these patients.2 Further, the proportion of low-risk patients 
(American Society of Anesthesiologists [ASA] class 1 or 
2) receiving sedation services from an anesthesiologist 
or certified registered nurse anesthetist has grown out of 
proportion to the overall number of procedures performed 
in the gastrointestinal suite.2 In this same period, the cost 
of anesthesia services has increased. One study estimates 
that the cost of anesthesia services for these procedures 
in the United States amounted to $1.1 billion in 2009.3 
Another study shows that participation by anesthesia 
personnel in these procedures is expected to increase to 
greater than 50% by 2015.4
The escalating costs and use of an already limited resource 
naturally leads to the discussion of exactly which services 
are being offered and whether a safer, more economical 
way exists to provide these services. This discussion is com­
plicated by the fact that it is increasingly commonplace for 
North American patients to request general anesthesia or 
at least deeper levels of sedation than are typically provided 
for procedures of this type,5,6 although at the same time 
proceduralists would prefer to use medications such as pro­
pofol but are afraid to do so because of the risks involved.7,8 
A review of the literature through 2009 shows at least 
460,000 cases of nonanesthesiologist-administered pro­
pofol sedation for endoscopy.9 The majority of those cases 
involved administration of propofol sedation by nurses. 
Three deaths were recorded in this group, occurring during 
or after esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD).10
The provision of anesthesia consists of several compo­
nents: unconsciousness or anesthetic depth, analgesia, and 
neuromuscular blockade. Each of these associated compo­
nents requires careful monitoring. New monitors are avail­
able to assist in the anesthetic management of the patient. 
These recently introduced monitors provide improvements 
in patient safety by using new physiological monitoring 
systems purported to aid in assessment of anesthesia depth. 
Automatic delivery systems, most commonly in the form 
of target-controlled infusion (TCI, or open-loop systems) 
pumps also have made an appearance in some markets.
A TCI is an infusion controlled to enable a user-defined 
drug concentration in a tissue of interest. Kruger-
Thiemer11 first suggested this concept in 1968, but it was 
not until the 1980s that pharmacokinetic models and 
equations were incorporated into computer-controlled 
devices. The first TCI pump introduced to clinical practice 
was the Diprifusor in 1996 (Figure 23-1).12-14 Pumps and 
pharmacokinetic models have continued to evolve since 
that time.
These advances, when taken together, have opened the 
door for the creation of fully closed-loop systems. These 
closed-loop systems are designed to not just deliver a drug 
in a controlled fashion but to also monitor the patient for 
a parameter appropriate to the particular medication in 
use—for example, monitoring respiratory rate and end-
tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) as a feedback mechanism 
while infusing remifentanil. The introduction of decision 
support systems has paralleled these developments (more 
commonly in the military and critical care setting) to fur­
ther help personnel make appropriate decisions.
The medical device industry has worked to develop auto­
mated systems for delivery of anesthesia care as it applies 
to the healthiest patients having the least complicated pro­
cedures. The focus of this chapter is the current state of 
automated or computer-assisted systems and those known 
to be in development. Although these devices are not yet 
routinely available in the United States, the SEDASYS Sys­
tem (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio) was recently 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis­tration (FDA) 
(on May 3, 2013). Canada and several European countries 
allow use of the SEDASYS System.
Development of Future 
Systems
LARRY LINDENBAUM
23
23  •  Development of Future Systems
201
Evolution of Automated or 
Computer-Assisted Systems
Traditionally, automated anesthesia delivery systems have 
been broken down into closed- or open-loop systems; how­
ever, that nomenclature does not accurately reflect the 
reality of the systems currently under development because 
these systems often share characteristics of both. No matter 
how these devices are classified in the future, it is important 
to understand how the current open-loop, or TCI-based, 
devices function for comparison.
TCI devices were originally presented for clinical use in 
199015 and are designed for the delivery of hypnotic or anal­
gesic agents using a pharmacokinetic algorithm. The algo­
rithms are based on commonly used three-­compartment 
models of distribution and elimination. These models are 
based on population studies correlating drug blood concen­
trations with target site concentrations. They do not mea­
sure any actual effect of the drug and are thus considered 
open-loop devices. These devices have become relatively 
popular in Europe, with a prevalence of use in 10% to 25% 
of all total intravenous anesthesia cases16; however, only 
one device is currently available in North America.
A review of current TCI systems demonstrated that the 
main advantage of these systems over manual infusion is 
a reduction in the number of manual interventions needed 
to maintain anesthesia at a particular clinical end point.17 
The same review showed a small increase in total propofol 
consumption but no advantage in terms of induction speed, 
recovery time, or intraoperative movement. A different study 
revealed superior hemodynamics and more efficient dosing 
of remifentanil by TCI than by manual administration.18
Although TCI systems were initially built to infuse opi­
oids or propofol, the idea of using TCI methods for volatile 
anesthetics has more recently emerged with both the Zeus 
(Dräger, Lübeck, Germany) and Felix (Taema, Antony, 
France) anesthesia workstations. These systems take advan­
tage of closed-circuit ventilation and use feedback to control 
direct injection of anesthetic vapor into the breathing circle.
The successful creation of these devices has spurred the 
development of closed-loop systems, which represent the 
next step in the evolution of automated anesthesia systems. 
These newer systems are designed to automatically admin­
ister anesthesia by monitoring the effects of the medications 
in use and using patient response as a feedback mechanism 
for the system. The currently available closed-loop systems 
comprise three parts: a computerized operating system 
programmed with delivery algorithms, a drug delivery 
system, and an effect monitor. To be effective, these new 
systems must have a suitable effect that can be precisely 
measured for the feedback loop of each component of anes­
thesia being delivered.
A complete anesthesia delivery system has three effects 
that must be reliably monitored: depth of anesthesia, neu­
romuscular blockade, and pain control. Neuromuscular 
blockade is the easiest of the three effects to monitor in clini­
cal practice. Multiple devices on the market take advan­
tage of several mechanisms for measuring neuromuscular 
blockade. The major problems with many of the current 
devices are the relative lack of user-friendliness and diffi­
culty in setting up for routine use. By contrast, twitch moni­
tors are simple to use, easy to configure, and provide reliable 
information when set up appropriately.
Monitoring depth of anesthesia—or level of sedation—
has grown in popularity over the last 10 to 15 years. The 
current devices use proprietary techniques for monitoring 
spontaneous electroencephalograph activity while dis­
playing a synthesized number that purportedly reflects the 
patient’s relative depth of sedation (typically on a scale of 
1-100). Although controversy exists on the precise utility 
of these systems and the actual meaning of the numbers 
displayed, some studies have demonstrated the success­
ful use of these systems as closed-loop systems, not just in 
efficacy but also in outperforming the manual administra­
tion of sedative-hypnotic medications.19-21 As additional 
safeguards, these systems may also measure pulse oximetry 
and respiratory rate, especially when used for nonsurgical 
sedation.
Pain control, the third effect monitored, is more difficult 
to assess because the patient may be heavily sedated, under 
general anesthesia, or otherwise unable to communicate 
directly to personnel in the non–operating room location. 
Several studies have shown that hemodynamic parameters 
can be useful in the dosing of opioids.22 Hemmerling et al23 
successfully demonstrated the utility of a scoring system in 
providing successful feedback control in a closed-loop sys­
tem, although this was a very small study. Further work is 
necessary to validate these results.
MCSLEEPY
Researchers at McGill University in Montreal, Canada, 
developed the world’s first completely automatic anesthesia 
delivery system, named McSleepy. As a complete anesthe­
sia delivery system, McSleepy monitors the patient’s depth 
of consciousness, muscle movements, and level of pain 
and stimulation during surgery. This information is fed 
back into the system’s brain to adjust administration of the 
appropriate medication.
McSleepy is relatively simple to use.24 After an intrave­
nous cannula is placed, sensors are applied to measure the 
patient’s muscle movement. Height, weight, age, and gen­
der information, as well as the type of surgery being per­
formed, are entered into the main console. McSleepy then 
allows the anesthesiologist to specify preferences regarding 
the drug dosages to be used before medication administra­
tion and monitoring of the patient. The system monitors 
data and adjusts dosing every minute while displaying all 
relevant data on a screen.10,25
Figure 23-1  Diprifusor pump. (Courtesy of Carefusion, San Diego, CA.)
SECTION 5  •  The Future of Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
202
SADASYS SYSTEM
Although McSleepy was the first closed-loop system intro­
duced, the first computer-assisted system to aggressively 
pursue regulatory approval was designed for gastroenter­
ologists. The SEDASYS System is a sedation delivery sys­
tem designed to enable nonanesthesiologists to administer 
propofol in the endoscopy laboratory. Reasons for the focus 
on endoscopy for the SEDASYS System include the increas­
ing number of procedures in the endoscopy suite, especially 
to help accommodate the demand for early colon cancer 
screening,26 and noted advantages to sedation with propo­
fol over benzodiazepine and opioid combinations in terms of 
turnover time and patient satisfaction.27
Originally endorsed by the FDA’s Anesthesiology and 
Respiratory Therapy Devices Advisory Committee in 2009, 
the SEDASYS System was rejected by the FDA in 2010, an 
unusual occurrence because the FDA typically follows the 
advice of its advisory committees. Ethicon Endo-Surgery 
(a division of Johnson & Johnson) appealed the decision, 
and FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg, MD, granted 
a hearing scheduled for December 2011. However, in 
November 2011, Ethicon Endo-Surgery announced that it 
had withdrawn its request for appeal because it had reached 
a settlement with the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radio­
logic Health “to settle the company’s appeal” of its previous 
denial.
The FDA accordingly agreed to reopen the premarket 
approval application and “review it expeditiously.” The 
SEDASYS System was approved by the FDA in May of 2013 
for the delivery of propofol for minimal-to-moderate seda­
tion during colonoscopy and EGD procedures. The device 
is also currently approved for sale in Canada for sedation 
of patients undergoing colonoscopy and in Australia for 
patients undergoing colonoscopy and EGD. It was granted 
the mark of approval in the European Union for use dur­
ing routine colonoscopy and EGD in May of 2010.28,29 In 
the United States, the device carries the following caveats: 
The device is restricted for use by health care professionals 
that have the types of training defined in the labeling, and 
to settings where an anesthesia professional is immediately 
available for assistance or consultation. Also, the SEDASYS 
System should not be used in:
	•	 Patients with known hypersensitivity to 1% propofol 
injectable emulsion or its components
	•	 Patients with allergies to eggs, egg products, soybeans, or 
soy products
	•	 Patients with a known hypersensitivity to fentanyl
	•	 Pregnant or lactating women
	•	 Delivery of any drug other than 1% propofol injectable 
emulsion
	•	 Patients with a full stomach
The SEDASYS System initiates sedation with a loading 
dose based on the patient’s weight and the maintenance 
infusion rate selected by the physician, delivered over 3 
minutes. The maximum initial maintenance rate the phy­
sician can select is 75 mcg/kg/min, which yields a 0.5 
mg/kg loading dose. After the loading dose is delivered, 
the SEDASYS System delivers the infusion rate selected by 
the physician. Detection of oversedation is determined by 
several mechanisms, including falling oxygen saturation, 
depressed respiratory rate, and failure of detection of the 
ETCO2 curve. If any of these signals occur, the propofol infu­
sion is automatically stopped. Further, the machine adds an 
additional layer of monitoring by talking to the patient at 
varied intervals and asking the patient to squeeze a hand­
set. If the patient fails to comply, the propofol infusion is 
automatically reduced.
Unlike McSleepy, the SEDASYS System is designed to 
deliver only propofol. The computer-assisted delivery 
mechanism is integrated with the patient monitoring as 
part of a feedback loop. The SEDASYS System is equipped 
with standard ASA monitors, including ETCO2. The device 
is physically made of two primary subunits, a bedside mon­
itoring unit and a procedure room unit (Figure 23-2). The 
mobile bedside monitoring unit is attached to the patient 
and moves with the patient throughout the periopera­
tive environment. It has a port for attachment of an oro­
nasal cannula for oxygen delivery, and it monitors and 
displays oxygen saturation, noninvasive blood pressure, 
and electrocardiogram. This unit also houses the auto­
mated responsiveness monitor, designed to assess patient 
responsiveness.
The approval of the device comes primarily from Ethi­
con’s study of 1000 adults in ASA class 1 to 3 undergo­
ing routine EGD or colonoscopy.30 In this study, patients 
were randomized into two groups, one for sedation with 
the SEDASYS System and one for sedation with each site’s 
Figure 23-2  The SEDASYS System. (Courtesy of Ethicon Endo-Surgery, 
Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio.)
23  •  Development of Future Systems
203
current standard of care for these procedures. Of note is that 
the standard of care at each of these facilities was a benzodi­
azepine and opioid combination, not propofol.
The results of this study showed that the area under the 
curve of oxygen desaturation was significantly lower for 
the SEDASYS System than it was for the benzodiazepine 
and opioid group. Further, the SEDASYS System patients 
were said to be significantly more satisfied, as were the cli­
nicians involved. The SEDASYS System group was shown 
to recover faster, and the incidence of adverse effects was 
slightly but not significantly lower.
Although the studies described are worth noting, the 
larger question is whether the use of the SEDASYS System 
to administer propofol can prevent the progression of seda­
tion to unintended depths. The SEDASYS System should 
be used by physicians trained in the management of the 
cardiorespiratory effects of propofol, including propofol 
pharmacology, identification of high-risk patients, recog­
nition of progression of levels of sedation and the actions 
necessary to return the patient to intended levels, determi­
nation of adequate ventilation, and management of airway 
obstruction and hypoventilation.
Propofol has a narrow therapeutic index and a very 
large interpatient variability between drug clearance and 
anesthetic requirements.33,34 The precise variability is, at 
present, completely unknown but most likely multifacto­
rial. Age, weight, circulation time, body fat percentage, and 
genetic polymorphisms may influence the variable effect 
of propofol. The algorithm in use by the SEDASYS System 
is not publicly known, further increasing the anxiety sur­
rounding the possibility of a medication administration 
error.
Conclusion
In spite of the controversy and concerns, the use of propofol 
by endoscopists without the supervision of trained anesthe­
siology professionals is on the rise. Given the current health 
care environment, the challenge remains to balance patient 
safety, cost effectiveness, and overall efficiency. Anesthesi­
ology as a profession has demonstrated impressive improve­
ments in safety over the last few decades, largely through 
the use of new technology. The development of these auto­
mated and computer-assisted anesthesia delivery systems 
is a natural direction for the specialty. Close collaboration 
between anesthesiologists and procedural specialists is nec­
essary to ensure the safe care of patients, regardless of the 
developments that evolve.
References
	 1.	 Harewood GC, Lieberman DA. Colonoscopy practice patterns since 
introduction of Medicare coverage for average-risk screening. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004;2(1):72–77.
	 2.	 Liu H, Waxman DA, Main R, Mattke S. Utilization of anesthesia ser­
vices during outpatient endoscopies and colonoscopies and associated 
spending in 2003-2009. JAMA. 2012;307(11):1178–1184.
	 3.	 Smith MJ. Use, cost of anesthesia for endoscopy increasing. Gastroen­
terol Endosc News. 2012;63:5.
	 4.	 Inadomi JM, Gunnarsson CL, Rizzo JA, Fang H. Projected increased 
growth rate of anesthesia professional-delivered sedation for colonos­
copy and EGD in the United States: 2009 to 2015. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2010;72(3):580–586.
	 5.	 Chanpong B, Haas DA, Locker D. Need and demand for sedation or 
general anesthesia in dentistry: a national survey of the Canadian 
population. Anesth Prog. 2005;52(1):3–11.
	 6.	 Jamieson J. Anesthesia and sedation in the endoscopy suite? (influ­
ences and options). Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 1999;12(4):417–423.
	 7.	 McQuaid KR, Laine L. A systematic review and meta-analysis of ran­
domized, controlled trials of moderate sedation for routine endoscopic 
procedures. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008;67(6):910–923.
	 8.	 Cohen LB, DeLegge M, Kochman M, et al. AGA institute review on 
endoscopic sedation. Gastroenterology. 2007;133(2):675–701.
	 9.	 Vargo JJ, Cohen LB, Rex DK, Kwo PY. Position statement: nonanes­
thesiologist administration of propofol for GI endoscopy. Am J Gas­
troenterol. 2009;104(12):2886–2892. Sedation guidelines update: 
http://www.asge.org/assets/0/71542/71544/4a572112-29a4-
4313-8ab8-b7801e8f84e2.pdf.
	10.	 Deenadayalu VP, Eid EF, Gotf JS, et al. Non-anesthesiologist adminis­
tered propofol sedation for endoscopic procedures: a worldwide safety 
review [abstr]. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008;67:AB107.
	11.	 Kruger-Thiemer E. Continuous intravenous infusion and multicom­
partmental accumulation. Eur J Pharmacol. 1968;4(3):317–324.
	12.	 White M, Kenny GN. Intravenous propofol anaesthesia using a com­
puterized infusion system. Anaesthesia. 1990;45(3):204–209.
	13.	 Kenny GN, White M. A portable target controlled propofol infusion 
system. Int J Clin Monit Comput. 1992;9(3):179–182.
	14.	 Gray JM, Kenny GNC. Development of the technology for the ‘Diprifu­
sor’ TCI systems. Anaesthesia. 1998;53(suppl 1):22–27.
	15.	 Schwilden H, Schuttler J. The determination of an effective therapeu­
tic infusion rate for intravenous anesthetics using feedback-controlled 
dosages. Anaesthetist. 1990;39(11):603–606.
	16.	 Schwilden H, Schuttler J. Target controlled anaesthetic drug dosing. 
Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2008;182:425–450.
	17.	 Leslie K, Clavisi O, Hargrove J. Target-controlled infusion versus man­
ually-controlled infusion of propofol for general anesthesia or sedation 
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;(3):CD006059.
	18.	 De Castro V, Godet G, Mencia G, et  al. Target-controlled infusion 
for remifentanil in vascular patients improves hemodynamics and 
decreases remifentanil requirement. Anesth Analg. 2003;96(1):33–38.
	19	 Struys MM, De Smet T, Versichelen LF, et al. Comparison of closed-
loop controlled administration of propofol using bispectral index as 
the controlled variable versus “standard practice” controlled admin­
istration. Anesthesiology. 2001;95(1):6–17.
	20.	 Hemmerling TM, Charabati S, Zaouter C, Minardi C, Mathieu PA. A 
randomized controlled trial demonstrates that a novel closed-loop pro­
pofol system performs better hypnosis control than manual adminis­
tration. Can J Anaesthesiol. 2010;57(8):725–735.
	21.	 De Smet T, Struys M, Neckebroek M, Van den Hauwe K, Bonte S, 
Mortier E. The accuracy and clinical feasibility of a new Bayes­
ian-based closed-loop control system for propofol administration 
using the bispectral index as a controlled variable. Anesth Analg. 
2008;107(4):1200–1210.
	22.	 Gentilini A, Schaniel C, Morari M, et  al. A new paradigm for the 
closed-loop intraoperative administration of analgesics in humans. 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2002;49(4):289–299.
	23.	 Hemmerling ZTM, Charabati S, Salhab E, et al. The Analgoscore: a 
novel score to monitor intraoperative nociception and its use for 
closed-loop application of remifentanil. J Comput. 2009;4:311–318.
	24.	 Hemmerling TM. Automated anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2009;22:757–763.
	25.	 Hemmerling TM, Charabati S, Mathieu PA. McSleepy: a completely 
automatic anesthesia delivery system [abstr S46]. STA Meeting. 
January, 2009.
	26.	 Seeff L, Nadel M, Blackman D. Colorectal cancer test use among per­
sons aged >50 years: United States, 2001. Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2003;52:193–196.
	27.	 Sipe BW, Rex DK, Latinovich D, et  al. Propofol versus mid­
azolam/meperidine for outpatient colonoscopy: administration by 
nurses supervised by endoscopists. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:
815–825.
	28.	 Public summary for ARTG entry for SEDASYS System in Australia. 
https://www.ebs.tga.gov.au/servlet/xmlmillr6?dbidebs/PublicHTML/
pdfStore.nsf&docid175411&agid(PrintDetailsPublic)&actionid1.
	29.	 Ethicon Endo-Surgery SEDASYS System receives approval in Can­
ada and CE mark in European Union. http://www.investor.jnj.com/
releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=465904.
SECTION 5  •  The Future of Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
204
	30.	 Pambianco DJ, Vargo JJ, Pruitt RE, Hardi R, Martin JF. Computer-
assisted personalized sedation for upper endoscopy and colonoscopy: 
a comparative, multicenter randomized study. Gastrointest Endosc. 
2001;73:765–772.
	31.	 Deleted in page proofs.
	32.	 Deleted in page proofs.
	33.	 Iohom G, Ni CM, O’Brien JK, et al. An investigation of potential genetic 
determinants of propofol requirements and recovery from anaesthe­
sia. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2007;24:912–919.
	34.	 Ortolani O, Conti A, Ngumi ZW, et al. Ethnic differences in propofol 
and fentanyl response: a comparison among Caucasians, Kenyan 
Africans and Brazilians. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2004;21:314–319.
205
The demand for non–operating room anesthesia (NORA) 
services is expanding rapidly and for diverse reasons. NORA 
procedures are often less invasive; many of these minimally 
or even noninvasive procedures are either no longer adapt­
able or not able to be performed in traditional operating 
rooms, or they do not need to be performed in expensive and 
highly staffed operating rooms. The growth in procedures 
that no longer routinely need to be performed in operating 
rooms encompasses practices ranging from radiology (e.g., 
radiofrequency tumor ablation, radiation seed implanta­
tion, transhepatic biliary duct stent placement) to gastroen­
terology (e.g., endoscopic placement of biliary stents, closed 
gastric stapling) to interventional cardiology (e.g., trans­
femoral aortic valve replacement). Many simple procedures 
may be performed in relatively spartan procedure rooms 
or even at the bedside, such as dressing and pack changes. 
Regardless of the location of the patient’s procedural care, a 
pain-free, safe, and relatively inexpensive experience is the 
primary desired outcome for both the patient and procedur­
alist. New anesthesia and sedation care models are needed 
to support the new procedural practices that are NORA 
cases.
The main goal of anesthesia delivery in any setting is to 
ensure safe, high-quality care. This can be challenging in 
operating settings where resources are often readily avail­
able and support staff and colleagues are nearby. It can be 
even more challenging outside the operating room environ­
ment. In best-case scenarios, distance from extra knowl­
edgeable hands and resources requires additional planning 
and raises concerns. In worst-case scenarios, anesthesia 
providers may be unfamiliar with the environment and 
procedural issues, have very limited or minimal resources, 
and lack support if unanticipated complications or extraor­
dinary needs arise.
Complexity as the Norm
Unless institutional processes and facilities are specifically 
adapted to support NORA, the delivery of safe anesthesia 
care is both administratively and medically difficult. Pre­
planning and standardization reduce complexity and the 
risks inherent in one-off activities. If sufficient numbers of 
non–operating room procedures are to be done, it may be 
possible to group them into specific locations. These loca­
tions can then be appropriately resourced with person­
nel, supplies, and emergency equipment. Standardized 
processes of care can be implemented and metrics of their 
success tracked as in other surgical or procedural environ­
ments. For example, sufficient numbers of unique gastroen­
terological endoscopy procedures may be done in a facility 
to support standard practices. These would include schedul­
ing systems, quality-improvement processes, specific recov­
ery areas, and staff who are trained and knowledgeable 
about the many procedures that take place in such facilities. 
In settings that allow consolidation of typical NORA proce­
dures, care within the context of healthy patients undergo­
ing complex procedures or medically compromised patients 
undergoing simple procedures can be fairly routine. This 
care becomes more challenging when medically compro­
mised patients undergo complex procedures.
Administrative difficulties arise, however, when it is not 
possible to develop consolidated practice areas for typical 
and atypical procedures outside the operating room. For 
example, in many settings the provision of anesthesia care 
for patients undergoing radiation therapy is infrequent 
and inconsistent. This scenario requires deliberate review 
and planning. Radiation therapy environments are often dis­
tant from regular operating room settings and thus isolate 
anesthesia providers from colleagues. Many providers are 
not comfortable caring for seriously ill patients or providing 
care to medically complex patients in emergency rooms 
or isolated interventional radiology or endoscopy sites. 
These locations all require careful planning and creation 
of myriad well-defined collaborative arrangements among 
services and staff to ensure cooperation and patient safety. 
These agreements need to be written, readily available, and 
reviewed periodically so that providers involved in these 
experiences understand their roles and responsibilities when 
working in isolated non–operating room sites. Box 24-1 lists 
examples of the issues to be identified and documented.
Medical complexity is a major challenge for many non–
operating room procedures. Anesthesia personnel are 
typically requested when a patient’s condition is medically 
challenging, a procedure is complex, or both. Patients who 
are sick or compromised clearly increase periprocedural 
risks. Metzner et al1 reviewed the American Society of Anes­
thesiologists (ASA) Closed Claims database entries from 
1990 to 2009 and found that non–operating room loca­
tions were more likely to involve older and sicker patients 
(p <0.01) undergoing emergency procedures than were oper­
ating rooms. Not surprisingly, monitored anesthesia care 
was eight times more likely to be the anesthesia technique 
used rather than general anesthesia in the operating room 
setting. The severity of injuries in these remote locations 
was greater, with a significant increase in death in contrast 
Novel Staffing Coverage 
for Anesthesia Outside 
the Operating Room
MARY ELLEN WARNER, LINDSAY L. WARNER, and NAFISSEH S. WARNER
24
SECTION 5  •  The Future of Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
206
to procedures performed in the operating room (p <0.001). 
The most common respiratory event in remote locations 
was inadequate oxygenation or ventilation. For respiratory 
depression and most other injuries in this population, an 
impartial team of database reviewers determined that many 
injuries in these settings would have been preventable with 
increased or better monitoring (p <0.001).
Personnel for Anesthesia Services
It is not always possible for anesthesia-trained providers to 
provide anesthesia services in non–operating room loca­
tions. An insufficient number of anesthesia providers are 
available to serve many facilities’ complete procedural 
sedation needs. As the aging population, which has a high 
level of procedure use, continues to grow, the demand for 
procedures of all kinds will expand rapidly. A recent article 
in The Journal of the American Medical Association outlined 
how total knee arthroplasty (TKA) volume in the elderly 
has increased 161.5% from 1991 to 2010.2 Revision TKA 
similarly increased by 105.9% during the same period. 
These increases were due to an increase in per capita 
usage.
One solution to the delivery of cost-effective safe sedation 
and anesthesia care is to develop new and innovative staff­
ing models. Throughout this chapter, various staffing mod­
els will be discussed. It is recognized that a specific model 
may not work for every practice because the models need to 
be appropriate for practice size, patient characteristics, and 
available resources.3
ROLES OF ANESTHESIOLOGISTS
For the sake of simplicity, the term anesthesia services will 
be used throughout this chapter to imply all anesthesia 
and sedation services in health care facilities. In accredited 
health care facilities, anesthesiologists are most likely to 
serve as directors of anesthesia services. In the absence of 
anesthesiologists, other appropriately qualified physicians 
are potential directors of anesthesia services. In their 2010 
Interpretive Guidelines, the Centers for Medicare and Med­
icaid Services (CMS) defined the role of anesthesiologists 
in organizing all anesthesia services under one oversight 
umbrella and stated that directors of the anesthesia ser­
vices must be physicians. Specifically, “anesthesia services 
must be organized under the direction of a Director who is 
a qualified doctor of medicine (MD) or doctor of osteopathy 
(DO) . . . the head of anesthesia services has the authority 
and responsibility for directing the administration of all 
anesthesia services, including anesthesia and analgesia, 
throughout the hospital (including all departments in all 
campuses and off-site locations where anesthesia services 
are provided).”4 Therefore it is the responsibility of these 
directors to grant anesthesia and sedation privileges only 
to providers who have met specific criteria that have been 
approved by the health care facilities.
Anesthesiologists and other physicians who are named 
directors of anesthesia services within health care facilities 
must be confident that the various anesthesia and sedation 
providers in their facilities are the most appropriate provid­
ers for all patients. Practice guidelines and procedures must 
be in place to facilitate the use of appropriately trained pro­
viders. In general, the directors of anesthesia services should 
ensure that all members of the anesthesia team are current 
in regard to educational and certification requirements. 
They must participate in or develop processes to properly 
train and educate all nonanesthesia providers who wish to 
participate in sedation care. They must establish the anes­
thesia service policies and guidelines for use in all practices 
outside the operating room. They should ensure that each 
provider has undergone the required training and should 
play an integral role in establishing quality monitoring 
metrics. Of course, anesthesiologists may personally deliver 
non–operating room anesthesia and sedation services, but 
they practice under the oversight of the designated physi­
cian directors of anesthesia services in accredited health 
care facilities.
ROLES OF OTHER PHYSICIANS
Anesthesia services for many patients undergoing NORA 
are provided by physicians who are not anesthesiologists. 
Physicians typically involved in providing these services 
are emergency medicine doctors, hospitalists, and intensiv­
ists. Although these physicians are independent practitio­
ners, when they provide or supervise anesthesia or sedation 
care in accredited health care facilities, they also fall under 
the oversight authority of the directors of anesthesia ser­
vices. They thus must meet the qualifications and currency 
requirements established by their facilities. The directors 
of anesthesia services are responsible to ensure that these 
nonanesthesiologists are appropriately qualified and fol­
low facility-approved practice guidelines. These physicians 
often may provide direct supervision of others, including 
nurse anesthetists, specifically trained and designated seda­
tion nurses, and nurses who are otherwise trained and 
approved to provide sedation care.
ROLES OF NURSE ANESTHETISTS
Nurse anesthetists are independent anesthesia provid­
ers in some states. In other states they practice under 
Box 24-1  Agreements and Arrangements 
Necessary for Procedures and Anesthesia 
Services Outside the Operating Room
Appointment of a director of anesthesia services
Establishment of a work group to oversee the procedural 
practices
Development of policies and processes that address:
Prioritization and scheduling of patients, providers, and 
procedures
Qualifications of providers
Options of provider models
Triage criteria for patients based on medical and procedural 
complexity
Standardization of anesthetic and procedural processes of care
Preprocedural evaluation and preparation of patients
Intraprocedural and postprocedural management of patients
Communication plans
Emergency procedures
24  •  Novel Staffing Coverage for Anesthesia Outside the Operating Room
207
physician oversight. Their degree of oversight depends on 
individual state laws and federal regulations. Regardless 
of their independence, their anesthesia and sedation activ­
ities, like those of all anesthesia providers, fall under the 
oversight of the directors of anesthesia services in accred­
ited health care facilities. Nurse anesthetists also may 
supervise, as may designated sedation nurses and nurses 
who are otherwise trained and approved to provide seda­
tion care in settings where they have independent practice 
authority.
ROLES OF ANESTHESIOLOGIST ASSISTANTS
Anesthesiologist assistants are anesthesia providers trained 
specifically to work directly under the supervision of anes­
thesiologists. From a federal perspective, the CMS considers 
them equivalent to nurse anesthetists for billing purposes. 
However, anesthesiologist assistants do not have indepen­
dent practice authority in any state or in federal health 
care facilities. Like nurse anesthetists and other anesthe­
sia providers, the anesthesia services that anesthesiologist 
assistants provide fall under the oversight of the directors 
of anesthesia services in accredited health care facilities. 
Because they do not hold independent practice authority, 
anesthesiologist assistants are not able to provide services 
under the supervision of nonanesthesiologist physicians 
and may not supervise sedation nurses and other appropri­
ately trained nurses.
SEDATION NURSES
A growing specialty within nursing is dedicated to provid­
ing conscious or moderate sedation. Some organizations 
support the professional development of sedation nursing, 
and some provide certification processes in sedation care or 
certificates in nursing specialization that include sedation 
care. These organizations include the American Associa­
tion of Moderate Sedation Nurses, the National Examining 
Board for Dental Nursing, and the Association for Radio­
logic and Imaging Nursing. These organizations and cer­
tifying bodies have common interests in improving the 
sedation care provided by nurses, and many of these groups 
have guidelines, training programs, and thresholds of expe­
rience and training for certification.
Although these organizations should be lauded for their 
efforts, at this time no national or state regulations require 
certification of sedation nurses. The qualifications of nurses 
who provide sedation in accredited health care facilities 
instead fall under the review and authority of the direc­
tors of anesthesia services. Facilities generally have specific 
training requirements for these nurses, who work under 
the supervision of physicians.
How are Practice Models 
Determined?
The composition of teams that provide anesthesia ser­
vices in non–operating room environments varies by 
situation, and many factors play a role in the decision-
making processes. These factors range from the loca­
tion of the procedural areas, with consideration as to the 
remoteness of the areas from additional support services, 
to the needs of specific procedures, such as the duration 
of procedures, sterile versus nonsterile, and unique and 
expensive equipment versus routine equipment. The 
needs of patients with various comorbid medical con­
ditions and the expense and availability of the various 
providers used for anesthesia services, such as an anes­
thesiologist versus sedation nurse, are other factors to be 
considered. The cost-effectiveness of the various models 
also plays a role.5
IMPACT OF LOCATION
The more remote the operating location from immediate 
assistance by experienced qualified anesthesia providers, 
the more likely it is the anesthesia care model will include 
independent anesthesia providers. This is based on the 
assumption that experienced anesthesia providers such as 
anesthesiologists and nurse anesthetists will be better able 
to identify and manage potential periprocedural problems 
than less trained providers, thus reducing the need for acute 
interventions such as treatment of respiratory depression 
or hemodynamic instability. Distance from colleagues and 
anesthesia providers who can offer knowledgeable hands 
and additional insights usually makes the use of higher 
trained and more experienced anesthesia providers a safer 
choice than a less experienced provider, such as a sedation 
nurse alone.
The independence of the provider is a factor in who 
provides anesthesia services. Anesthesiologist assistants 
practice under the direct supervision of anesthesiologists. 
When distances of non–operating room procedures from 
main operating rooms or from the presence of anesthesi­
ologists are too great for direct supervision, anesthesiolo­
gists or nurse anesthetists are needed to provide patient 
care. However, advanced technologies and communica­
tions are changing the evolving definitions of direct super­
vision. It is currently possible for anesthesiologists to be 
physically remote from anesthetizing sites but in complete 
communication with other providers. The use of high-
quality telecommunications, such as the growing use of 
electronic intensive care services (e-ICUs), allows physi­
cians and nurses to directly interact, share direct obser­
vations of patients, and intervene across great distances. 
Although the use of these technologies in clinical anes­
thesiology is relatively early in development and imple­
mentation, more options will be available for choosing the 
appropriate provider types for distant procedures as these 
capabilities expand.
NEEDS OF SPECIFIC PROCEDURES
Increased procedural complexity requires a greater depth 
of sedation or use of general anesthesia. The duration and 
degree of potential pain associated with procedures tend to 
dictate the type of provided sedation. When procedures are 
prolonged or painful, the need to use more highly trained 
and experienced anesthesia providers escalates along with 
the level of care. As noted earlier, advances in sedation 
and anesthesia technologies will change the level of care 
provided and the qualifications and experience levels of 
providers.
SECTION 5  •  The Future of Non–Operating Room Anesthesia
208
NEEDS OF THE PATIENT
The health status of patients undergoing NORA procedures 
ranges from very healthy to critically ill. For critically ill 
patients, the selection process for choosing the appropri­
ate anesthesia provider type is relatively straightforward. 
The providers need to have experience in managing these 
patients’ infusions, ventilation, and hemodynamics. As the 
level of patient acuity drops below critically ill, the choice 
of provider is not as clear-cut.1 Appropriately trained and 
experienced sedation nurses may be capable of providing 
sedation for relatively minor procedures in patients who are 
quite sick but hemodynamically stable.
EXPENSE RELATED TO PROVIDER TYPE
If more than one anesthesia provider type is capable of pro­
viding anesthesia or sedation care for NORA procedures, 
the decision on which type to use often will depend on the 
availability and expense of the providers. The availability 
of anesthesia personnel is a straightforward issue of man­
power. Expense of provider type is a much more complex 
issue and is based on a variety of factors. These factors must 
be reviewed by the recipients of the anesthesia services, 
their insurers, and the health care system where the care 
is delivered.
Recipients of anesthesia services and their insurers are 
most interested in the amount of money exchanged for the 
sedation services. The expenses associated with most anes­
thesia services provided by anesthesiologists, nurse anes­
thetists, and anesthesiologist assistants are similar in the 
United States. Medicare payments to these three provider 
types for direct care have little variation within any local­
ity. Assuming patient satisfaction and safety outcomes are 
similar, and as long as billed expenses are similar for these 
three provider types, neither patients nor insurers are moti­
vated to choose one provider type over another.
The perspectives of health care systems are distinctly dif­
ferent from those of recipients of care and insurers. Health 
care in the United States is being increasingly delivered with 
financial limitations. Contracts with health systems often 
have single-amount payments to deliver unique services. 
Patients undergoing colonoscopy in the past often received 
bills from multiple providers, such as colonoscopists, anes­
thesia providers, facilities, and others. Recent changes 
in reimbursement, including incentives and regulations 
related to the 2010 U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, entails that a greater proportion of patients undergoing 
colonoscopy and other procedures will not receive separate 
bills from multiple providers. The payment to the provid­
ers will instead be in a bundled sum paid to an accountable 
organization (referred to in the Patient Protection and Afford­
able Care Act as an accountable care organization). The 
accountable organization subsequently determines how 
the various providers split the bundled payment.
In a bundled payment (or, for some populations, a 
global payment for comprehensive care) environment, the 
accountable organization will wish to reduce expenses as 
much as possible. In general, reductions in expenses will 
result in either improved margins or profits for the services 
provided or less financial loss associated with these ser­
vices. Many factors will play roles in how to reduce these 
expenses, and most of them do not pertain to anesthesia 
care. However, regarding anesthesia provider types and 
various models of providing anesthesia services for NORA 
procedures, the single most important decision point will 
be how to use the lowest-cost provider model that results 
in the fewest expensive complications—in essence, the best 
financial model.
Novel Anesthesia Models for 
Outside the Operating Room
Several examples of NORA models may suggest the range 
of staffing paradigms that may be used to deliver the most 
appropriate level of anesthesia care at the most appropriate 
site. This is not meant to be an exhaustive list, but it reflects 
observations of novel remote anesthesia services that are 
being used in 2013 around the United States in private and 
academic medical centers and ambulatory facilities.
ROVING SEDATION NURSE TEAMS
Large academic medical centers use institutionally trained 
sedation nurses to provide anesthesia services to patients in 
their hospital rooms. These patients vary from hematology 
patients who need bone marrow aspirations to recovering 
trauma patients who need daily pack changes. For the lat­
ter patients, return trips to the operating rooms for rela­
tively short procedures are difficult, time-consuming, and 
expensive. In this highly wired medical center, the sedation 
nurses go to the bedsides with carts that contain computer 
consoles, video equipment, and a full array of airway equip­
ment and routine sedation drugs. The sedation nurses fol­
low standardized sedation protocols and initiate video and 
medical record communications with anesthesiologists 
who provide oversight from a distance. It is very similar 
to the e-ICU concept used throughout the world; the anes­
thesiologists use wireless connections and earphones that 
allow them to perform other tasks while offering advice as 
needed to the sedation nurses.
This institution has successfully used this approach for 
over a year. Given the large volume of patients at the Mayo 
Clinic (average daily census in two hospitals of 620), the 
center has eliminated the need for more than 15 patients 
per week to receive care in its operating rooms. The pro­
jected savings of this approach, using a simple estimated 
savings of $3500 per case and including the expenses of this 
sedation model, is $2 million in the first year of the service.
NURSE ANESTHETISTS AS SUPERVISORS
A large private practice performs 60 gastroenterological 
endoscopic procedures daily. These procedures are grouped 
into a single procedural center, allowing anesthesia and pro­
cedural resources to be consolidated in a high-volume area. 
In this setting, 2 independently practicing nurse anesthe­
tists provide supervision for 12 sedation nurses. These nurse 
anesthetists and the procedural area intake nurses triage all 
patients to ensure they are either healthy or medically com­
plex but undergoing low-risk procedures. They follow triage 
criteria that have been established by an oversight group 
consisting of anesthesiologists, nurses, nurse anesthetists, 
24  •  Novel Staffing Coverage for Anesthesia Outside the Operating Room
209
and gastroenterologists (Box 24-2). Patients falling outside 
the triage criteria are sent to a nearby site where anesthesi­
ologists and nurse anesthetists deliver care. This second site 
also performs all complex endoscopic procedures.
The sedation nurses follow standardized sedation order 
sets. If situations arise, such as patients requiring more 
sedation than allowed in the order sets or patients falling 
outside specified hemodynamic, ventilation, or oxygenation 
parameters, the nurse anesthetists are readily available to 
intervene and rescue the patients from harm as needed. A 
second level of rescue is available from the anesthesiologists 
present in the nearby second site.
NONANESTHESIOLOGIST PHYSICIAN 
OVERSIGHT OF SEDATION NURSES
A large private-practice oncology center has two medical 
oncologists who also are trained intensivists. They are used as 
needed to provide oversight of sedation nurses. These inten­
sivists care for medically complex patients who are sedated 
while undergoing radiation procedures in a remote corner 
of their facility. The sedation nurses have been trained at a 
nearby private medical center and follow triage and sedation 
protocols collaboratively developed by the anesthesiologists 
at that hospital and the intensivists at the center. The inten­
sivists periodically undergo airway training at the hospital 
under the supervision of the anesthesiologists. This approach 
is used because an insufficient number of patients who need 
sedation are seen in the free-standing oncology center to 
make it financially worthwhile for the anesthesiologists to 
provide resources for the sedation service. The application of 
a triage protocol ensures that acutely ill patients or patients 
with issues that might negatively affect their care are trans­
ferred for their radiation procedures to the hospital, where 
anesthesia providers are present.
SEDATION NURSES FOR COMMON 
OPHTHALMOLOGICAL PROCEDURES
One of the most frequently billed anesthesia services in the 
United States involves anesthesia or sedation for common 
ophthalmological procedures, such as cataract extraction. 
As CMS develops and expands bundled payment for these 
procedures, health systems will seek the lowest-cost anes­
thesia services that can provide safe care to the patients 
undergoing these procedures.
One medical center uses an anesthesia model in which 
anesthesiologists or nurse anesthetists provide sufficient 
sedation to cause loss of consciousness for approximately 
2 to 3 minutes while retrobulbar blocks are placed for cata­
ract extraction surgeries.6 Once the patients are awake, ori­
ented, and adequately ventilating, their care is transferred 
to sedation nurses who observe and monitor the patients 
while the procedures are performed, essentially “recover­
ing” them from very short anesthetics during the actual 
procedures. The anesthesia providers are thus freed to pro­
vide other anesthesia services, triage incoming patients, 
dismiss those who have met discharge criteria, and provide 
support to the sedation nurses if needed.
Conclusion
Many novel approaches exist to providing NORA services. 
Many factors play roles in determining the best anesthe­
sia service models to use. Collaborative development of 
standardized anesthesia and triage protocols is essential 
in many environments to ensure the safe care of the right 
patients in the right site. Continuing financial pressures 
will spark more innovation as an increasing number of 
procedures move beyond traditional operating room envi­
ronments. Advances in monitoring, communication, and 
practice technologies will allow innovations in the future 
that are not possible at this time.
References
	1.	 Metzner J, Posner KL, Domino KB. The risk and safety of anesthesia at 
remote locations: the US closed claims analysis. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2009;22(4):502–508.
	2.	 Cram P, Lu X, Kates SL, Singh JA, Li Y, Wolf BR. Total knee arthro­
plasty volume, utilization, and outcomes among Medicare beneficia­
ries, 1991-2010. JAMA. 2012;308(12):1227–1236.
	3.	 Metzner J, Domino KB. Risks of anesthesia or sedation outside the oper­
ating room: the role of the anesthesia provider. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2010;23(4):523–531.
	4.	 CMS Manual System, Pub. 100-07 State Operations, Provider Certifica­
tion, Transmittal 74, December 2, 2011. Interpretive guidelines for hospitals. 
Baltimore, Md: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; 2011.
	5.	 Glance LG. The cost effectiveness of anesthesia workforce models: a 
simulation approach using decision-analysis modeling. Anesth Analg. 
2000;90(3):584–592.
	6.	 Erie AJ, McHugh R, Warner ME, Erie JC. Model of anesthesia care that 
combines anesthesiologists and registered nurses during cataract sur­
gery. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2011;37(3):481–485.
Box 24-2  Potential Triage Criteria in a 
Gastroenterological Endoscopy Center Using 
a Nurse Sedation Model*
Patients with any one of the following characteristics should 
undergo procedures at locations staffed by anesthesia providers:
   
Prior difficulty with sedation or anesthesia
Body mass index >50
Oxygen use at home
Previous head or neck cancer and associated surgery or radiation
Obstructive sleep apnea
High-dose opioid use
American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status IV
*Criteria may be modified based on the unique capabilities or char­
acteristics of the center. Complex endoscopies may require deep 
sedation or general anesthesia and need care given by anesthesia 
providers.
211
Personnel, Privileges, and 
Credentials
	•	 Statement on Granting Privileges to Nonanesthesiologist 
Physicians for Personally Administering or Supervising 
Deep Sedation (2012)
	•	 Statement on Granting Privileges for Administration of 
Moderate Sedation to Practitioners Who Are Not Anesthe­
sia Professionals (2011)
	•	 Advisory on Granting Privileges for Deep Sedation to 
Nonanesthesiologist Sedation Practitioners (2010)
	•	 Guidelines for Ambulatory Anesthesia and Surgery 
(2008)
	•	 Guidelines for Office-Based Anesthesia (2009)
	•	 Statement on Qualifications of Anesthesia Providers in 
the Office-Based Setting (2009)
Definitions and Standards
	•	 Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General 
Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analgesia (2009)
	•	 Distinguishing Monitored Anesthesia Care (“MAC”) from 
Moderate Sedation/Analgesia (Conscious Sedation) (2009)
	•	 Position on Monitored Anesthesia Care (2008)
	•	 Statement on the Interoperability of Medical Devices (2008)
Monitoring and Equipment
	•	 Statement on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing Loca­
tions (2008)
	•	 Statement on Respiratory Monitoring During Endoscopic 
Procedures (2009)
   
APPENDIX
Relevant American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Guidelines
Appendix
212
Statement on Granting Privileges to Nonanesthesiologist Physicians for Person­
ally Administering or Supervising Deep Sedation (2012) is reprinted with 
hjhjhj of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest 
Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
213
Statement on Granting Privileges for Administration of Moderate Sedation to 
Practitioners Who Are Not Anesthesia Professionals (2011) is reprinted 
with hjhjhj of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. 
Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
214
Appendix
215
Appendix
216
Appendix
217
Appendix
218
Appendix
219
Appendix
220
Appendix
221
Appendix
222
Appendix
223
Advisory on Granting Privileges for Deep Sedation to Nonanesthesiologist Seda­
tion Practitioners (2010) is reprinted with hjhjhj of the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, 
IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
224
Appendix
225
Appendix
226
Appendix
227
Appendix
228
Appendix
229
Appendix
230
Appendix
231
Appendix
232
Guidelines for Ambulatory Anesthesia and Surgery (2008) is reprinted with 
hjhjhj of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest 
Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
233
Appendix
234
Guidelines for Office-Based Anesthesia (2009) is reprinted with hjhjhj of 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest Highway, 
Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
235
Appendix
236
Appendix
237
Statement on Qualifications of Anesthesia Providers in the Office-Based Setting 
(2009) is reprinted with hjhjhj of the American Society of Anes­
thesiologists, 520 N. Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
238
Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia Levels and 
Levels of Sedation/Analgesia (2009) is reprinted with hjhjhj of the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest Highway, 
Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
239
Appendix
240
Distinguishing Monitored Analgesia Care (“MAC”) from Moderate Sedation/
Analgesia (Conscious Sedation) (2009) is reprinted with hjhjhj of 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest Highway, 
Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
241
Appendix
242
Position on Monitored Anesthesia Care (2008) is reprinted with hjhjhj of 
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest Highway, 
Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
243
Statement on the Interoperability of Medical Devices (2008) is reprinted with 
hjhjhj of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. Northwest 
Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
244
Statement on Nonoperating Room Anesthetizing Locations (2008) is reprinted 
with hjhjhj of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 520 N. 
Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
Appendix
245
Appendix
246
Statement on Respiratory Monitoring During Endoscopic Procedures (2009) is 
reprinted with hjhjhj of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 
520 N. Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068-2573.
