 
Contents
Abbreviations xv
Contributors xvii
 1. Preoperative assessment 1
Roger H. Y. Ho and David M. H. Lam
Introduction 1
Range of procedures 1
Airway evaluation and planning 1
Pathology-speciﬁc considerations 2
Environmental considerations 4
Evaluation of comorbidities 4
Preoperative risk stratiﬁcation 10
Perioperative management of medications 12
Conclusion 15
 2. Difﬁcult airway 19
Craig Lyons and Ellen P. O’Sullivan
Introduction 19
Airway assessment 19
The airway plan 20
Positioning 20
Preoxygenation 20
Neuromuscular blockade 20
Apnoeic oxygenation 21
Bag mask ventilation 21
Supraglottic airway devices 21
Direct laryngoscopy 21
Videolaryngoscopy 22
Awake tracheal intubation 22
Fibreoptic intubation 22
Awake videolaryngoscopy 24
Awake tracheostomy 24
Retrograde intubation 24
Blind nasal intubation 25
Cricothyroidotomy 25
Intubation for maxillomandibular ﬁxation 25
Tracheal extubation 26
Human factors 27
Conclusion 27
 3. Surgical airway 29
William P. L. Bradley and Gordon A. Chapman
Introduction 29
Anatomy 29
Elective tracheostomy 30
Percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy 30
Surgical tracheostomy 31
Complications of surgical and percutaneous   
tracheostomy 33
Submental tracheal intubation 33
Emergency front of neck airway 34
Use of ultrasound 36
Conversion techniques 37
Retrograde intubation 38
Jet oxygenation 39
Conclusion 40
Acknowledgements 40
 4. Regional anaesthesia 43
Shona Love and Ian Bailes
Introduction 43
The face 43
Anaesthetizing the face 46
The scalp 47
Anaesthetizing the scalp 47
The nasal cavity 47
Anaesthetizing the nasal cavity 48
The mouth 49
Anaesthetizing the mouth 49
The pharynx 50
Anaesthetizing the pharynx 51
The larynx 51
Anaesthetizing the larynx 52
Awake tracheal intubation 52
Complications of regional anaesthesia 53
Conclusion 54
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xii
Contents
 5. Imaging 57
Indu Mitra
Introduction 57
Imaging modalities 57
Trauma imaging 58
Dentition 59
Craniofacial anatomy 60
Craniofacial fractures 60
Infection 63
Tumours 63
Conclusion 64
 6. Sedation 65
James W. D. Mann and Vivian Yuen
Introduction 65
Aims of sedation 65
Advantages of sedation 66
Potential complications of sedation 66
The ideal sedative agent 67
Pharmacology of sedative agents 67
Synergy of agents 70
Conduct of sedation 71
Conduct of surgery 72
Safety and guidelines 72
Preoperative assessment and preparation 73
Monitoring 74
Equipment availability 74
Training and personnel 74
Recovery and discharge 75
Conclusion 75
 7. Hypotensive anaesthesia 77
Kimberley Hodge, Patrick A. Ward, and Michael G. Irwin
Introduction 77
Background 77
Physiology 77
Indications 78
Contraindications 78
Conduct of deliberate hypotensive anaesthesia 79
Pharmacological techniques for hypotensive anaesthesia 79
Non- pharmacological techniques to minimize blood loss 82
Conclusion 82
 8. Dental anaesthesia 83
Jennifer Gosling and John Myatt
Introduction 83
Background and history 83
Preoperative assessment 84
Consent 84
Anaesthesia 86
Postoperative complications and follow- up 89
Sedation 89
Conclusion 90
 9. Aesthetic surgery 93
Corina Lee
Introduction 93
Orofacial aesthetic surgery 93
Preoperative assessment 93
Anaesthesia for orofacial aesthetic procedures 94
Surgical requirements for orofacial aesthetic procedures 96
Postoperative priorities for orofacial aesthetic surgery 97
Considerations for speciﬁc orofacial surgical procedures 97
Considerations for non- surgical facial aesthetic 
procedures 102
Revision surgery 104
Acknowledgements 104
 10. Orthognathic surgery 107
Patrick A. Ward and Michael G. Irwin
Introduction 107
Preoperative assessment, preparation, and planning 107
Preoperative consent and premedication 110
Intraoperative management 110
Tracheal extubation and emergence 117
Postoperative management 118
Speciﬁc orthognathic procedures 121
Conclusion 121
 11. Paediatric surgery 123
Silky Wong and Theresa Wan- Chun Hui
Introduction 123
Preoperative evaluation 123
Premedication 123
Fasting 124
Identiﬁcation of the difﬁcult airway and its management 124
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xiii
Contents
Induction of anaesthesia 125
Tracheal tube selection 125
Fluid management 126
Analgesia 126
Postoperative nausea and vomiting 126
The compromised airway in the postoperative period 126
Oromaxillofacial procedures 127
Craniofacial procedures 128
Orthognathic procedures 129
Anaesthesia for craniofacial and orthognathic procedures 130
Surgery for trauma 131
Minor oromaxillofacial procedures 131
Conclusion 132
 12. Infection 135
Adam R. Duffen and David J. A. Vaughan
Introduction 135
Epidemiology 135
Pathophysiology 135
Microbiology 136
Antimicrobials 137
Antibiotic prophylaxis 138
Clinical assessment 138
Management of the uncomplicated patient 139
Management of the patient with serious complications 139
Tracheal extubation and postoperative management 142
Secondary infections 142
Conclusion 143
 13. Trauma 145
Rebecca Thurairatnam and Fauzia Mir
Introduction 145
Epidemiology and aetiology 145
Classiﬁcation of fractures 145
Associated injuries 147
Emergency airway management 147
Airway guidelines and maxillofacial trauma 149
Anaesthetic management of maxillofacial trauma 150
Conclusion 153
 14. Burns and inhalational injury 155
Caroline A. R. Nicholas and Tim N. Vorster
Introduction 155
Epidemiology 155
The emergency department acute major burn admission 155
Resuscitation 156
Secondary survey 157
Inhalation injury 158
Systemic gaseous toxins 158
Thermal injury to the airway 159
Smoke injury to the lungs 160
Chemical burns 161
Other considerations in patients with airway burns 161
Prognosis in the airway burns patient 162
Critical care therapy 162
Immediate major burn debridement 162
General considerations in burns anaesthesia 162
Burns pharmacology 163
Long- term considerations 164
Conclusion 164
 15. Malignancy 167
Michelle Gerstman, Orla J. Lacey, and Cyrus Kerawala
Introduction 167
Anatomical distribution of malignancy 167
Risk factors for malignancy 167
Types of surgical procedures 167
Treatment options 167
Anaesthetic assessment 169
Fourth National Audit Project 170
Difﬁcult Airway Society 2015 guidelines 170
Awake airway management techniques 170
Oxygenation techniques 172
Airway devices 173
Anaesthesia and perioperative care 173
Tracheal extubation techniques 174
Range of procedures 175
Conclusion 177
 16. Postoperative care and planning 179
Joshua H. Atkins, Christopher H. Rassekh, and Andrew Herlich
Introduction 179
Enhanced Recovery After Surgery 179
Postoperative levels of care and monitoring 180
Anaesthetic considerations 180
Oral hygiene 181
Tissue oedema 181
Cognitive recovery 181
Difﬁcult airway identiﬁcation 181
Analgesia 182
Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome 183
 
 
 
 
 
xiv
Contents
Venous thromboprophylaxis 183
Perioperative nutrition 183
Neurological sequelae 184
Perioperative antimicrobials 184
Procedure- speciﬁc considerations 184
Conclusion 189
 17. Surgical complications 191
Justin P. Curtin and Gene Lee
Introduction 191
Airway management 191
Extubation planning and postoperative airway 
compromise 192
Return to theatre! 193
Bleeding 194
Infection 194
Other perioperative complications 194
Procedure- speciﬁc complications 195
Conclusion 198
 18. Non- technical skills 201
Frances Lui
Introduction 201
Anaesthetic non- technical skills (ANTS) framework 201
Challenges of oromaxillofacial anaesthesia 201
Task management 202
Situation awareness 202
ANTS applied to situation awareness 203
Decision- making 204
ANTS applied to decision- making 204
Teamwork 205
ANTS applied to teamwork 205
Team communication 205
Team performance 206
Crisis resource management and simulation training 206
Cognitive aids 207
Continued path towards improving patient safety 207
Conclusion 207
 19. Orofacial pain 211
Stanley Sau Ching Wong and Chi Wai Cheung
Introduction 211
Assessment for orofacial pain 211
Classiﬁcation 212
Speciﬁc chronic orofacial pain disorders 213
Conclusion 220
Index 225
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations
2D 
two- dimensional
3D 
three- dimensional
ACC 
American College of Cardiology
ACEI 
angiotensin- converting enzyme inhibitor
AFOI 
awake fibreoptic intubation
AHA 
American Heart Association
ANTS 
anaesthetic non- technical skills
ARB 
angiotensin II receptor blocker
ASA 
American Society of Anesthesiologists
ASA- PS 
American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical 
Status
ATLS 
Advanced Trauma Life Support
AVL 
awake videolaryngoscopy
BMI 
body mass index
CABG 
coronary artery bypass grafting
CICO 
can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate
CICV 
can’t intubate, can’t ventilate
CPAP 
continuous positive airway pressure
CPET 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing
CRM 
crisis resource management
CSF 
cerebrospinal fluid
CT 
computed tomography
DAPT 
dual antiplatelet therapy
DAS 
Difficult Airway Society
DC/ TMD 
Diagnostic Criteria for Temporomandibular 
Disorders
DNM 
descending necrotizing mediastinitis
DOAC 
direct oral anticoagulant
EEG 
electroencephalogram
eFONA 
emergency front of neck airway
ERAS 
Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
ESA 
European Society of Anaesthesiology
ESC 
European Society of Cardiology
FiO2 
fraction of inspired oxygen
FONA 
front of neck airway
GCS 
Glasgow Coma Score
HFNO 
high- flow humidified nasal oxygen
IASP 
International Association for the Study of Pain
ICHD 
International Classification of Headache Disorders
ICU 
intensive care unit
IMF 
intermaxillary fixation
INR 
international normalized ratio
LMA 
laryngeal mask airway
MAP 
mean arterial pressure
MICA 
Myocardial Infarction and Cardiac Arrest
MRI 
magnetic resonance imaging
N2O 
nitrous oxide
NAP4 
Fourth National Audit Project
NICE 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
NIHSS 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
NMDA 
N- methyl- d- aspartate
NSAID 
non- steroidal anti- inflammatory drug
NSQIP 
National Surgical Quality Improvement Project
OMFS 
oromaxillofacial surgery/ surgical
OSAS 
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome
PACU 
post- anaesthesia care unit
PBM 
patient blood management
PCC 
prothrombin complex concentrate
PCI 
percutaneous coronary intervention
PEG 
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
PHN 
post- herpetic neuralgia
PIFP 
persistent idiopathic facial pain
PONV 
postoperative nausea and vomiting
RAE 
Ring– Adair– Elwyn
RCRI 
Revised Cardiac Risk Index
SAD 
supraglottic airway device
SMAS 
superficial muscular aponeurotic system
SpO2 
oxygen saturation
SSC 
Surgical Safety Checklist
TBSA 
total body surface area
THRIVE 
transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventilatory 
exchange
TIF 
tracheo- innominate artery fistula
TIVA 
total intravenous anaesthesia
TMJ 
temporomandibular joint
TORS 
transoral robotic surgery
VKA 
vitamin K antagonist
WHO 
World Health Organization
 
Contributors
Joshua H. Atkins, MD, PhD, CPE Associate Professor of Anesthesiology & 
Critical Care, Associate Professor of Otorhinolaryngology: Head and Neck 
Surgery (Secondary), Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Ian Bailes, BMBCh MA (Oxon), FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, Imperial 
College NHS Trust, London, UK
William P. L. Bradley, MBChB, FANZCA, MAICD Adjunct Clinical Associate 
Professor, Monash University, TAS & VIC State Airway Lead, Specialist 
Anaesthetist, Department of Anaesthesia and Perioperative Medicine, The 
Alfred, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Gordon A. Chapman, MBChB, FRCA, FANZCA, MD Consultant Anaesthetist, 
Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, Clinical Senior Lecturer, 
University of Western Australia, Australia
Chi Wai Cheung, MBBS (HK), MD (HKU), FHKCA, FHKAM (Anaesthesiology), 
FHKCA (Pain Med), Dip Pain Mgt (HKCA) Clinical Professor, Department of 
Anaesthesiology, University of Hong Kong; Honorary Consultant, Department 
of Anaesthesiology, Queen Mary Hospital and Grantham Hospital and 
Duchess of Kent Children’s Hospital, Chair of Specialty for Anaesthesiology 
and Adult Intensive Care Services Gleneagles Hospital, Chief of Service 
Department of Anaesthesiology HKU- Shenzhen Hospital, Hong Kong
Justin P. Curtin, FRACDS (OMS), FRCSEd Associate Professor in Oral and 
Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Medicine and Dentistry, James Cook 
University, Australia
Adam R. Duffen, MBBS, BSc, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, University 
Hospitals Bristol and Weston, UK
Michelle Gerstman, MBBS, FANZCA, MD Consultant Anaesthetist, Peter 
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia
Jennifer Gosling, MBBS, BSc, MA, FRCA, FFICM Senior Registrar in 
Anaesthesia, St. Mary’s Hospital Department of Anaesthesia, Imperial 
College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK
Andrew Herlich, DMD, MD, FAAP, FASA, FAAOMS (H) Professor Emeritus, 
Department of Anaesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Roger H. Y. Ho, MBBS, BSc, MRCP, FRCA, FHKCA, FHKAM 
(Anaesthesiology) Associate Consultant, Department of Anaesthesiology, 
Queen Mary Hospital and University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Kimberley Hodge, MBChB, FRCA, PGDip Med Ed Senior Registrar in 
Anaesthesia, St. Mary’s Hospital Department of Anaesthesia, Imperial College 
Healthcare NHS Trust, London, Squadron Leader, Royal Air Force, UK
Theresa Wan- Chun Hui, MBBS, FANZCA, FHKAM Consultant Anaesthetist, 
Department of Anaesthesiology, The Duchess of Kent Children’s Hospital, 
Hong Kong
Michael G. Irwin, MBChB, MD, FRCA, FCAI, FANZCA, FHKAM Daniel CK 
Yu Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong
Cyrus Kerawala, BDS (Hons), FDSRCS (Eng), MBBS (Hons), FRCS, 
FRCS (OMFS) Professor, Consultant Maxillofacial/ Head & Neck Surgery, 
Royal Marsden Foundation Trust, London, UK
Orla J. Lacey, MBChB FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, The Royal Marsden 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
David M. H. Lam, MBChB, FHKCA, FHKAM (Anaesthesiology) Honorary 
Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Corina Lee, MBChB, FRCA, MRCP Consultant Anaesthetist, Chelsea & 
Westminster Hospital, London, UK
Gene Lee, MBBS, FRCA, FANZCA Consultant Anaesthetist, Department of 
Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Royal North Shore Hospital and St 
Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia
Shona Love, BSc (Med Sci), MBChB, MRCS, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, 
Imperial College NHS Trust, London, UK
Frances Lui, MBChB, FHKCA, FHKAM (Anaesthesiology), FANZCA Consultant 
Anaesthetist, Department of Anaesthesiology, Queen Mary Hospital, Honorary 
Clinical Associate Professor, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Craig Lyons, MBBCh, BAO, FCAI Senior Registrar, Department of Anaesthesia 
and Intensive Care Medicine, Galway University Hospitals, Galway, Ireland
James W. D. Mann, MBChB, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, Great Western 
Hospital, Swindon, Wiltshire, UK
Fauzia Mir, MBBS, FRCA, EDICM, PGCert Med Ed Consultant Anaesthetist, 
St George’s Hospital, London, UK
Indu Mitra, MRCS, FRCR Consultant Radiologist, Department of Imaging, 
Chelsea & Westminster Hospital, London, UK
John Myatt, BSc, MBBS, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, Imperial College 
NHS Trust, London, UK
Caroline A. R. Nicholas, BSc (Hons Lon), MB BS, FRCA Consultant 
Anaesthetist, University Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Trust, UK
Ellen P. O’Sullivan, MBBCh, BAO, FRCA, FCAI Professor and Consultant in 
Anaesthesia, Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, St James’s 
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Christopher H. Rassekh, MD Professor of Otorhinolaryngology: Head 
and Neck Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Rebecca Thurairatnam, MBBS, BSc, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, Croydon 
University Hospital, London, UK
David J. A. Vaughan, MBBS, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, Northwick Park 
Hospital, Harrow, UK
Tim N. Vorster, BSc (Hons Lon), MBBS, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist and 
Clinical Director Anaesthetics, Perioperative and Clinical Support Services, 
Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead, UK
Patrick A. Ward, MBChB, BSc, FRCA Consultant Anaesthetist, St John’s 
Hospital, NHS Lothian, Scotland, UK
Silky Wong, MBBS, FHKCA, FHKAM (Anaesthesiology), FANZCA Associate 
Consultant in Anaesthesia, The Duchess of Kent Children’s Hospital, 
Hong Kong
Stanley Sau Ching Wong, MBBS (HK), MD (HKU), FHKCA, FHKAM 
(Anaesthesiology), FANZCA, FHKCA (Pain Med) Clinical Assistant 
Professor, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Vivian Yuen, MD, MBBS, FANZCA, FHKCA, FHKAM Consultant Anaesthetist, 
Queen Mary Hospital, Honorary Assistant Clinical Professor, Department of 
 
1
Preoperative assessment
Roger H. Y. Ho and David M. H. Lam
Introduction
Preoperative assessment for oromaxillofacial surgery (OMFS) can be 
particularly challenging. OMFS encompasses a wide range of proced-
ures, some of which may overlap with ear, nose, and throat surgery; 
head & neck surgery; neurosurgery; and/ or plastic surgery. The an-
aesthetist must have a good understanding of the extent and complex-
ities of the surgery being undertaken in order to make an appropriate 
assessment and formulate an effective plan for anaesthesia and post-
operative care. The setting in which these procedures are undertaken 
may be variable, ranging from the hospital operating theatre to the 
less familiar environment of the outpatient dental clinic, placing em-
phasis on the preoperative assessment in determining the most ap-
propriate pathway. The indications for OMFS procedures frequently 
have anaesthetic implications, where concomitant injuries or associ-
ated syndromes/ diseases must be considered in the anaesthetist’s pre-
operative evaluation— in particular, the potential for difficult airway 
management. As with all shared- airway surgery, sound preoperative 
assessment and planning is essential in ensuring patient safety, while 
optimizing surgical access and operating conditions.
Range of procedures
OMFS encompasses dentoalveolar procedures (such as general den-
tistry and wisdom teeth extraction), intraoral surgery, orthognathic 
surgery, facial cosmetic surgery, major reconstructive surgery with 
implants or local/ distant microvascular free flaps, temporoman-
dibular joint (TMJ) surgery, and craniofacial surgery. The goals of 
surgery can be broadly classified as functional restorative, structural 
support, and aesthetic reconstruction.
Airway evaluation and planning
Preoperative assessment of the airway for OMFS should include 
screening patients for the following:
 • Predictors of difficulty in tracheal intubation (oral or nasal).
 • Predictors of difficulty in ventilation/ rescue oxygenation (via face 
mask or supraglottic airway device).
 • Potential requirement for an awake airway management tech-
nique (and ability of patient to cooperate/ consent for this 
approach).
 • Ease of a front of neck airway.
In the elective setting, a detailed review of previous anaesthetic re-
cords, past medical history, and surgical history should be under-
taken. In addition to routine examination of the airway, which 
includes assessment of mouth opening, dentition, thyromental 
distance, jaw protrusion, and neck mobility, the OMFS airway 
examination often necessitates assessment for nasotracheal 
intubation— screening for potential contraindications, such as 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma or previous cleft palate repair, and risk 
factors for epistaxis, such as altered coagulation or nasal polyps. 
The findings of recent imaging, such as computed tomography or 
magnetic resonance imaging, may provide additional information 
(including the specific location of any lesion and degree of airway 
compression, distortion, or obstruction). Other technologies, in-
cluding virtual airway endoscopy and three- dimensional printed 
models, have also been described in the assessment and planning 
of complex airway management, though are less commonly utilized 
at present. Should the findings of bedside assessments and routine 
investigations remain inconclusive, awake nasendoscopy can often 
provide invaluable information. These assessments and investiga-
tions assist the anaesthetist in formulating an airway management 
strategy, which should comprise a primary airway plan, as well as 
airway rescue plan(s), in accordance with the UK National Audit 
Project 4 (NAP4).1 (Assessment and management of the difficult 
airway is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 2.)
In the emergency setting (e.g. oromaxillofacial trauma or infec-
tion), it is crucial to identify any signs or symptoms indicative of 
impending airway obstruction— stridor, dyspnoea, hoarseness, 
drooling, and/ or lack of tongue protrusion, requiring urgent airway 
intervention. Management of the airway may be further complicated 
by limited mouth opening due to trismus, difficult front of neck ac-
cess due to previous surgery/ radiotherapy, infection, obesity, or the 
presence of a rigid cervical spinal collar, and/ or an uncooperative/ 
combative patient.
A crucial aspect in formulating any airway management strategy 
is the involvement of the multidisciplinary team— prior discussion 
with the surgical team (in advance of anaesthesia) is essential to 
 
 
 
 
Preoperative assessment
2
ensure the respective requirements/ priorities of each team are met. 
The anaesthetist may wish the surgeon to be present at induction of 
anaesthesia if there are concerns that a rescue surgical airway may be 
required. The position of the airway device/ breathing circuit should 
be specifically discussed, so as not to obscure the surgical field or 
prevent assessment of bite occlusion (if required). Where significant 
movement of the head and neck is expected (particularly TMJ sur-
gery), this should be emphasized by the surgical team to the anaes-
thetist, thus ensuring the airway device is secured appropriately to 
prevent accidental tracheal extubation. In some procedures, patency 
of the airway may be compromised postoperatively by bleeding or 
oedema, therefore a plan for tracheal extubation (technique, timing, 
and setting) must be agreed preoperatively (and modified as ne-
cessary). Clearly, if a tracheostomy, intermaxillary fixation device, 
or other significant intervention is planned, the anaesthetist and 
surgeon must have discussed them with each other, and with the 
patient.
Pathology- speciﬁc considerations
Trauma
While the appearance of facial injuries can be distracting, it is crit-
ical to prioritize management of trauma patients according to clin-
ical importance, following a systematic approach (as per Advanced 
Trauma Life Support principles). The goal of the airway assessment 
in the primary survey is to establish any immediate threat to patency, 
identifying any signs and symptoms of potential airway obstruction 
(e.g. tracheal deviation, subcutaneous emphysema, and/ or marked 
soft tissue swelling). Traumatic injuries classically associated with 
airway obstruction include bilateral anterior mandibular fractures 
and the Le Fort III fracture (Fig. 1.1).
Airway management in the trauma setting should always be 
presumed to be difficult. Cervical spine movements are often re-
stricted due to the application of a rigid cervical spine collar and/ 
or manual in- line stabilization. Mouth opening may be restricted by 
pain, muscle spasm, or mechanical obstruction (e.g. a tripod frac-
ture of the zygomatic complex may interfere with movement of the 
coronoid process of the mandible). The patient may be combative/ 
unable to cooperate with an awake tracheal intubation technique, 
and there may be the additional risk of aspiration of blood or broken 
teeth fragments. Having undertaken initial assessment and stabiliza-
tion of the patient, the secondary survey should include an ‘AMPLE’ 
(Allergy, Medication, Past medical history, Last food and drink, 
Event) history, full body examination, and relevant investigations. 
In particular, the mechanism of injury and magnitude of energy 
transfer are important factors in guiding identification and assess-
ment of injuries. Classification of facial fractures as lower, middle, 
and/ or upper third may also be helpful in identifying concomitant 
injuries commonly associated at each level. (Management of the 
oromaxillofacial trauma patient is discussed in detail in Chapter 13.)
Infection
The most common cause of oromaxillofacial infection is impacted 
teeth, and the resulting dental abscess may cause significant facial 
swelling and trismus, affecting airway management (rarer causes of 
infection include tuberculosis, syphilis, and fungal or viral infec-
tion in immunocompromised states). Infection usually begins with 
dental decay and pulpitis, leading to perforation of the bone cortex, 
allowing the infection to spread to the subperiosteal region. In more 
severe cases, infection may spread along the fascial planes into the 
infratemporal fossa, subtemporalis, or even the cervical fascial plane 
(Fig. 1.2), forming a parapharyngeal abscess and even mediastin-
itis. The classic example of this is Ludwig’s angina, in which cellulitis 
extends over the entire floor of mouth, including both the sub-
mandibular and sublingual spaces. Preoperative evaluation of the 
airway reveals difficulty in swallowing secretions and an inability to 
protrude the tongue. Neck and/ or pretracheal fascial involvement 
complicates the option of tracheostomy formation. In addition to 
assessing the extent of local spread, the systemic effects of bacter-
aemia/ sepsis via haematogenous spread must be actively sought and 
promptly managed according to the Surviving Sepsis Campaign.3 
(Management of oromaxillofacial infection is discussed in greater 
detail in Chapter 12.)
Congenital anomalies
Cleft lip and palate are among the most common congenital defects 
requiring surgery. In addition to the primary repair, patients often 
require subsequent procedures for lip aesthetics, closure of residual 
palatal defects, bone grafts, alignment of alveolar and dental defects, 
Le Fort I
Le Fort II
Le Fort III
Fig. 1.1 The Le Fort classiﬁcation of facial fractures.2
 
 
 
 
Pathology-speciﬁc considerations
3
jaw realignment, and correction of nasal deformity. Although cleft 
defects per se do not lead to upper airway obstruction and/ or dif-
ficult airway management, coexisting structural or neuromuscular 
dysfunction may result in either/ both. For example, in Pierre Robin 
sequence, the combination of micrognathia, glossoptosis, and cleft 
palate may cause airway obstruction relieved only by prone posi-
tioning or insertion of a nasopharyngeal airway, and in some cases 
necessitating tracheostomy formation. Crucially, beyond the airway 
examination, the anaesthetist must be aware of the multisystem na-
ture of many of the syndromes associated with cleft anomalies, and 
make appropriate assessment of cardiac, renal, and skeletal systems 
as required (Table 1.1).
Malignancy
Airway management may be complicated by distortion, invasion, 
or compression of tissues by the tumour and/ or progressive airway 
obstruction by the lesion itself. Previous cancer treatments/ surgery 
may also contribute to airway management difficulties (Table 1.2). 
Consideration should be given to the specific risk factors associ-
ated with head and neck cancer, including human papilloma virus, 
smoking, and alcohol use, and their associated comorbidities— in 
particular, chronic obstructive lung disease, ischaemic heart dis-
ease, alcoholic cardiomyopathy, liver cirrhosis, and alcohol depend-
ence. There is a 10% risk of a synchronous primary cancer elsewhere 
within the aerodigestive tract, which should be sought through 
appropriate imaging. Malnutrition is common due to poor appe-
tite, dysphagia, or side effects of chemotherapy and/ or radiation 
mucositis, and dietician input is advocated to optimize nutritional 
support preoperatively in order to minimize the reduced wound 
healing, and increased risk of infection/ other postoperative compli-
cations associated with it. (Management of the oromaxillofacial pa-
tient with malignancy is discussed in detail in Chapter 15.)
Free ﬂap transfer
This surgical technique may be employed to provide tissue for re-
construction. Successful flap perfusion (and surgical outcome) re-
lies upon optimization of perioperative haemodynamics (a relative 
hyperdynamic circulation with high cardiac output and vasodilation 
is desirable), thus preoperative assessment of cardiorespiratory re-
serve is crucial in establishing the appropriateness of the planned 
procedure. Contraindications might include sickle cell disease and 
untreated polycythaemia rubra vera due to their hypercoagulable 
states, and flap survival may be compromised in patients with ac-
tive vasculitis or peripheral vascular disease. Prolonged preoperative 
fasting should be avoided in order to minimize any fluid deficits. 
Buccinator
muscle
Maxillary sinus
Deep lobe of
submandibular
gland
Mylohyoid muscle
Superﬁcial lobe of
submandibular gland
Fig. 1.2 Spread of odontogenic infection through the fascial planes.
Table 1.1 Congenital syndromes associated with cleft lip and palate
Down syndrome
Microstomia and macroglossia
Atlantoaxial subluxation and instability
Congenital cardiac disease
Pierre Robin sequence
Micrognathia
Glossoptosis
Usually easier to intubate with age
Hemifacial microsomia
Hemifacial and mandibular hypoplasia
Cervical spine abnormalities
Eye and ear malformations
Usually more difﬁcult to intubate with age
Treacher Collins syndrome
Micrognathia and maxillary hypoplasia
Choanal atresia
Eye and ear malformations
Usually more difﬁcult to intubate with age
Velocardiofacial syndrome
Microcephaly
Microstomia, ﬂat nasal bridge, 
velopharyngeal incompetence, tracheal 
and laryngeal anomalies
Congenital cardiac disease
Small ears, short stature
Stickler syndrome
Micrognathia and ﬂat face
Eye, ear, and joint abnormalities
Congenital cardiac disease
Klippel– Feil syndrome
Webbed neck and fused cervical vertebrae
Congenital cardiac disease
Short stature
Table 1.2 Sequelae of oromaxillofacial and head and neck cancer 
treatments
Maxillectomy and craniofacial 
resection
Difﬁcult facemask seal
Difﬁcult nasotracheal intubation
TMJ pseudoankylosis
Tongue, ﬂoor of mouth surgery
Trismus
Limited mandibular space
Fixed tongue
Laryngeal surgery
Laryngeal stenosis
Impaired swallowing
Aspiration risk
Neck dissection
Damage to cranial nerves IX, X, XII
Vocal cord palsy
Impaired swallowing
Aspiration risk
Radiotherapy
Limited neck extension
TMJ ankylosis
Osteoradionecrosis of mandible
Carotid artery stenosis
Poor wound healing
 
 
Preoperative assessment
4
(Management of OMFS patients for free flap reconstruction is dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 15.)
Environmental considerations
Minor dental procedures are commonly performed under sedation or 
general anaesthesia in short- stay ambulatory care centres, and some-
times dental clinics. Accessibility to drugs and equipment, availability 
of postoperative recovery facilities, staff numbers, and staff training 
in airway management, resuscitation, and sedation may vary signifi-
cantly between the settings. Appropriate patient selection through 
thorough preoperative assessment is crucial in ensuring patient safety 
in the remote site/ day surgical environment. Patient suitability should 
be based upon assessment of comorbidities and fitness for day sur-
gery, as well as determining the availability of an appropriate escort, 
geographical proximity, and access to emergency services if required 
(as described by the Society of Day Surgery4). The guidelines for the 
management of children referred for dental extraction under general 
anesthesia5 state that sedation or general anaesthesia is best delivered 
in the inpatient setting for patients considered to be of high anaes-
thetic risk, with significant comorbidities or complex dental problems 
(Table 1.3), where high dependency unit/ intensive care is immedi-
ately available or may be arranged in advance. (Dental anaesthesia and 
sedation are covered in greater detail in Chapters 8 and 6, respectively.)
Evaluation of comorbidities
Obesity and obstructive sleep 
apnoea syndrome
Obesity is defined as a body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/ m2; morbid 
obesity ≥35 kg/ m2; and supermorbid obesity ≥50 kg/ m2. There is 
an increasing number of patients with raised BMI presenting for 
OMFS, and the pathophysiological consequences of obesity pose 
significant challenges to the anaesthetist.
Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) arises from peri-
odic partial or complete collapse of the upper airway during sleep, 
resulting in decreased (hypopnoea) or complete cessation (apnoea) 
of airflow. The severity of OSAS is defined by the apnoea– hypopnoea 
index (the number of apnoea or hypopnoea events per hour) 
(Table 1.4).6 These recurrent episodes of hypoxia can lead to signifi-
cant cardiopulmonary morbidity, such as pulmonary hypertension 
and cor pulmonale. Patients often have poor sleep quality due to 
the frequent arousal that occurs during their sleep cycle to restore 
airway patency,7 resulting in behavioural disturbances, such as day-
time hypersomnolence and sexual dysfunction.
Patients with OSAS presenting for surgery are at increased risk 
of perioperative airway, respiratory, and cardiovascular complica-
tions,8 and these risks are further increased if the condition remains 
undiagnosed (and untreated) at the time of surgery.9 Respiratory 
complications (e.g. oxygen desaturation, acute respiratory failure, 
respiratory arrest, and aspiration pneumonia) are the most common, 
as the underlying pathophysiology of OSAS may be exacerbated by 
the depressant effects of anaesthetic medications upon respiratory 
drive, airway protective reflexes, and arousal responses.8 These prob-
lems may be further compounded in patients undergoing major 
OMFS procedures due to significant alterations in airway anatomy 
and postoperative oedema.
Obesity per se is not always associated with difficult tracheal in-
tubation; however, many aspects of airway management may be 
more challenging. Thorough preoperative airway examination 
should be undertaken, seeking features suggestive of difficult airway 
management— in particular, a Mallampati score ≥3, a high Wilson 
score, and increased neck circumference. Often, a standard asleep 
tracheal intubation is both practical and safe (especially following 
the advent of videolaryngoscopy); however, a robust strategy for 
airway management must always be in place prior to induction of 
anaesthesia.
Obese patients are more prone to both restrictive and ob-
structive respiratory insufficiency— decreased chest wall and lung 
compliance results in a restrictive defect, while increased adipose 
tissue within the pharyngeal walls predisposes to airway collapse 
during normal breathing and contributes to the development of 
OSAS. Obese patients should therefore be routinely screened for 
OSAS preoperatively— including identification of any risk factors 
(Box 1.1),10 thorough physical examination, use of the STOP- BANG 
questionnaire (Table 1.5),8 and appropriate investigations such as 
electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, pulmonary function tests,11 
and polysomnography.12 Abnormal spirometry is associated with 
increased postoperative complications.13 The STOP- BANG ques-
tionnaire is currently the most sensitive, specific, and best- validated 
screening questionnaire for OSAS. A score of 0– 2 indicates ‘low risk’, 
3– 4 indicates ‘intermediate risk’, and a score of ≥5 indicates ‘high 
Table 1.3 Conditions for dental extraction in the inpatient 
(hospital) setting
High anaesthetic 
risk
Anatomically or functionally abnormal airway
Signiﬁcant learning disabilities or behavioural abnormalities
Severe anxiety
Congenital syndromes associated with increased 
anaesthetic risk
History of adverse reaction to anaesthetic agents
History of complications occurring under general 
anaesthesia
Family history of signiﬁcant problems occurring under 
general anaesthesia
Signiﬁcant 
comorbidities
Severe or poorly controlled asthma
Symptomatic cardiac disease, requiring treatment
Coagulopathy, anticoagulant therapy, or antiplatelet 
therapy
Impaired renal or hepatic function
Unstable metabolic or endocrine disorders
Signiﬁcant neurological or neuromuscular disorders
Active systemic infection
Haemoglobinopathies
Abnormal BMI (<18.5 kg/ m2 or >30 kg/ m2)
Table 1.4 Classiﬁcation of the severity of OSAS according to the 
American Academy of Sleeping Medicine Task Force
Apnoea– hypopnoea index
Severity classiﬁcation
<5
Normal
5– 15
Mild
15– 30
Moderate
>30
Severe
Sleep-related breathing disorders in adults: recommendations for syndrome deﬁnition 
and measurement techniques in clinical research. The Report of an American Academy 
of Sleep Medicine Task Force. Sleep. 1999;22(5):667–89.
 
 
 
Evaluation of comorbidities
5
risk’ for OSAS. Patients who have an intermediate- to- high risk score 
are at greater risk of perioperative complications14 and referral to 
a sleep specialist for formal evaluation and optimization is recom-
mended. Strategies that may be considered include weight loss, the 
use of mandibular advancement devices, and non- invasive positive 
pressure ventilation.6 Utilization of continuous positive airway pres-
sure/ bi- level positive airway pressure devices may reduce the inci-
dence of perioperative hypoxic events in obese patients, regardless 
of whether OSAS has been formally diagnosed.11
Early preoperative identification of OSAS allows initiation of 
non- invasive ventilation therapy (as indicated) prior to surgery, re-
ducing the overall risk of perioperative complications. Prompt diag-
nosis also enables the appropriate preoperative planning to occur, 
influencing the conduct of all aspects of anaesthetic care, including 
the choice of anaesthetic medications, airway management, and 
nature of the postoperative care facility. Many patients with OSAS 
will also suffer from concomitant comorbidities that should be opti-
mized preoperatively.
Obesity is associated with cardiovascular comorbidities such as 
hypertension, ischaemic heart disease, and arrhythmias. Patients 
with these conditions should be managed in accordance with 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/ European Society 
of Anaesthesiology (ESA) guidelines11 or American College of 
Cardiology (ACC)/ American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines15 
to achieve satisfactory control prior to any elective surgery.
Obesity is an independent risk factor for perioperative renal 
dysfunction,16 and although there is no evidence that any par-
ticular preoperative optimization strategy is effective in minim-
izing postoperative renal impairment, general protective strategies 
such as correcting preoperative anaemia, avoiding nephrotoxic 
medications, and maintaining adequate volume status should be 
employed.17
Obesity is also commonly associated with metabolic dis-
orders such as diabetes, hyperlipidaemia, and fatty liver disease. 
Perioperative hyperglycaemia is associated with increased mor-
bidity and mortality in patients undergoing non- cardiac surgery.18 
The 2018 ESA guidelines recommend that laboratory testing to 
screen for diabetes should be carried out in obese patients prior to 
elective non- cardiac surgery (if the condition has not already been 
diagnosed).11 Glycaemic control should be optimized, with elective 
surgery delayed in order to achieve this.19
Obesity is also associated with anaemia, and deficiencies in 
various micronutrients such as vitamin D, ascorbic acid, and beta- 
carotene.20 These deficits should be identified during preoperative 
assessment and corrected before elective surgery is undertaken (an-
aemia is discussed in detail later in this chapter).
Patients with OSAS should have their condition thoroughly re-
viewed at preassessment, and, if compliant with existing therapy, 
asymptomatic, and without significant cardiopulmonary sequelae, 
can be considered appropriate to proceed with surgery as planned 
without further investigation and/ or treatment. The non- invasive 
ventilation device used by the patient should be brought into hos-
pital on admission and its use continued throughout the periopera-
tive period,11 unless specifically contraindicated (e.g. if there are 
surgical concerns following craniofacial surgery). However, pa-
tients who have poorly controlled OSAS (or who have developed 
secondary cardiopulmonary complications) should be referred 
for further assessment and optimization before elective surgery. 
In semi- elective/ expedited surgery (e.g. cancer surgery), the deci-
sion to defer surgery for further investigation and/ or treatment for 
OSAS should take an individualized approach, taking into consid-
eration the urgency and risk of surgery, the severity of OSAS and 
other comorbidities, and the relative accessibility of proposed in-
vestigations/ treatments. In urgent or emergency surgery, where 
preoperative optimization may be precluded, patients considered 
to be at high risk of OSAS should be presumed to have the condition 
and managed as such, with measures taken to minimize periopera-
tive complications, including postoperative care in an appropriately 
staffed and monitored facility.
OSAS is not an absolute contraindication for day surgery, al-
though patient selection is key— taking into consideration the 
extent of planned surgery, severity of OSAS, comorbidities, anaes-
thetic technique, postoperative analgesic requirements, and ne-
cessity for advanced postoperative monitoring and non- invasive 
ventilation.
Coronary artery disease and revascularization
Coronary artery disease is a risk factor for perioperative major adverse 
cardiovascular events.15 For elective surgery, perioperative cardiac 
assessment should proceed according to the stepwise approaches de-
scribed in the ‘ESC/ ESA guidelines on non- cardiac surgery: cardiovas-
cular assessment and management’11 or the ‘ACC/ AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients 
undergoing non- 
Table 1.5 STOP- BANG questionnaire, utilized as a screening tool 
for OSAS
Snoring: do you snore loudly (louder than talking or loud enough 
to be heard through closed doors)?
Yes/ No
Tired: do you often feel tired, fatigued, or sleepy during the daytime?
Yes/ No
Observed: has anyone observed you stopping breathing during 
your sleep?
Yes/ No
Blood Pressure: do you have high blood pressure or are you on 
treatment for high blood pressure?
Yes/ No
BMI: is your body mass index greater than 35 kg/ m2?
Yes/ No
Age: are you over 50 years old?
Yes/ No
Neck circumference: is your neck circumference greater than 
40 cm (16 inches)?
Yes/ No
Gender: are you male?
Yes/ No
Hall A. Sleep physiology and the perioperative care of patients with sleep disorders. BJA 
Education. 2014;15(4):167–72.
Box 1.1 Predisposing conditions for obstructive sleep apnoea
• Obesity
• Age 40–70 yr
• Male gender
• Excess alcohol intake
• Smoking
• Pregnancy
• Low Physical activity
• Unemployment
• Neck circumference >40 cm
• Surgical patient
• Tonsillar and adenoidal hypertrophy
• Craniofacial abnormalities (e.g. Pierre Robin, Down’s syndrome)
• Neuromuscular disease
Source: Martinez G, Faber P. Obstructive Sleep apnoea. Continuing Education in 
Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain. 2011; 11(1): 5–8.
 
Preoperative assessment
6
a low combined clinical and surgical risk (<1% risk of a major adverse 
cardiovascular event) can safely proceed to surgery without additional 
testing. Many OMFS procedures are considered to be of low surgical 
risk (e.g. superficial oral and periodontal surgery); however, the pres-
ence of ischaemic heart disease alone may elevate the overall risk of 
major adverse cardiovascular events to ≥1%.21 In such cases, assessment 
of patients’ functional capacity is essential, and pharmacological stress 
testing (and subsequent coronary revascularization) may be indicated 
(Figs 1.3 and 1.4). Routine preoperative coronary angiography or 
prophylactic revascularization is not recommended to exclusively re-
duce perioperative cardiac events22— an approach supported by the 
recent Coronary- Artery Revascularisation Prophylaxis (CARP) trial, 
Patient scheduled for surgery with
known or risk factors for CAD*
(Step 1)
Clinical risk stratiﬁcation
and proceed to surgery
Evaluate and treat
according to GDMT†
*See Sections 2.2, 2.4, and 2.5 in
the full-text CPG for
recommendations for patients
with symptomatic HP, VHD, or
arrhythmias.
†See UA/NSTEMI and STEMI
CPGs (Table 2).
Emergency
Yes
Estimated perioperative risk of MACE
based on combined clinical/surgical risk
(Step 3)
Low risk (<1%)
(Step 4)
Elevated risk
(Step 5)
Moderate or greater
(≥4 METs) functional
capacity
No further
testing
(Class III: NB)
No or
unknown
Proceed to
surgery
Excellent
(>10 METs)
No further
testing
(Class Ila)
Proceed to
surgery
Moderate/Good
(≥4–10 METs)
No further
testing
(Class Ilb)
Pharmacologic
stress testing
(Class Ila)
Yes
If
normal
No
If
abnormal
Coronary
revascularization
according to
existing CPGs
(Class I)
Proceed to surgery
according to GDMT OR
alternate strategies
(noninvasive treatment,
palliation)
(Step 7)
Poor OR unknown
functional capacity
(<4 METs):
Will further testing impact
decision making OR
perioperative care?
(Step 6)
Yes
No
No
ACS†
(Step 2)
Fig. 1.3 Step- wise approach to assessment of patients with pre- existing coronary artery disease (CAD) undergoing surgery.15 ACS, acute coronary 
syndrome; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CPG, clinical practice guideline; DASI, Duke Activity Status Index; GDMT, guideline- directed 
medical therapy; HF, heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiac event; MET, metabolic equivalent; NB, no beneﬁt; NSQIP, National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Program; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; RCRI, Revised Cardiac Risk Index; STEMI, ST- elevation myocardial infarction; UA/ 
NSTEMI, unstable angina/ non- ST- elevation myocardial infarction; VHD, valvular heart disease.
Reproduced with permissions from Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA, Beckman JA, Bozkurt B, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular 
evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2014;130(24):e278–333.
Evaluation of comorbidities
7
Urgent surgery
No
One of active or unstable
cardiac conditions (table 9)
Determine the risk of the
surgical procedure (table 3)
Intermediate or high
Consider the functional
capacity of the patient
In patients with a poor functional 
capacity consider the risk of 
the surgical procedure
No
Yes
Low
>4 METs
Intermediate
risk surgery
High-risk
surgery
Cardiac risk factors (table 4)
Consider non-invasive testing. Non-
invasive testing can also be considered
prior to any surgical procedure for patient
counselling, change of peri-operative
management in relation to type of
surgery and anaesthesia technique.
Interpretation of non-invasive
stress test results
Balloon angioplasty:
Surgery can be performed
>2 weeks after intervention
with continuation
of aspirin treatment
Bare-metal stent:
Surgery can be performed
>4 weeks after intervention.
Dual antiplatelet therapy
should be continued for
at least 4 weeks.
Surgery
aTreatment should be initiated optimally between 30 days and at least 2 days before surgery and should be continued postoperatively aiming at target resting 
heart rate of 60–70 beats per minute and systolic blood pressure >100 mmHg.
bFor strategy of anaesthesia and perioperative monitoring see appropriate sections.
ACEI =  angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; CABG = coronary artery bypass graft; DES = drug-eluting stent; ECG = electrocardiogram; 
IHD = ischaemic heart disease; MET = metabolic equivalent.
Surgery can be performed
within 12 months after
intervention for old-generation
DES and within 6 months for
new-generation DES.
CABG
Continuation or discontinuation of aspirin in patients previously treated
with aspirin may be considered in the peri-operative period, and should be
based on an individual decision that depends on the peri-operative bleeding
risk weighed against the risk of thrombotic complications (see also Table 8).
≤2
No/mild/
moderate
stress-induced
ischaemia
An individualized peri-operative management is recommended considering
the potential beneﬁt of the proposed surgical procedure compared with the
predicted adverse outcome, and the effect of medical therapy and/or
coronary revascularization.
In addition to suggestions above:
Rest echocardiography and biomarkers may be considered for evaluation of LV
function and obtaining prognostic information for peri-operative and late
cardiac events
In addition to suggestions above:
In patients with one or more clinical risk factors, non-invasive stress testing
may be considered.
The consultant can identify risk factors and provide recommendations on
lifestyle and medical therapy, according to the ESC Guidelines.
In patients with one or more clinical risk factors, preoperative baseline
ECG may be considered to monitor changes during the peri-operative
period.
In patients with known IHD or myocardial ischaemia, initiation of a titrated
low-dose beta-blocker regimen may be considered before surgery  .
In patients with heart failure and systolic dysfunction, ACEI should be
considered before surgery.
In patients undergoing vascular surgery, initiation of statin therapy should
be considered.
Patient or surgical speciﬁc factors dictate the strategy, and do not allow further
cardiac testing or treatment. The consultant provides recommendations on
peri-operative medical management, surveillance for cardiac events and
continuation of chronic cardiovascular medical therapy.
Treatment options should be discussed in a multidisciplinary team, involving all
peri-operative care physicians as interventions might have implication on
anaesthesiological and surgical care. For instance in the presence of unstable
angina, depending on the outcome of this discussion, patients can proceed for
coronary artery intervention, with the initiation of dual-anti platelet therapy if
the index surgical procedure can be delayed, or directly for operation if delay
is impossible with optimal medical therapy.
Extensive
stress-induced
ischaemia
≤4 METs
≥3
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
Yes
Fig. 1.4 Assessment and treatment strategies in the management of patients with cardiac risk factors undergoing surgery.11
Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, Anker S, Botker HE, Hert SD, et al. 2014 ESC/ESA Guidelines on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management: The Joint Task 
Force on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Society of Anaesthesiology (ESA). Eur 
Heart J. 2014;35(35):2383–431. 2014;35(35):2383–431
Preoperative assessment
8
which showed no difference in perioperative or long- term cardiac 
outcomes with preoperative prophylactic coronary revascularization, 
even in the setting of high- risk surgery.23
If revascularization is indicated, the two principal options are per-
cutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and coronary artery by-
pass grafting (CABG). The choice of technique is beyond the scope 
of this chapter, but is dependent upon various factors, including the 
extent of the coronary artery disease. Following satisfactory CABG 
revascularization, the risk of subsequent perioperative myocardial is-
chaemia may be considered relatively low, but it is often recommended 
to postpone elective non- cardiac surgery for at least 3 months.24 The re-
commendations regarding perioperative risk and timing of surgery fol-
lowing PCI varies according to the particular intervention undertaken 
(Table 1.6)— for example, if surgery is time sensitive (required within 
weeks), then PCI with a bare- metal stent may be more appropriate 
than a drug- eluting stent to avoid the greater period of anticoagulation 
required for the latter (discussed in detail later in the chapter).
In the elective setting, patients with stable ischaemic heart disease 
(who do not fulfil the criteria for coronary revascularization) should 
still be referred to a cardiologist for optimization of medical therapy 
and to ensure long- term follow- up. In urgent or emergency surgery, 
where there is limited time for evaluation and/ or optimization prior 
to surgery, all members of the multidisciplinary team involved in the 
patient’s care (anaesthetist, surgeon, cardiologist, intensivist, and/ or 
haematologist), as well as the patient and their family, should discuss 
together the increased perioperative cardiovascular risk and the ap-
propriateness of surgery. Specific measures to mitigate risk may be 
considered, such as performing the surgery at a centre where emer-
gency coronary revascularization is available, and upgrading the 
level of perioperative haemodynamic monitoring and postoperative 
care facility. In extreme circumstances, where revascularization is 
absolutely necessary and surgery cannot be postponed, CABG may 
be undertaken as part of the proposed surgery.15 In the case of a pa-
tient with acute coronary syndrome presenting for elective surgery, 
priority should be given to the evaluation and management of acute 
coronary syndrome according to established guidelines, providing 
that the condition requiring elective surgery is not life- threatening.
Cardiac murmurs
Patients who present to preoperative assessment with a heart 
murmur may be classified into three subgroups:
 • One or more isolated valvular lesions (involving aortic/ pul-
monary/ tricuspid/ mitral valves).
 • Complex congenital heart disease with a combination of intra- or 
extracardiac defects.
 • A flow murmur, where the cardiovascular system is otherwise 
physiologically and anatomically normal.
Patients with known or suspected valvular heart disease should be 
evaluated by formal echocardiography prior to elective OMFS, in 
order to identify the site(s) and severity of lesion(s), and to assess for 
any complications (unless echocardiography has been performed 
within 1 year and there has been no change in the patient’s clinical 
status).15 If a patient has a valvular lesion of sufficient severity (based 
on clinical and/ or echocardiographic criteria) to warrant interven-
tion (replacement or repair), then this should be undertaken before 
proceeding to any elective OMFS procedure of intermediate to high 
risk.15 However, if a valvular lesion is present but is of insufficient 
severity to warrant valvular intervention, elective surgery may still 
proceed, but consideration should be given to the use of invasive 
haemodynamic monitoring and postoperative intensive care for 
ongoing monitoring and/ or organ support.15 For patients with un-
corrected valvular lesions who require urgent or emergency sur-
gery, where there is limited time for evaluation and optimization, 
surgery may proceed providing that there is multidisciplinary team 
involvement in the patient’s care, and the patient and their family 
are aware of the increased perioperative cardiovascular risk; the type 
and severity of the valvular lesion is known; the chosen anaesthetic 
approach is appropriate for the existing valvular lesion; and the ap-
propriate level of perioperative cardiovascular monitoring and sup-
port is available.
Patients with corrected valvular lesions which are functioning 
well may be regarded as physiologically normal, and hence do not 
carry an increased cardiovascular risk during OMFS procedures un-
less there are other risk factors present. These patients are normally 
under regular review by a cardiologist and, as such, any subsequent 
deterioration in valvular or cardiac function will usually be detected 
early. Patients with prosthetic metallic valves will require an appro-
priate perioperative anticoagulation bridging regimen.
Patients with a history of complex congenital heart disease are 
generally considered to have an increased perioperative cardiovas-
cular risk, but the precise degree of risk is highly variable because 
Table 1.6 Recommendations from the 2014 ACC/ AHA guidelines and the 2014 ESC/ ESA guidelines regarding coronary revascularization 
and the timing of surgery following different revascularization modalities
ACC/ AHA guidance13
ESC/ ESA guidance9
Routine preoperative coronary angiography or 
revascularization prior to elective non- cardiac surgery
Not recommended unless revascularization is 
otherwise indicated according to existing guidance 
for stable coronary artery disease
Not recommended unless revascularization 
is otherwise indicated according to existing 
guidance for stable coronary artery disease
Recommended duration that elective surgery should be 
delayed following balloon angioplasty
14 days
14 days
Recommended duration that elective surgery should be 
delayed following bare- metal stent insertion
30 days
Minimum of 30 days, but ideally 3 months
Recommended duration that elective surgery should be 
delayed following drug- eluting stent (DES) insertion
6 months for newer- generation DESs
12 months for conventional DESs
6 months for newer- generation DESs
12 months for conventional DESs
Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, Anker S, Botker HE, Hert SD, et al. 2014 ESC/ESA Guidelines on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management: The Joint Task 
Force on non-cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Society of Anaesthesiology (ESA). Eur 
Heart J. 2014;35(35):2383–431
Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA, Beckman JA, Bozkurt B, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients 
undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130(24):e278–333.
 
Evaluation of comorbidities
9
it is dependent upon the nature of the pre- existing cardiac condi-
tion itself, the extent of previous surgical corrections, the presence 
of associated complications (e.g. heart failure, pulmonary hyperten-
sion, and dysrhythmias), the proposed surgical procedure, and the 
urgency of surgery. The ESC/ ESA guideline11 and the 2014 ACC/ 
AHA guideline15 both recommend that preoperative evaluation and 
any subsequent elective non- cardiac surgery should be carried out 
by an expert multidisciplinary team at a specialist centre. In the case 
of urgent or emergency procedures where there is minimal time for 
evaluation and/ or optimization prior to surgery, all clinicians in-
volved in patient care and the patient/ family should be made aware 
of the increased perioperative risk. If it is not practically possible 
for surgery to be performed at a specialist centre due to the urgency 
of the condition, expert advice should be sought from an affiliated 
specialist centre regarding the most appropriate perioperative opti-
mization strategies.
Patients with a physiological flow murmur only are regarded as 
physiologically normal and do not carry an increased cardiovas-
cular risk during OMFS procedures unless there are other risk fac-
tors present. The difficulty lies in determining if the murmur is, in 
fact, merely a functional flow murmur or if there is a pathological 
element to it. If other concerns are also identified during the pre-
operative assessment, then appropriate consideration should be 
given to further investigation of the murmur.
Arterial hypertension
Uncontrolled arterial hypertension is one of the most common 
reasons for deferring elective surgery.
Indeed, there is an association between hypertension and adverse 
perioperative cardiovascular complications, but only when the se-
verity of arterial hypertension is grade 3 or above (Table 1.7).25,26 
As such, the potential benefit of achieving improved blood pressure 
control in order to minimize cardiovascular complications has to 
be balanced against the considerable socioeconomic cost, psycho-
logical burden upon patients and their families, and the risk of 
disease progression associated with unnecessary postponement of 
operations.
The Association of Anaesthetists has published guidelines re-
garding the management of arterial hypertension in patients sched-
uled for elective non- cardiac surgery. Firstly, any abnormal blood 
pressure readings should be confirmed by multiple readings, with 
the use of ambulatory or home blood pressure monitoring if neces-
sary.27 Grade 2 hypertension or below should be managed according 
to established guidelines for the treatment of hypertension (e.g. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines), but 
surgery may proceed as planned and regular antihypertensive medi-
cations continued through the perioperative period. However, if the 
systolic blood pressure is ≥180 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure 
≥110 mmHg (i.e. at least grade 3 hypertension), the patient should 
be referred for further investigation and treatment prior to surgery 
(Fig. 1.5).28 In the case of urgent or emergency operations where 
there is limited opportunity for preoperative optimization, all those 
who are involved in the patient’s care, as well as the patients and their 
families, should be made aware of the increased perioperative risk. 
Specific measures to mitigate the risk should be considered, such as 
employing invasive haemodynamic monitoring, and providing an 
enhanced level of postoperative care.
Anaemia
Anaemia is defined by the World Health Organization as a haemo-
globin level of <13 g/ dL for males and <12 g/ dL for females. 
Preoperative anaemia has been shown to be associated with in-
creased morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing major 
non- cardiac surgery, as well as an increased risk of allogeneic 
blood transfusion perioperatively, which itself is associated with 
significant morbidity.29 This has led to the development of various 
perioperative blood conservation strategies and the concept of pa-
tient blood management (PBM). PBM involves a patient- centred, 
multidisciplinary, multimodal, and evidence- based approach to the 
management of perioperative anaemia. The primary aim of PBM 
is to avoid unnecessary blood transfusion thereby minimizing the 
associated morbidity, improving patient outcome, and minim-
izing resource utilization. This strategy is supported by the World 
Table 1.7 Classiﬁcation of blood pressure and grade 
of hypertension
Category
Systolic 
blood 
pressure 
(mmHg)
Diastolic 
blood 
pressure 
(mmHg)
Optimal
<120
and
<80
Normal
120– 129
and/ or
80– 84
High normal
130– 139
and/ or
85– 89
Grade 1 hypertension
140– 159
and/ or
90– 99
Grade 2 hypertension
160– 179
and/ or
100– 109
Grade 3 hypertension
≥180
and/ or
≥110
Isolated systolic hypertension
≥140
and
<90
Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, Agabiti Rosei E, Azizi M, Burnier M, et al. 2018 
ESC/ESH Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. Eur Heart J. 
2018;39(33):3021–104.
Surgeon receives referral
Request measurement
from GP
Lowest SBP <160 mmHg AND
the lowest DBP <100 mmHg?
Measures BP up to 3
times
Lowest SBP <180 mmHg AND
the lowest DBP <110 mmHg?
Documented
SBP <160 mmHg AND
DBP <100 mmHg
in past year?
No
No
No
Refer back to GP*
Proceed*
Proceed
Yes
Yes
Yes
Fig. 1.5 Stepwise approach to blood pressure assessment in patients 
referred for elective surgery.28 *The GP should be informed of blood 
pressure readings in excess of 140 mmHg systolic or 90 mmHg diastolic, 
so that the diagnosis of hypertension can be refuted or conﬁrmed and 
investigated and treated as necessary. DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, 
systolic blood pressure.
Reproduced with permissions from Hartle A, McCormack T, Carlisle J, Anderson S, 
Pichel A, Beckett N, et al. The measurement of adult blood pressure and management 
of hypertension before elective surgery: Joint Guidelines from the Association of 
Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland and the British Hypertension Society. 
Anaesthesia. 2016;71(3):326-37.
Preoperative assessment
10
Health Organization and many of its principles have been endorsed 
and adopted internationally, including by the European Society of 
Anaesthesiology, the National Blood Transfusion Committee in the 
UK, the National Blood Authority in Australia, and the American 
Association of Blood Banks in the US. Central to the concept of 
PBM are the so- called three pillars of PBM (Table 1.8):
 • Detection and management of anaemia to optimize red cell mass.
 • Minimization of blood loss.
 • Managing and optimizing patients’ tolerance to anaemia.30
Each pillar comprises preoperative, intraoperative, and postopera-
tive components. Each pillar should be considered in turn during the 
preoperative assessment, with appropriate involvement of the multi-
disciplinary team (surgeon, anaesthetist, haematologist, and other 
relevant clinicians).
The first pillar of PBM in the preoperative phase includes all the 
strategies to detect and manage pre- existing anaemia, such that red 
cell mass is optimized at the time of surgery. Patients scheduled 
for major elective surgery (with an estimated blood loss of ≥500 
mL)31 should undergo screening tests for anaemia 4– 6 weeks before 
surgery.30 Any underlying cause should be identified and treated 
accordingly. Iron deficiency remains the most common cause of an-
aemia worldwide and patients with iron deficiency anaemia should 
be treated with oral iron therapy in the first instance. If the patient 
has failed oral iron therapy (insufficient response to treatment or 
intolerance), or if surgery is planned in <6 weeks, intravenous iron 
therapy is recommended as an alternative (as 3 months are required 
to replenish body iron stores fully). Other nutritional deficiencies 
should be treated with haematinics. The use of erythropoietin- 
stimulating agents may be considered if nutritional deficiencies 
have been corrected or excluded30— the 2018 ESA guidelines sug-
gest that these agents may be used in conjunction with conventional 
iron therapy to accelerate red cell mass production.12 Blood tests 
should be rechecked following a course of appropriate treatment.
The second pillar of PBM includes strategies to minimize bleeding 
and blood loss. In the preoperative phase, this should include a com-
prehensive review of the patient’s medical background, drug history, 
laboratory results, and physical examination findings in order to iden-
tify conditions which predispose to bleeding and coagulopathy. These 
conditions (e.g. congenital bleeding disorders) should be corrected 
and optimized where possible. Patients who are taking anticoagulant 
medications should undergo an assessment of the thromboembolic 
risk associated with cessation of anticoagulant therapy versus the risk 
of perioperative bleeding associated with continued use. In some cases, 
a perioperative bridging regimen will be indicated. The proposed sur-
gical procedure and technique should be carefully planned in advance 
by the surgical team with consideration to the risk of bleeding so that 
iatrogenic blood loss due to the procedure itself is minimized.
The third pillar of PBM includes strategies to manage and op-
timize the patient’s tolerance to anaemia. This refers to the ability 
of the patient’s cardiopulmonary reserve to compensate for a de-
crease in oxygen- carrying capacity via an increase in cardiac output. 
Hence, it is important to assess the functional reserve of the cardio-
pulmonary system during the preoperative assessment in accord-
ance with the approaches outlined in the 2014 ESC/ ESA guideline11 
and 2014 ACC/ AHA guideline.15
Every attempt should be made to correct anaemia to normal levels 
by implementing PBM principles prior to proceeding with elective 
surgery. Some of these principles may still be applicable for patients 
who require urgent or emergency surgery, though it may still be ne-
cessary to proceed despite suboptimal preoperative evaluation and 
optimization.
Preoperative risk stratiﬁcation
Although low- risk procedures account for a significant propor-
tion of OMFS caseload, in- hospital mortality has been reported to 
be around 3% for patients undergoing major head and neck oper-
ations within NHS England, while the overall mortality is around 
1% for all maxillofacial and head and neck procedures in the UK. It 
is therefore important to identify patients at increased risk of peri-
operative morbidity and mortality to allow shared decision- making, 
informed consent, preoperative optimization, and modification of 
surgical pathways as required. While various risk stratification tools 
are available, the accuracy of risk prediction remains uncertain be-
cause OMFS accounted for only a small proportion of the surgical 
procedures included in the databases used during prediction tool 
development, and consequently there is a paucity of evidence sup-
porting their validity in this particular field.
Prediction of morbidity and mortality
American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status  
(ASA- PS) score
The ASA- PS classification system was first developed in 1941 as a 
statistical tool for retrospective analysis of hospital records and was 
Table 1.8 The three pillars of PBM: preoperative components
Pillar 1: detection and management of anaemia
Pillar 2: minimization of bleeding and blood loss
Pillar 3: management of anaemia and 
optimization of tolerance
Aim for assessment of anaemia 4– 6 weeks before 
surgery
Identify and manage bleeding risk (past medical 
and family history)
Compare estimated blood loss with patient- speciﬁc 
tolerable blood loss
Identify, evaluate, and treat anaemia
Review medications (antiplatelets, anticoagulants)
Assess and optimize patient’s physiological reserve, 
e.g. pulmonary and cardiac function
Treat absolute or functional iron deﬁciency with 
oral or intravenous iron
Minimize iatrogenic blood loss
Formulate patient- speciﬁc management plan using 
appropriate blood conservation modalities
Consider erythropoiesis stimulating agents if 
nutritional anaemia is excluded/ treated
Procedure planning and rehearsal
Refer for further evaluation as necessary
Au TH, Castillo S, Morrow L, Malesker M. Obstructive sleep apnea and continuous positive airway pressure: A primer for pharmacists2015. 30–3.
 
 
 
 
Preoperative risk stratiﬁcation
11
updated in 2014 to include BMI, alcohol intake, and smoking. An 
ASA class is assigned based upon the severity of systemic disease, 
if any, and the likelihood of survival without an operation being 
undertaken. The ASA- PS is widely adopted across many specialties, 
is simple to perform, and is validated for its association with peri-
operative morbidity and mortality. However, the risk specific to the 
planned surgical procedure is not taken into account. The ASA- PS is 
also reported to have poor inter- rater reliability, even among anaes-
thetists, due to the subjective nature of assessment.
Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the 
enUmeration of Mortality and Morbidity (POSSUM)
POSSUM was developed by Copeland et al. in 1991 from pa-
tients undergoing both elective and emergency gastrointestinal, 
hepatobiliary, urological, and vascular surgery. It uses 12 physio-
logical and six surgical variables for the calculation of 30- day mor-
tality. Portsmouth- POSSUM (P- POSSUM) is a newer model that 
requires the same input variables as POSSUM, but uses alterna-
tive equations for risk calculation. Both POSSUM and P- POSSUM 
are well validated in other surgical specialties; however, patients 
undergoing OMFS procedures were not included in the database. 
Therefore, the validity of these scores remains uncertain despite one 
small studying demonstrating reasonable discrimination.32 In add-
ition to a number of subjective assessments of physiological vari-
ables, input of intraoperative findings is also required, which limits 
the applicability and practicality of these tools in the preoperative 
setting.
Surgical Outcome Risk Tool (SORT)
In 2014, Protopapa et al. developed SORT from post hoc analysis of 
data from the ‘Knowing the Risk’ report of the National Confidential 
Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death (NCEPOD), which com-
prised 16,788 patients undergoing both elective and emergency in- 
hospital surgical procedures. SORT requires the input of only six 
preoperative variables: ASA- PS, urgency of surgery, surgical spe-
cialty, severity of surgery, presence/ absence of cancer, and age. It is 
simple to use, but it does not calculate morbidity and, to date, has not 
been validated for OMFS.
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Project (NSQIP) surgical risk calculator
The NSQIP surgical risk calculator was developed in 2013, based on 
both inpatients and outpatients undergoing major surgical procedures 
in the private healthcare setting in the US. It requires input of 21 pre-
operative variables, such as age, sex, BMI, dyspnoea, previous myocar-
dial infarction, and functional status. NSQIP has the largest data pool, 
consisting of 1.4 million patients, and predicts procedure- specific 
morbidity and mortality risks in addition to 14 other postoperative 
outcomes. However, the tool lacks validation in other populations, 
and the differing service sector must be taken into account.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)
CPET is the most sensitive and specific exercise capacity test for 
the purposes of preoperative risk stratification (compared with the 
shuttle test, 6- minute walk test, and the stair climb test). CPET al-
lows assessment of the cardiopulmonary function by exercising 
patients on a bike ergometer through four key physiological stages 
(cardiodynamic, increased cellular respiration, steady state, and 
incremental work phases), deriving anaerobic threshold, peak 
oxygen consumption (peak VO2), and ventilatory equivalents (VE/ 
VECO2) — all of which have been shown to be independent predictors 
of morbidity, mortality, and length of hospital stay. In addition to risk 
stratification, CPET can also direct preoperative optimization, iden-
tify undiagnosed pathology, and assess effectiveness of neoadjuvant 
cancer therapies. Its role in risk stratification and decision- making 
has been explored in a few small studies on patients with head and 
neck malignancy (with or without tissue reconstruction), and, al-
though the findings are encouraging, further investigation is re-
quired.33,34 It should be noted that CPET carries a reported mortality 
of 2– 4 in 100,000, and is therefore not suitable for all patients, and 
should be undertaken in an appropriately equipped facility by trained 
personnel, as recommended by the American Thoracic Society and 
the Perioperative Exercise Testing and Training Society.35
Prediction of cardiac complications
Lee’s Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI)
Lee’s RCRI was developed in 1999 by Lee et al. from 4315 patients 
undergoing non- emergency operations, to predict the risk of de-
veloping cardiac complications after major non- cardiac operations 
(including myocardial infarction, pulmonary oedema, ventricular 
fibrillation, cardiac arrest, and complete heart block). It util-
izes six independent factors: high- risk surgery (intraperitoneal, 
intrathoracic, or suprainguinal vascular procedures); ischaemic 
heart disease; history of congestive heart failure; cerebrovascular 
disease (transient ischaemic attack or cerebrovascular accident); 
diabetes mellitus, on insulin; and preoperative serum creatinine 
>176 µmol/ L). It is simple to use and is highly recommended by 
consensus guidelines on preoperative evaluation for non- cardiac 
surgery, including those by the ESC/ ESA11 and ACC/ AHA.15 Only 
one independent predictor refers to the nature of the planned op-
eration, and its applicability to patients undergoing emergency or 
minor procedures remains unclear.
NSQIP Myocardial Infarction and Cardiac Arrest (MICA)
NSQIP- MICA was developed in 2011 from a multicentre study of 
211,410 patients. It uses five predictors of perioperative myocar-
dial infarction or cardiac arrest: type of surgery, functional status, 
abnormal serum creatinine, ASA, and age. NSQIP- MICA outper-
forms the RCRI in discriminative power among patients undergoing 
vascular surgery and is recommended for cardiac risk stratification 
by the ESA, whose consensus view is that NSQIP- MICA and Lee’s 
RCRI are complementary in providing prognostic perspective in the 
decision- making process.
Biomarker assays
Preoperative blood levels of natriuretic peptides (brain natriuretic 
peptide or N- terminal pro- brain natriuretic peptide) and C- reactive 
protein have been shown to have incremental predictive value in 
several observational studies.36– 38 However, there are no data to sug-
gest that targeting these biomarkers for treatment and intervention 
will reduce the postoperative risk. As such, the ESA does not recom-
mend routine preoperative biomarker sampling in all patients for 
risk stratification purposes, but suggests brain natriuretic peptide 
levels may be used to provide independent prognostic information 
on perioperative and late cardiac events in high- risk patients under-
going major surgery.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preoperative assessment
12
Exercise capacity testing
This was described earlier in the ‘Cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
(CPET)’ section.
Perioperative management of medications
Many of the patients undergoing OMFS procedures take regular 
long- term medications for chronic medical conditions. Patients’ 
medication history should be reviewed preoperatively by all the 
clinicians involved in their perioperative care, but in practice, this 
responsibility often resides with the anaesthetist, in their role as 
perioperative physician. Many organizations provide guidance on 
the perioperative management of long- term medications in patients 
undergoing non- cardiac surgery, including the ESC, ESA, ACC, and 
AHA. In general, long- term medications which are considered to 
exert beneficial effects during the perioperative period, or which 
may result in morbidity with abrupt cessation, should be continued, 
while those medications which are thought to increase anaesthetic 
or surgical risk should be discontinued.
Dual antiplatelet therapy
Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) is currently indicated in patients 
following PCI for coronary artery disease and as an antithrombotic 
therapy following acute ischaemic stroke.
In the context of PCI, DAPT refers to the combination of aspirin 
with a P2Y12 receptor antagonist, such as clopidogrel, prasugrel, or 
ticagrelor, to reduce the risk of coronary artery restenosis and stent 
thrombosis. This is especially important in the perioperative period, 
as the stress response to surgery has both proinflammatory and 
prothrombotic effects; however, the protective effects must be bal-
anced with the increased bleeding risk. Thus, decisions regarding 
the perioperative continuation/ cessation of DAPT must involve the 
multidisciplinary team, comprising a surgeon, anaesthetist, cardi-
ologist, and haematologist. In elective surgery, if the procedure is 
deemed to have a low surgical bleeding risk (Table 1.9),39 then the 
risk of stent thrombosis outweighs the risk of bleeding and hence 
DAPT should be continued. If, however, the risk of bleeding is mod-
erate to high, then interruption of DAPT for surgery may be con-
sidered if the minimum recommended period of DAPT post- stent 
implantation has been completed. The 2017 ESC focused update 
on DAPT40 recommended a minimum of 30 days of uninterrupted 
DAPT following PCI, regardless of stent type. The 2016 ACC/ AHA 
focused update41 recommends a minimum of 30 days for bare- metal 
stents, but a minimum of 3 months and optimally 6 months for 
drug- eluting stents (the risk of ischaemic events is higher with drug- 
eluting stents in the immediate months following PCI). A 6- month 
duration of DAPT may also benefit patients who are at increased 
ischaemic risk due to acute coronary syndrome at presentation or 
those who have undergone complex coronary revascularization 
procedures.
Ticagrelor, clopidogrel, and prasugrel should be stopped for at 
least 3, 5, or 7 days respectively before surgery to allow for adequate 
recovery of platelet function. Aspirin, as a sole antiplatelet agent, 
should be continued where possible unless the risk of bleeding is 
deemed to be excessively high. If it is necessary to discontinue both 
antiplatelet agents, a perioperative bridging strategy with short- 
acting, rapidly reversible intravenous antiplatelet agents such as 
cangrelor should be considered. The optimal time to restart DAPT 
following surgery should be a multidisciplinary decision, but ideally 
within 48 hours. Surgery in this group of patients should be per-
formed at centres where 24- hour emergency PCI facilities are 
available. In the case of emergency surgery that cannot be delayed 
beyond the recommended minimum period of DAPT therapy post 
PCI, the multidisciplinary team must reach a consensus decision— 
where possible, DAPT should be continued to minimize the risk of 
catastrophic perioperative thrombosis; aspirin should be continued 
even if the P2Y12 inhibitor is withheld; and if cessation of both agents 
is deemed necessary, then an intravenous bridging therapy should 
be considered.
In the context of acute cerebrovascular event prevention, DAPT 
usually refers to the combination of aspirin with clopidogrel or 
extended- release dipyridamole. It is beyond the scope of this chapter 
to discuss the approach to antithrombotic therapy in acute ischaemic 
stroke. Depending on the underlying aetiology and the stroke se-
verity, a number of antithrombotic therapies are available, including 
monotherapies (with aspirin or clopidogrel alone), or DAPT.42 The 
recommended duration of therapy is also variable, from 3 weeks in 
the case of a minor ischaemic stroke (National Institutes of Health 
Stroke Scale (NIHSS) ≤3) in the setting of small vessel disease,43 
to 3 months for higher severity ischaemic stroke (NIHSS >3) due 
to intracranial large artery atherosclerosis.44 For patients taking 
DAPT at the time of surgery, the decision to continue/ discontinue 
antiplatelet agents should be determined by the multidisciplinary 
team and guided by an individualized risk assessment of bleeding 
versus thrombosis. In general, aspirin monotherapy should be con-
tinued unless the bleeding risk is excessively high, or if bleeding 
may result in a catastrophic consequence (e.g. closed space sur-
gery). Dipyridamole and clopidogrel should be stopped for at least 
2 and 7 days respectively before surgery to allow platelet function to 
recover.
Aspirin
Aspirin irreversibly inhibits the action of cyclo- oxygenase enzymes 
COX- 1 and COX- 2. Its antithrombotic effects are mediated via its 
action on platelet COX- 1. It is a mainstay of treatment in both the 
primary and secondary prevention of acute coronary syndrome and 
stroke. Although it may be useful in reducing perioperative throm-
botic complications, its antithrombotic effects may also increase the 
risk of intra- 
Table 1.9 Assessment of surgical bleeding risk in non- cardiac surgery
Surgical 
bleeding risk
Blood transfusion 
requirement
Type of surgery
Low
Usually not required
Peripheral, plastic, and general 
surgery biopsies
Minor otolaryngology, and 
general surgery
Endoscopy
Anterior chamber eye surgery
Dental extractions
Intermediate
Frequently required
Visceral surgery
Otolaryngology
Reconstructive surgery
High
Possible bleeding in a 
closed space
Intracranial neurosurgery
Posterior chamber eye surgery
Oprea AD, Popescu WM. Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy. Br J Anaesth. 
2013;111 Suppl 1:i3–17.
Perioperative management of medications
13
discontinuation of aspirin may also separately produce a rebound 
effect, resulting in a temporary prothrombotic state, which increases 
the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events. The 2014 ESC/ ESA 
guidelines11 and the 2014 ACC/ AHA guidelines15 both endorse an 
individualized approach to the perioperative management of pa-
tients on aspirin, considering the bleeding risk versus the risk of 
thrombotic complications. If the bleeding risk outweighs the poten-
tial cardiovascular benefits, aspirin should be stopped at least 7 days 
prior to surgery to allow for sufficient recovery of platelet function. 
Otherwise, it is reasonable to continue aspirin perioperatively, espe-
cially for patients with high- risk coronary artery disease or cerebro-
vascular disease.
Vitamin K antagonists
Vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) such as warfarin have a wide range of 
indications, from stroke prophylaxis in atrial fibrillation to the pre-
vention of thromboembolic complications in patients with mechan-
ical heart valves. VKAs exert their anticoagulant effects by inhibiting 
the action of vitamin K, thereby reducing the production of vitamin 
K- dependent coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X. These factors are 
involved in various parts of the coagulation cascade, leading to the 
final formation of a stable fibrin clot. VKAs therefore increase the 
perioperative bleeding risk. The threshold at which surgery is con-
sidered safe to proceed with minimal increased risk of bleeding is 
generally regarded as an international normalized ratio (INR) ≤1.5. 
The interruption of VKAs for surgery can be especially hazardous 
in patients at particularly high risk of thromboembolic events, 
including:
 • Atrial fibrillation and high CHA2DS2- VASc score ≥4 (Table 1.10)45 
(i.e. high risk of thromboembolic stroke).
 • Mechanical prosthetic heart valves.
 • Mitral valvular repair within the last 3 months.
 • Recent venous thromboembolism or embolic stroke within the 
last 3 months.
 • A history of thromboembolic events during previous discontinu-
ation of anticoagulation.
 • Hypercoagulable states (e.g. congenital thrombophilia syn-
dromes or nephrotic syndrome).
If the bleeding risk is deemed to be low, then it may not be neces-
sary to interrupt VKA anticoagulation at all throughout the peri-
operative period. However, if the bleeding risk is high, and VKA 
anticoagulation has to be stopped perioperatively, then bridging 
anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin or therapeutic- dose 
low- molecular- weight heparin may be required, keeping the dur-
ation of subtherapeutic anticoagulation to a minimum. For pa-
tients taking warfarin for indications other than those listed above, 
the risk of perioperative bleeding with bridging therapy likely out-
weighs the risk of perioperative thromboembolic complications, 
such that routine bridging is probably not indicated even while VKA 
anticoagulation is interrupted.46,47 Bridging regimens vary between 
institutions, but generally warfarin is withheld 3– 5 days prior to sur-
gery, and the international normalized ratio (INR) checked daily. 
Bridging therapy with unfractionated heparin or low- molecular- 
weight heparin is commenced once the INR is subtherapeutic. If 
the INR remains high on the day before surgery, vitamin K may be 
given to hasten normalization of INR, with surgery proceeding once 
the INR is ≤1.5. The timing of the discontinuation of the bridging 
agent is based upon its biological half- life, allowing sufficient time 
for clearance— intravenous unfractionated heparin, with a half- life 
of approximately 45 minutes, is usually discontinued 4– 5 hours 
prior to surgery, while low- molecular- weight heparin, with a half- 
life of 3– 5 hours, is usually discontinued 24 hours before surgery. 
Following surgery, the bridging agent should be restarted as soon 
as adequate haemostasis is achieved, typically by postoperative day 
1 or 2. VKAs are also usually restarted on the same day, at the usual 
maintenance dose with or without an additional booster.11 The INR 
is monitored daily, and the bridging agent stopped once the INR is 
within therapeutic range.
For urgent procedures, requiring the anticoagulant effect of VKAs 
to be rapidly reversed (within hours to days), the VKA should be 
discontinued and low- dose vitamin K (2.5– 5.0 mg) given either or-
ally or intravenously. For emergency procedures, where immediate 
reversal is required, the recommended reversal agent is now pro-
thrombin complex concentrate (PCC). The dose is dependent on the 
initial INR and the weight of the patient. If PCC is not available, 
fresh frozen plasma at a dose of 12– 15 mL/ kg, can be given. These 
products produce a significant prothrombotic effect, which can be 
catastrophic in patients with an already high thromboembolic risk, 
so their use should be limited to life- threatening haemorrhage asso-
ciated with a prolonged INR.
Direct oral anticoagulants
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), also known as non- VKA 
direct oral anticoagulants (NOACs), are a newer class of anti-
coagulants now in widespread use (e.g. dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
and apixaban). They exert their effects by directly inhibiting a spe-
cific factor in the coagulation cascade: dabigatran inhibits factor 
II (thrombin), while rivaroxaban and apixaban inhibit factor Xa. 
Due to their direct mechanism of action, they have a relatively 
rapid onset of action. Elimination depends upon adequate renal 
function, so there is the potential for accumulation in patients with 
renal impairment. The preoperative cessation period for DOACs 
is therefore variable, and depends on renal function and assess-
ment of perioperative bleeding risk48 (Table 1.11). In general, 
DOACs should be withheld for a time period two to three times 
their biological half- lives for surgery with low bleeding risk, and 
Table 1.10 The CHA2DS2- VASc score, used to assess the risk of  
ischaemic stroke in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation
Risk factor
Score
Congestive heart failure/ left ventricular dysfunction (ejection 
fraction ≤40%)
1
Hypertension
1
Age ≥75 years
2
Diabetes mellitus
1
Stroke/ transient ischaemic attack/ thromboembolism
2
Vascular disease (previous myocardial infarction/ peripheral 
vascular disease/ aortic plaque
1
Age 65– 74 years
1
Sex categories (i.e. female sex)
1
Maximum score
9
Lip GY, Nieuwlaat R, Pisters R, Lane DA, Crijns HJ. Reﬁning clinical risk stratiﬁcation for 
predicting stroke and thromboembolism in atrial ﬁbrillation using a novel risk factor-based 
approach: the euro heart survey on atrial ﬁbrillation. Chest. 2010;137(2):263–72.
Preoperative assessment
14
As they have a quick onset of action, they should only be restarted 
after surgery when haemostasis has been adequately achieved and 
postsurgical bleeding risk is low. Bridging therapy is not usually 
recommended because the duration required for the drug to be 
withheld prior to surgery is short and its anticoagulant effect is 
rapidly achieved on re- initiation, except in patients where the risk 
of thromboembolism is unacceptably high. In these cases, the 
multidisciplinary team must decide upon the optimal periopera-
tive anticoagulation strategy.
For emergency procedures requiring the immediate reversal of 
dabigatran, the recommended first- line agent is idarucizumab— 
a humanized monoclonal antibody fragment which binds to 
dabigatran. Activated PCC or four- factor PCC may be used as 
second- line alternatives.50 Haemodialysis remains a further op-
tion if neither idarucizumab nor PCC products are available.51  
For patients requiring urgent reversal of factor Xa inhibitors, the 
current recommended first- and second- line options are four- factor 
PCC and activated PCC, respectively.50 A specific reversal agent 
(andexanet) was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration 
in 2018 but is not yet in widespread use. Haemodialysis is not useful 
in the elimination of factor Xa inhibitors. Fresh frozen plasma is 
no longer recommended for the reversal of DOACs. Table 1.12  
summarizes the available reversal agents.50
Statins
Statins (3- hydroxy- 3- methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibi-
tors) are lipid- lowering agents used in the primary and secondary 
prevention of adverse cardiac events in patients with cardiovas-
cular risk factors. They are also effective in improving perioperative 
cardiovascular outcomes in these patients. The exact mechanisms 
by which statins confer cardiovascular protection remain unclear, 
but may be related to both pleiotropic effects (e.g. coronary plaque 
stabilization) as well as lipid- lowering effects. Both the 2014 ESC/ 
ESA guidelines11 and the 2014 ACC/ AHA guidelines15 endorse the 
perioperative continuation of existing statin therapy in patients 
undergoing non- cardiac surgery. For patients who are not already 
on statin treatment, there is probably no benefit in initiating statins 
preoperatively unless they already meet the existing criteria for 
statin therapy, especially since potential adverse side effects may be 
significant (e.g. statin- induced myopathy and rhabdomyolysis).11 
For patients that do meet the criteria, statins should be commenced 
as soon as possible, and ideally no less than 2 weeks before surgery, 
to allow maximal plaque- stabilizing benefit.11 Since these patients 
have a high baseline cardiovascular risk, it would also be reasonable 
to continue with statin therapy beyond the perioperative period, at 
least until further review, in order to minimize long- term cardio-
vascular risk.
Angiotensin antagonists
There remains considerable debate as to whether angiotensin- 
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and angiotensin II receptor 
blockers (ARBs) should be continued throughout the periopera-
tive period. ACEIs and ARBs preserve organ function and have 
prognostic benefits for patients with heart failure and/ or left ven-
tricular systolic dysfunction. The main concern with the peri-
operative continuation of these agents is the increased risk of 
intraoperative hypotension, especially following induction of an-
aesthesia, although this has not been shown to be associated with 
Table 1.11 Recommended cessation periods between last dose of a DOAC and surgery
Renal function and related half- life
DOAC and current dose
Timing of last dose before surgery (number of hours)
Low bleeding risk surgery  
(2– 3 half- lives between last  
dose and surgery)
High bleeding risk surgery  
(4– 5 half- lives between last 
dose and surgery)
Creatinine clearance (CrCl) ≥50 mL/ min half- life:  
7– 8 hours (hr)
Apixaban 5 mg twice daily
24
48– 72
CrCl 30– 49 mL/ min half- life: 17– 18 hr
48
72
CrCl ≥50 mL/ min half- life: 5– 9 hr
Rivaroxaban 20 mg once daily
24
48– 72
CrCl 30– 49 mL/ min half- life: 9– 13 hr
48
72
CrCl ≥50 mL/ min half- life: 12– 17 hr
Dabigatran 150 mg twice daily
24
48– 72
CrCl 30– 49 mL/ min half- life: 13– 23 hr
48– 72
96
McIlmoyle K, Tran H. Perioperative management of oral anticoagulation. BJA Education. 2018;18(9):259–64.
Table 1.12 VKA and DOAC reversal agents and their suggested use
Reversal agent
VKA (warfarin)
Factor IIa inhibitor 
(dabigatran)
Factor Xa inhibitor (apixaban, 
edoxaban and rivaroxaban)
Four- factor prothrombin 
complex concentrate
(4F- PCC)
First line
Second line
First line
Activated prothrombin 
complex concentrate
Not indicated
Second line
Second line
Idarucizumab
Not indicated
First line
Not indicated
Fresh frozen plasma
If 4F- PCC is unavailable
Not indicated
Not indicated
 
 
Conclusion
15
a difference in major adverse cardiovascular outcomes.52 There is 
also no strong evidence of cardiovascular risk reduction with con-
tinuation of existing treatment, despite the theoretical benefits.53 
Current guidelines therefore recommend that continuation of ex-
isting ACEI or ARB medication in the setting of non- cardiac sur-
gery should at least be considered, especially if the indication for 
initiation was stable heart failure and/ or left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction. For patients taking these medications for hyperten-
sion alone, temporary discontinuation (at least 24 hours prior to 
surgery) should be considered, due to the risk of intraoperative 
hypotension. If treatment is continued, blood pressure should be 
closely monitored intraoperatively and significant hypotension 
avoided. For patients with stable heart failure and/ or left ven-
tricular systolic dysfunction who are not yet taking ACEIs or ARBs, 
preoperative initiation of these medications at least 1 week before 
surgery should also be considered.11 If ACEIs or ARBs are discon-
tinued before surgery, they should be restarted as soon as possible 
following surgery (if haemodynamically stable), as inappropriate 
cessation of existing therapy is associated with impaired cardio-
vascular outcomes.11,15
Beta- blockers
Beta- blockers may provide a degree of perioperative cardio-
protection by reducing myocardial oxygen consumption through a 
decrease in both heart rate and contractility. Multiple meta- analyses 
on perioperative beta- blocker usage have shown a significant reduc-
tion in adverse cardiac events (e.g. myocardial infarction, atrial fibril-
lation), especially in patients at high risk of myocardial ischaemia.54 
For patients already on existing beta- blocker therapy, consensus 
supports their continuation throughout the perioperative period, as 
preoperative discontinuation is associated with increased mortality. 
Conversely, the POISE trial demonstrated that the preoperative 
introduction of beta- blockers was associated with stroke, hypoten-
sion, bradycardia, and an increase in all- cause mortality55 (though 
the study received criticism for its design, which led to increased 
hypotensive episodes and a higher incidence of stroke in the study 
population). The 2014 ESC/ ESA guidelines and the 2014 ACC/ AHA 
guidelines recommend that preoperative beta- blocker initiation 
(with cardioselective atenolol or bisoprolol first line) should be con-
sidered in patients at high risk of perioperative myocardial ischaemia 
(known ischaemic heart disease, or at least two clinical risk factors 
according to Lee’s RCRI, or ASA status ≥3) if they are undergoing 
high- risk surgery.11 However, in patients without these clinical risk 
factors or in those undergoing low- risk surgery, the potential harm 
of perioperative initiation of beta- blockers may outweigh the bene-
fits, and is therefore not recommended (even if the patient has been 
identified as meeting existing criteria for long- term beta- blocker 
therapy). In such cases, beta- blockers should be commenced as 
soon as possible after surgery. If the decision is made to initiate beta- 
blockers prior to surgery for the purposes of perioperative cardiac 
risk reduction, treatment should not be started on the day of surgery. 
Instead, at least 2 days (and ideally up to 30 days) should be allowed 
for dose titration to achieve optimal heart rate and blood pressure 
targets. If there are long- term indications to support their use, 
then it would be reasonable to continue them beyond the periopera-
tive period.
Conclusion
Preoperative assessment should target the challenges specific to the 
underlying oromaxillofacial condition and planned operative pro-
cedure. A risk stratification tool should be employed during this 
process to facilitate optimal planning of the perioperative care. This 
is particularly important in patients with extensive comorbidities 
undergoing major OMFS. Long- term medications should be thor-
oughly reviewed, and appropriately adjusted in order to ensure safe 
perioperative patient care and the best patient outcome.
REFERENCES
 1. Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C, Fourth National Audit 
P. Major complications of airway management in the 
UK: results of the Fourth National Audit Project of the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society. 
Part 1: anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 2011;106(5):617– 631.
 2. Morosan M, Parbhoo A, Curry N. Anaesthesia and common oral 
and maxillo- facial emergencies. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care 
Pain. 2012;12(5):257– 262.
 3. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, Levy MM, Antonelli M, Ferrer 
R, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for 
management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med. 
2017;43(3):304– 377.
 4. Bailey CR, Ahuja M, Bartholomew K, Bew S, Forbes L, Lipp A, 
et al. Guidelines for day- case surgery 2019: guidelines from the 
Association of Anaesthetists and the British Association of Day 
Surgery. Anaesthesia. 2019;74(6):778– 792.
 5. Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain and 
Ireland. Guidelines for the management of children referred for 
dental extraction under general anesthesia: guidelines from the 
Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland, 
the Royal College of Anaesthetists, the Association of Anaesthetists 
of Great Britain & Ireland, the Association of Dental Anaesthetists, 
the British Society of Paediatric Dentistry, GDP, and the Royal 
College of Nursing. 2011. https:// www.bspd.co.uk/ Port als/ 0/ Pub 
lic/ Files/ Gui deli nes/ Main%20Den tal%20Gui deli nes.pdf
 6. Sleep- related breathing disorders in adults: recommendations 
for syndrome definition and measurement techniques in clinical 
research. The Report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
Task Force. Sleep. 1999;22(5):667– 689.
 7. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative 
Management of Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Practice 
guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society 
of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Perioperative Management 
of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 
2014;120(2):268– 286.
 8. Hall A. Sleep physiology and the perioperative care of patients 
with sleep disorders. BJA Educ. 2014;15(4):167– 172.
 9. Abdelsattar ZM, Hendren S, Wong SL, Campbell DA, Jr., 
Ramachandran SK. The impact of untreated obstructive sleep 
apnea on cardiopulmonary complications in general and vascular 
surgery: a cohort study. Sleep. 2015;38(8):1205– 1210.
 10. Martinez G, Faber P. Obstructive Sleep apnoea. Continuing 
Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain. 2011;11(1):5–8.
Preoperative assessment
16
 11. Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, Anker S, Botker HE, 
Hert SD, et al. 2014 ESC/ ESA guidelines on non- cardiac 
surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management: the Joint 
Task Force on non- cardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment 
and management of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 
and the European Society of Anaesthesiology (ESA). Eur Heart J. 
2014;35(35):2383– 2431.
 12. De Hert S, Staender S, Fritsch G, Hinkelbein J, Afshari A, Bettelli 
G, et al. Pre- operative evaluation of adults undergoing elective 
noncardiac surgery: updated guideline from the European Society of 
Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2018;35(6):407– 465.
 13. Clavellina- Gaytan D, Velazquez- Fernandez D, Del- Villar E, 
Dominguez- Cherit G, Sanchez H, Mosti M, et al. Evaluation 
of spirometric testing as a routine preoperative assessment 
in patients undergoing bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 
2015;25(3):530– 536.
 14. Fernandez- Bustamante A, Bartels K, Clavijo C, Scott BK, Kacmar 
R, Bullard K, et al. Preoperatively screened obstructive sleep 
apnea is associated with worse postoperative outcomes than 
previously diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 
2017;125(2):593– 602.
 15. Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, Barnason SA, 
Beckman JA, Bozkurt B, et al. 2014 ACC/ AHA guideline on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management 
of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130(24):e278– e333.
 16. Calder CL, Ortega G, Vij A, Chawla K, Nnamdi- Emetarom 
C, Stephanie S, et al. Morbid obesity is an independent 
risk factor for postoperative renal dysfunction in young 
adults: a review of the American College of Surgeons National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program database. Am J Surg. 
2016;211(4):772– 777.
 17. Goren O, Matot I. Perioperative acute kidney injury. Br J Anaesth. 
2015;115 Suppl 2:ii3– ii14.
 18. Frisch A, Chandra P, Smiley D, Peng L, Rizzo M, Gatcliffe C, 
et al. Prevalence and clinical outcome of hyperglycemia in the 
perioperative period in noncardiac surgery. Diabetes Care. 
2010;33(8):1783– 1788.
 19. Membership of the Working Party, Barker P, Creasey PE, 
Dhatariya K, Levy N, Lipp A, et al. Peri- operative management 
of the surgical patient with diabetes 2015: Association of 
Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. Anaesthesia. 
2015;70(12):1427– 1440.
 20. Wolf E, Utech M, Stehle P, Busing M, Stoffel- Wagner B, Ellinger 
S. Preoperative micronutrient status in morbidly obese patients 
before undergoing bariatric surgery: results of a cross- sectional 
study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015;11(5):1157– 1163.
 21. Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM, Thomas EJ, Polanczyk 
CA, Cook EF, et al. Derivation and prospective validation of a 
simple index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac 
surgery. Circulation. 1999;100(10):1043– 1049.
 22. Neumann FJ, Sousa- Uva M, Ahlsson A, Alfonso F, Banning AP, 
Benedetto U, et al. 2018 ESC/ EACTS guidelines on myocardial 
revascularization. Eur Heart J. 2019;40(2):87– 165.
 23. McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, Goldman S, Krupski 
WC, Littooy F, et al. Coronary- artery revascularization 
before elective major vascular surgery. N Engl J Med. 
2004;351(27):2795– 2804.
 24. Mookadam F, Carpenter SD, Thota VR, Cha S, Jiamsripong P, 
Alharthi MS, et al. Risk of adverse events after coronary artery 
bypass graft and subsequent noncardiac surgery. Future Cardiol. 
2011;7(1):69– 75.
 25. Howell SJ, Sear JW, Foex P. Hypertension, hypertensive 
heart disease and perioperative cardiac risk. Br J Anaesth. 
2004;92(4):570– 583.
 26. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, Agabiti Rosei E, Azizi M, 
Burnier M, et al. 2018 ESC/ ESH guidelines for the management 
of arterial hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2018;39(33):3021– 3104.
 27. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Bohm 
M, et al. 2013 ESH/ ESC guidelines for the management of arterial 
hypertension: the Task Force for the Management of Arterial 
Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) 
and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 
2013;34(28):2159– 2219.
 28. Hartle A, McCormack T, Carlisle J, Anderson S, Pichel A, 
Beckett N, et al. The measurement of adult blood pressure and 
management of hypertension before elective surgery: joint 
guidelines from the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain 
and Ireland and the British Hypertension Society. Anaesthesia. 
2016;71(3):326– 337.
 29. Shander A, Knight K, Thurer R, Adamson J, Spence R. Prevalence 
and outcomes of anemia in surgery: a systematic review of the 
literature. Am J Med. 2004;116 Suppl 7A:58S– 69S.
 30. Thakrar SV, Clevenger B, Mallett S. Patient blood management 
and perioperative anaemia. BJA Educ. 2016;17(1):28– 34.
 31. Munoz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, Besser M, Habler O, Kehlet 
H, et al. International consensus statement on the peri- operative 
management of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia. 
2017;72(2):233– 247.
 32. Scott N, Jones J, Hulbert J, Kittur MA, Parkin R, Silvester KC, 
et al. Possum scoring and risk prediction in head and neck 
surgery. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014;52(8):e53.
 33. Lalabekyan BB, Tetlow N, Moonesinghe R, Martin D, 
Burdett E, Otto J, et al. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing and 
cardiopulmonary morbidity in patients undergoing major head 
and neck surgery. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2021;59(3):297– 302.
 34. Fernandes N, Hussain M, Ho M, Kanatas A, Fabbroni G, 
Ong TK, et al. The value of cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
as a prognostic indicator for head and neck cancer patients 
considered for primary surgery. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2018;56(10):e62.
 35. Levett DZH, Jack S, Swart M, Carlisle J, Wilson J, Snowden C, et al. 
Perioperative cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET): consensus 
clinical guidelines on indications, organization, conduct, and 
physiological interpretation. Br J Anaesth. 2018;120(3):484– 500.
 36. Dernellis J, Panaretou M. Assessment of cardiac risk before non- 
cardiac surgery: brain natriuretic peptide in 1590 patients. Heart. 
2006;92(11):1645– 1650.
 37. Rodseth RN, Padayachee L, Biccard BM. A meta- analysis 
of the utility of pre- operative brain natriuretic peptide in 
predicting early and intermediate- term mortality and major 
adverse cardiac events in vascular surgical patients. Anaesthesia. 
2008;63(11):1226– 1233.
 38. Karthikeyan G, Moncur RA, Levine O, Heels- Ansdell D, 
Chan MT, Alonso- Coello P, et al. Is a pre- operative brain 
natriuretic peptide or N- terminal pro- B- type natriuretic peptide 
measurement an independent predictor of adverse cardiovascular 
outcomes within 30 days of noncardiac surgery? A systematic 
review and meta- analysis of observational studies. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2009;54(17):1599– 1606.
 39. Oprea AD, Popescu WM. Perioperative management of 
antiplatelet therapy. Br J Anaesth. 2013;111 Suppl 1:i3– i17.
Conclusion
17
 40. Valgimigli M, Bueno H, Byrne RA, Collet JP, Costa F, Jeppsson 
A, et al. 2017 ESC focused update on dual antiplatelet therapy 
in coronary artery disease developed in collaboration with 
EACTS: the Task Force for dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary 
artery disease of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 
and of the European Association for Cardio- Thoracic Surgery 
(EACTS). Eur Heart J. 2018;39(3):213– 260.
 41. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Fihn SD, Fleisher 
LA, et al. 2016 ACC/ AHA guideline focused update on duration 
of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery 
disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/ 
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68(10):1082– 1115.
 42. Hackam DG, Spence JD. Antiplatelet therapy in ischemic stroke 
and transient ischemic attack. Stroke. 2019;50(3):773– 778.
 43. Prasad K, Siemieniuk R, Hao Q, Guyatt G, O’Donnell M, Lytvyn 
L, et al. Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel for 
acute high risk transient ischaemic attack and minor ischaemic 
stroke: a clinical practice guideline. BMJ. 2018;363:k5130.
 44. Chimowitz MI, Lynn MJ, Derdeyn CP, Turan TN, Fiorella 
D, Lane BF, et al. Stenting versus aggressive medical 
therapy for intracranial arterial stenosis. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365(11):993– 1003.
 45. Lip GY, Nieuwlaat R, Pisters R, Lane DA, Crijns HJ. 
Refining clinical risk stratification for predicting stroke and 
thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation using a novel risk factor- 
based approach: the Euro Heart Survey on atrial fibrillation. 
Chest. 2010;137(2):263– 272.
 46. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, Becker RC, Caprini JA, 
Dunn AS, et al. Perioperative bridging anticoagulation in patients 
with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(9):823– 833.
 47. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, Chen LY, Cigarroa JE, 
Cleveland JC Jr, et al. 2019 AHA/ ACC/ HRS Focused Update 
of the 2014 AHA/ ACC/ HRS guideline for the management of 
patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College 
of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2019;140(2):e125– e151.
 48. McIlmoyle K, Tran H. Perioperative management of oral 
anticoagulation. BJA Educ. 2018;18(9):259– 264.
 49. De Caterina R, Husted S, Wallentin L, Andreotti F, Arnesen H, 
Bachmann F, et al. New oral anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation 
and acute coronary syndromes: ESC Working Group on 
Thrombosis- Task Force on Anticoagulants in Heart Disease 
position paper. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(16):1413– 1425.
 50. Tomaselli GF, Mahaffey KW, Cuker A, Dobesh PP, Doherty 
JU, Eikelboom JW, et al. 2017 ACC expert consensus decision 
pathway on management of bleeding in patients on oral 
anticoagulants: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Task Force on Expert Consensus Decision Pathways. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017;70(24):3042– 3067.
 51. Camm AJ, Lip GY, De Caterina R, Savelieva I, Atar D, Hohnloser 
SH, et al. 2012 focused update of the ESC Guidelines for the 
management of atrial fibrillation: an update of the 2010 ESC 
Guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation. Developed 
with the special contribution of the European Heart Rhythm 
Association. Eur Heart J. 2012;33(21):2719– 2747.
 52. Hollmann C, Fernandes NL, Biccard BM. A systematic review 
of outcomes associated with withholding or continuing 
angiotensin- converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin 
receptor blockers before noncardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 
2018;127(3):678– 687.
 53. Bertrand M, Godet G, Meersschaert K, Brun L, Salcedo E, Coriat 
P. Should the angiotensin II antagonists be discontinued before 
surgery? Anesth Analg. 2001;92(1):26– 30.
 54. McGory ML, Maggard MA, Ko CY. A meta- analysis of 
perioperative beta blockade: what is the actual risk reduction? 
Surgery. 2005;138(2):171– 179.
 55. Group PS, Devereaux PJ, Yang H, Yusuf S, Guyatt G, Leslie K, 
et al. Effects of extended- release metoprolol succinate in patients 
undergoing non- cardiac surgery (POISE trial): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9627):1839– 1847.
2
Difficult airway
Craig Lyons and Ellen P. O’Sullivan
Introduction
The fundamental goal of airway management is to ensure the reliable 
delivery of oxygen to the lungs. Thirty- nine per cent of airway com-
plications reported to the fourth National Audit Project of the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists involved patients with acute or chronic 
head and neck disease.1 The majority of incidents related to anaes-
thesia for diagnostic or resection surgery, half of which occurred at 
induction of anaesthesia, with the remainder arising during main-
tenance, emergence, or in recovery. Airway management for oral 
and maxillofacial surgery, therefore, presents unique challenges, re-
quiring an adaptable, diverse skill set that is tailored to the patient’s 
pathology and facilitates the surgical procedure.
Airway assessment
The aim of preoperative airway assessment is to formulate a per-
sonalized airway management plan that minimizes the risk of 
complications. This is particularly important for patients with 
oromaxillofacial or head and neck pathology, as they commonly 
have abnormal airways. First of all, it is important to determine the 
methods by which oxygenation of the patient is likely to be suc-
cessful, as both primary and rescue strategies. These are primarily 
face mask ventilation, supraglottic airway device (SAD) insertion, 
tracheal intubation, and front- of- neck access.
Assessment includes history taking and examination, a review of 
previous investigations (such as a recent intubation, nasendoscopy, 
and imaging studies of the airway), and a discussion with the sur-
geon regarding an appropriate airway plan. However, difficult 
airway management may be unanticipated, and so several alterna-
tive airway strategies must be in reserve for all patients, with ad-
equate equipment and skills for their immediate implementation. 
Stridor, hoarseness, and intolerance of lying flat are concerning fea-
tures in the history. Prior radiotherapy of the neck tissues can im-
pair all facets of airway management from face mask ventilation to 
landmark identification for front- of- neck access. Patient comorbid-
ities should be carefully assessed as they may directly impact airway 
assessment, such as restricted neck movement in the patient with 
rheumatoid arthritis and possible obstructive sleep apnoea.
Individual elements of clinical examination have a low positive 
predictive value for difficult airway management. When combined, 
their predictive value modestly increases, but not to the degree that 
they can be relied upon to confirm or exclude a difficult airway 
for any given patient.2,3 ‘Easy’ airway management is ultimately a 
retrospective diagnosis. Clinical examination includes assessment 
of obvious facial deformities, facial hair, dentition, and range of 
neck motion. Mouth opening is assessed by inter- incisor distance. 
If reduced (<3 cm), it makes direct laryngoscopy challenging and 
can preclude the insertion of a videolaryngoscope. The modified 
Mallampati score (1– 4) is based on the anatomical structures seen 
with maximal protrusion of the tongue from an open mouth in the 
sitting position. A higher score is associated with greater difficulty 
in airway management. Jaw protrusion is assessed by asking the pa-
tient to place their lower incisors as far forward as possible. Failure 
to advance the lower teeth as far as the upper teeth is predictive of 
difficult intubation, as is the inability of the lower incisors to bite 
the vermilion border of the upper lip.4 Difficult laryngoscopy is as-
sociated with a thyromental distance of <6 cm and a sternomental 
distance of <13.5 cm, which are measured with the head extended 
from the mental prominence to the thyroid and sternal notches, 
respectively.5,6 Patients presenting for major oromaxillofacial or 
head and neck surgery have typically undergone computed tomo-
graphic or magnetic resonance imaging. This should form part of 
airway assessment, which may be enhanced by discussion with a 
radiologist. It can be particularly informative in relation to glottic 
and subglottic pathologies which are not amenable to assessment by 
clinical examination.
Airway anatomy can be assessed via flexible nasendoscopy, either 
preoperatively or prior to induction of anaesthesia. An outpatient 
nasendoscopy may have been undertaken by the surgeon, though 
findings can become outdated with a rapidly growing tumour. Since 
it is performed awake, it does not necessarily reflect circumstances 
under anaesthesia, where loss of pharyngeal tone promotes upper 
airway obstruction. This caveat also applies to any virtual endo-
scopic examination undertaken on airway models that have been re-
constructed from imaging studies. Nonetheless, nasendoscopy can 
significantly influence airway management, tipping the balance in 
favour of awake intubation, or indeed allaying concerns sufficient to 
proceed with induction of anaesthesia. Ultrasound can also be used 
 
 
 
Difﬁcult airway
20
to pre- emptively identify the cricothyroid membrane and to guide 
advancement towards the membrane during the procedure itself.7
All documentation of previous airway management should be 
reviewed. This alone can highlight difficulties which would have 
otherwise been unanticipated. Likewise, detailed documentation 
of airway management on this occasion is important for informing 
clinicians involved in future patient care. All documentation repre-
sents a snapshot in time that may not continue to reflect the patient’s 
airway status. Airway assessment does not cease after induction of 
anaesthesia. The anaesthetist must continually appraise the security 
of oxygenation, which can be jeopardized by surgical manipulation 
of the airway and at emergence of anaesthesia.
The airway plan
There is no one- size- fits- all approach to airway management. At all 
stages, the anaesthetist should assess whether the airway plan, per-
sonnel, equipment, or location could be further optimized. A funda-
mental decision is whether to intubate the trachea with the patient 
awake (with or without sedation) or under general anaesthesia. No 
approach to the airway, awake or under anaesthesia, is devoid of 
complications or guaranteed to bring success.
Traditionally, inhalational induction has been performed in an ef-
fort to maintain spontaneous respiration. However, this approach 
can transition to a scenario where spontaneous respiration becomes 
inadequate, such as with the loss of airway patency, but the patient 
is not adequately anaesthetized to allow for satisfactory airway in-
strumentation. A rescue plan in this scenario would commonly ne-
cessitate the administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs. As 
these agents improve the likelihood of successful oxygenation, their 
administration from the outset arguably represents a more logical 
approach. Thus, most anaesthetists would typically select either an 
awake approach or an intravenous induction with neuromuscular 
blocking drug when difficulty is anticipated. Awake intubation is 
chosen when there are heightened concerns that intubation under 
general anaesthesia could prove problematic. When it is felt that 
airway management could deteriorate to the point of requiring 
emergency tracheostomy, it should take place in the operating the-
atre rather than the induction room. Indeed, such circumstances 
may require the performance of a tracheostomy under local anaes-
thesia from the outset.
Repeated airway instrumentation can create a spiral of worsening 
airway conditions and convert challenging airway management 
into impossible airway management.8 Bleeding, soiling, worsening 
airway oedema, and fragmentation of diseased tissues can all arise. 
The first attempt at airway management for all patients should, 
therefore, reflect the anaesthetist’s assessment of what constitutes the 
best attempt. Key elements to consider in this regard include posi-
tioning, preoxygenation, apnoeic oxygenation, and neuromuscular 
blockade. When difficulty is encountered, subsequent attempts are 
informed in real time by the anaesthetist’s perception of the barriers 
to oxygenation. A key tenet is that repeating the same approach to 
airway management, and hoping for a different outcome, typically 
results in continued failure.
During an airway crisis, the specific conduit for oxygen delivery is 
of secondary importance, as is the degree of ventilation attained. This 
is reflected in the increasingly used ‘can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate’ 
(CICO) terminology in lieu of ‘can’t intubate, can’t ventilate’ (CICV), 
emphasizing oxygenation as the main priority. If a route of oxygen-
ation is established with difficulty, such as with a SAD, the clinician 
must appraise whether efforts at tracheal intubation are now appro-
priate. For example, they may make a further attempt at intubation 
with laryngoscopy, intubate via a SAD, or allow the patient to wake 
up (and subsequently perform an awake intubation or postpone sur-
gery). Any intervention risks progression to a CICO scenario.
Monitoring of heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation is 
essential during all airway management, as is the use of capnography 
for confirmation of correct tube placement.
Positioning
Optimal positioning for direct laryngoscopy involves neck flexion 
and head extension, termed the ‘sniffing’ position. Obese patients 
are ‘ramped’, often with dedicated pillows, such that the external 
auditory meatus is aligned with the suprasternal notch. This position 
improves respiratory mechanics and assists with laryngoscopy.9
Preoxygenation
Preoxygenation refers to the administration of 100% oxygen to re-
place the nitrogen present in the lungs and to increase body oxygen 
stores. It is undertaken prior to an airway intervention, where there 
is a risk that the supply of oxygen to the lungs may be interrupted. 
This is not isolated to induction of anaesthesia, also relating to an 
intraoperative change in airway management and emergence. 
Preoxygenation delays the onset of hypoxaemia should oxygen 
delivery become compromised, allowing more time for rescue 
interventions. Given that difficult airway management is often un-
predictable, universal use of preoxygenation is advocated.
Maximal benefit from preoxygenation is derived at induction 
when performed in an upright position for at least 3 minutes, with 
confirmation of an adequate face mask seal with capnography and 
the attainment of an end- tidal oxygen concentration of >0.85.10 
Every effort should be undertaken to overcome an incomplete seal, 
such as two- handed face mask application, placement of transparent 
film over facial hair, or the use of a mouthpiece. Preoxygenation is 
further enhanced by the application of continuous or bilevel posi-
tive airway pressure. Despite a limited evidence base, high- flow 
nasal cannulae are increasingly used for preoxygenation to allow 
for a smooth transition to apnoeic oxygenation during airway 
instrumentation.
Neuromuscular blockade
The administration of a neuromuscular blocking drug enhances 
the likelihood of tracheal intubation, and also of successful rescue 
attempts at oxygenation via face mask and SAD.11,12 Maximal 
neuromuscular blockade should, therefore, be ensured before 
laryngoscopy, and is frequently achieved by the administration of 
1 mg/ kg rocuronium. The placement of a quantitative nerve stimu-
lator at induction of anaesthesia offers an objective assessment of 
the adequacy of neuromuscular blockade, helping to curtail early 
Direct laryngoscopy
21
suboptimal efforts, and is advocated in monitoring guidelines from 
the Association of Anaesthetists.13
Apnoeic oxygenation
Apnoeic oxygenation refers to oxygenation in the absence of spon-
taneous respiration or positive pressure ventilation.14 This technique 
allows for continued oxygenation following onset of apnoea at in-
duction of anaesthesia. By prolonging the time to oxygen desatur-
ation, a stop– start approach to engage in efforts at re- saturation is 
made less likely, thereby extending the ‘safe apnoea time’ to allow for 
definitive airway management.
Oxygen insufflation is most commonly achieved via nasal can-
nulae, allowing for largely unimpeded airway instrumentation, 
while other options include face mask, nasopharyngeal catheter, and 
front- of- neck catheter. Apnoeic oxygenation with low- flow nasal 
cannulae has been termed NODESAT (nasal oxygen during efforts 
securing a tube),15 while a similar approach using high- flow nasal 
cannulae is commonly known as THRIVE (transnasal humidified 
rapid insufflation ventilatory exchange).16 The latter allows for more 
prolonged oxygenation and can also assist with clearance of carbon 
dioxide. Optimal settings remain unknown; flow rates of 60– 80 L/ 
min at a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 1.0 are the most widely 
reported.
In an airway crisis, failure of more common oxygenation methods 
(bag mask ventilation, SAD insertion, and tracheal intubation) is 
often secondary to loss of upper airway patency, which is also ne-
cessary for successful apnoeic oxygenation via nasal or oral routes. 
Therefore, apnoeic oxygenation is most likely to fail in those cir-
cumstances where its success is most desired. It should be regarded 
as a supplemental effort at oxygenation rather than a primary oxy-
genation technique. High- flow nasal oxygen can also be used as an 
intraoperative oxygenation technique for the apnoeic patient in 
scenarios where the presence of a tracheal tube is impeding short- 
duration surgery.17 However, diathermy and laser should be used 
with caution, given the increased risk of airway fire with an open 
oxygenation system.
Bag mask ventilation
Bag mask ventilation with 100% oxygen during the apnoeic period 
enables administration of oxygen between intubation attempts and 
is a core rescue technique. Difficult face mask ventilation is assisted 
with a two- or four- handed technique and the use of airway adjuncts 
such as an oropharyngeal airway. Placement of airway adjuncts 
must be undertaken with care as they can lead to airway trauma and 
bleeding, particularly in patients with intraoral pathologies.
Supraglottic airway devices
A SAD is occasionally used in lieu of a tracheal tube for airway 
management during oral and maxillofacial surgery, particularly for 
minor procedures. This device does not prevent aspiration. Rotation 
of the cuff can lead to an inadequate seal that impairs gas exchange 
or stimulates airway reflexes leading to laryngospasm. Furthermore, 
efforts at troubleshooting and rectifying problems with this airway 
device may require a pause in surgery and encroachment upon the 
surgical field.
SADs can occupy a life- saving role during rescue of the difficult 
airway by re- establishing oxygenation. They can subsequently offer 
a conduit for the passage of a tracheal tube.
Second- generation SADs are those with design elements that 
aim to reduce the risk of aspiration, such as an oesophageal con-
duit for the diversion of any regurgitant gastric contents away from 
the respiratory tract and to enable the placement of a gastric tube. 
Common second- generation SADs include the i- gel (Intersurgical, 
Wokingham, UK), laryngeal mask airway (LMA) Supreme (Teleflex 
Medical, Athlone, Ireland), ProSeal LMA (Teleflex Medical, Athlone, 
Ireland), and Laryngeal Tube Suction (VBM Medizintechnik GmbH, 
Sulz am Neckar, Germany). These devices exhibit improved safety 
and efficacy when compared with first- generation SADs.18
The reinforced LMA has a flexible wire- reinforced shaft which 
enables its position to be adjusted to reduce impingement on the 
surgical site. This flexibility can make insertion more difficult. It is 
commonly used during dental surgery and tonsillectomy.
In the scenario of difficult airway management, attempts at SAD 
insertion should be limited, much like attempts at tracheal intub-
ation, as they are associated with trauma and diminishing success. 
Causes of a malpositioned SAD include folding of the tip of the cuff, 
lodgement of the cuff tip between the vocal cords, and presence of 
the epiglottis in the bowl of the SAD.19 Each attempt at SAD inser-
tion should differ in approach, such as the selection of an alternative 
type or size. Jaw thrust, laryngoscopy, or the railroading of a SAD 
over a bougie or orogastric tube can assist with successful siting of 
the device.20,21
Once oxygenation through a SAD is achieved, the anaesthetist 
must balance the risks and benefits in deciding whether to proceed 
with this device in situ, to attempt intubation via the SAD, or to wake 
the patient up. Key considerations include aspiration risk, tolerance 
for spontaneous respiration, available equipment (such as a fibre-
optic scope), and urgency of surgery. Intubation via a SAD can be 
performed blindly or under fibreoptic guidance. The former risks 
trauma to an already compromised airway and should not be under-
taken unless there is no alternative. Fibreoptic placement of a tra-
cheal tube via the SAD can be assisted with an Aintree Intubation 
Catheter (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) which is placed 
into the trachea over the scope under visualization, followed by 
removal of the SAD and railroading of the tracheal tube over the 
Aintree Intubation Catheter.22
Direct laryngoscopy
Irrespective of other advancements in airway management, direct 
laryngoscopy remains the commonest approach to tracheal in-
tubation. Direct laryngoscopy is most commonly performed with 
a Macintosh blade, but other variations can prove beneficial, such 
as the hinged tip McCoy blade.23 Gentle, gradual advancement 
of the laryngoscope should be undertaken, identifying anatom-
ical landmarks en route to the glottis, in an effort to avoid airway 
trauma. Elevation of the tongue with the laryngoscope tensions the 
hyoepiglottic ligament and lifts the epiglottis from the posterior 
pharyngeal wall. The tip of the laryngoscope blade is placed in the 
 
 
 
 
Difﬁcult airway
22
vallecula to maximize epiglottis elevation. An inadequate view may 
be improved by external laryngeal manipulation. Classically, this 
is achieved with ‘BURP’ (backward, upward, rightward pressure) 
of the larynx.24 An assistant’s thumb and index finger can be ma-
nipulated by the laryngoscopist with one hand, while the other hand 
maintains laryngoscopy, to ensure the manoeuvre provides optimal 
benefit.
Dynamic head elevation can also enhance the glottic view, and 
is performed by placing the right hand at the occiput and ele-
vating or lowering the head during laryngoscopy.25 A bougie or 
styletted tube can prove invaluable when a poor view persists, while 
maintaining a low threshold for intubation by other means, such as 
videolaryngoscopy.
Videolaryngoscopy
Videolaryngoscopy utilizes a laryngoscope containing a video 
camera or other optical arrangement to indirectly visualize the la-
ryngeal inlet. Benefit is greatest in patients for whom visualization of 
the glottis by direct laryngoscopy is challenging or even impossible, 
as the videolaryngoscope can ‘look around the corner’.
Videolaryngoscopes can be classified based on whether or not 
they contain an integrated channel for the passage of a tracheal 
tube. Unchannelled devices include the McGrath (Aircraft Medical, 
Edinburgh, UK), C- Mac (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany), and 
GlideScope (Verathon Medical, Bothell, Washington, USA). 
Channelled devices include the Airtraq (Prodol Meditec, Vizcaya, 
Spain) and the Pentax Airway Scope (Ambu, Copenhagen, 
Denmark). The King Vision (King Systems, Noblesville, IN, 
USA) can accommodate both channelled and unchannelled la-
ryngoscope blades. The Airtraq uses mirrors and prisms rather 
than a video camera to obtain a view of the laryngeal inlet. Some 
videolaryngoscopes have modifications to aid intubation success, 
such as a steeper angulated D- blade for the C- Mac laryngoscope, 
and an Airtraq designed for nasal intubation. User familiarity with 
both channelled and unchannelled laryngoscopes is essential if they 
are to be relied upon in a time- critical airway crisis.
Videolaryngoscopy avoids the need to obtain a view of the laryn-
geal inlet that is in the direct line of vision of the anaesthetist. This 
is particularly beneficial where attempted intubation with direct 
laryngoscopy has proven unsuccessful. Videolaryngoscopy also en-
ables less use of force and multiple individuals can observe the at-
tained view on a monitor, offering advice to the laryngoscopist or 
collectively deciding upon a change of plan for managing the airway.
The videolaryngoscope and tracheal tube must be cautiously in-
serted into the airway to avoid damage to pharyngeal structures, the 
likelihood of which may be enhanced in maxillofacial surgery pa-
tients, where the airway may contain disease or have been injured 
during airway management.
An improved view of the laryngeal inlet does not necessarily 
equate to an easier intubation. The tracheal tube must navigate 
the natural upper airway curvature and any pharyngeal pathology. 
Common pitfalls include advancing the laryngoscope too close 
to the glottis in an effort to obtain a ‘perfect’ view. Advancement 
of the tracheal tube tends to collide with the right arytenoid car-
tilage or pass towards the oesophagus. To reduce this likelihood, 
the clinician should retract the videolaryngoscope to obtain a 
more ‘panoramic’ view of the laryngeal inlet, which may reduce 
the percentage of glottic opening visualized but be of greater 
overall benefit. Channelled devices help to guide the tracheal tube 
through the glottic opening. Selection of a smaller diameter tra-
cheal tube and lubrication allows for easier advancement through 
the channel. For unchannelled videolaryngoscopes, successful in-
tubation is most likely when the curvature of the tracheal tube mir-
rors that of the curvature of the laryngoscope blade. The use of a 
bougie or a malleable stylet can assist with this anterior redirection 
of the tracheal tube. Further obstruction to tracheal tube advance-
ment may arise when the angulated tube contacts the anterior 
tracheal rings after passing through the glottis. This can be ameli-
orated with 180° rotation of the tracheal tube. ‘Reverse loading’ 
of the tracheal tube on a stylet, such that the tube has a tendency 
to bend posteriorly down the trachea when it is offloaded off the 
anterior facing stylet, can also prevent collision with the anterior 
tracheal wall.26
Awake tracheal intubation
All patients are capable of progressing to a CICO scenario on in-
duction of anaesthesia. However, it would be excessive to obviate 
this risk by subjecting all patients to an awake intubation. Awake 
intubation is indicated when the anaesthetist appraises that the risk 
of airway compromise on induction of anaesthesia is unacceptably 
high, or would be regarded as unacceptable by a group of practi-
tioners making a reasonable appraisal of the circumstances. The 
opinion, and indeed assistance, of an experienced colleague can be 
invaluable in this scenario. We advocate a low threshold for awake 
intubation, a threshold frequently reached by patients undergoing 
major oromaxillofacial or head and neck surgery. Awake intub-
ation is most commonly performed with a flexible fibreoptic scope. 
The use of awake videolaryngoscopy (AVL) is increasing, while an 
awake tracheostomy may be most appropriate for managing airways 
in greatest jeopardy.
Fibreoptic intubation
Fibreoptic intubation can be performed awake (AFOI), with or 
without sedation, or under general anaesthesia.
An antisialagogue, such as glycopyrrolate 4 mcg/ kg IV, admin-
istered 30 minutes before the procedure, can reduce the burden 
of secretions, increase the efficacy of topical anaesthesia, and 
offset the bradycardia associated with use of remifentanil or 
dexmedetomidine.27 However, tachycardia may be undesirable in 
patients with significant cardiac disease and can worsen patient 
anxiety.
Sedation can improve tolerance of awake intubation but is not 
an essential component of the procedure with optimal topical an-
aesthesia and a cooperative patient. In all cases, careful titration 
is essential in order to minimize the risk of airway obstruction. 
The degree of sedation must be continually appraised during the 
procedure, and ideally controlled by a second practitioner whose 
primary focus is not intubation. Vital signs should be monitored 
and supplementary oxygen administered, such as via high- flow 
nasal cannulae. The patient should remain capable of responding 
 
 
 
Fibreoptic intubation
23
to a verbal stimulus. Traditional sedative regimens have typically 
included midazolam and fentanyl. Use of remifentanil, propofol, 
ketamine, and dexmedetomidine has increased in recent years.27 
No sedative regimen has demonstrated clear superiority. Local drug 
availability and clinician experience are key determining factors. In 
many institutions, a remifentanil- based regimen (target- controlled 
infusion 1– 3 ng/ mL) is often preferred as this drug effectively blunts 
airway reflexes, is easily titratable due to its short context- sensitive 
half- time, and is reversible with naloxone. Dexmedetomidine, 
though less universally available, produces sedation with excel-
lent patient compliance, antisialagogue effects, and no respiratory 
depression.
Topical anaesthesia is most commonly achieved with lidocaine, 
which is available in varying concentrations (1– 10%), and com-
bined with other agents, such as phenylephrine (co- phenylcaine). 
The addition of a vasoconstrictor is useful for topical anaesthesia 
of the nasal passages to reduce the risk of epistaxis. Cocaine is 
an alternative agent, though is a controlled drug and less readily 
available. The safe dose of lidocaine for airway topical anaesthesia 
is uncertain, with thresholds of 7– 9 mg/ kg commonly quoted.28 
There is poor correlation between administered dose and serum 
concentration. Excessive administration of lidocaine can cause 
local anaesthetic systemic toxicity, most likely to arise during a 
prolonged effort at intubation and with concomitant local anaes-
thetic administration for other reasons. Sedation and progression 
to general anaesthesia precludes assessment of symptoms, such 
that cardiovascular instability may be the first sign. Clinicians 
should familiarize themselves with a treatment protocol for 
this rare event, including the location of lipid emulsion in their 
department.
Techniques for topical anaesthesia include nebulization, garg-
ling of viscous lidocaine, application of soaked pledgets, and 
translaryngeal injection. A ‘spray- as- you- go’ technique enables pro-
gressive anaesthesia of the airway with advancement of the fibre-
optic scope. Dispersal of local anaesthetic in the airway is achieved 
through the working channel of the scope by one of two means. 
The first method involves the filling of syringes with local anaes-
thetic and air (e.g. a 10 mL syringe with 3 mL of 2% lidocaine and 
7 mL of air), such that rapid compression of the plunger pressurizes 
the syringe and propels the local anaesthetic through the working 
channel in a jet- like spray. Alternatively, the injection of local anaes-
thetic through an epidural catheter that has been passed through the 
working channel can achieve a similar effect.
Dedicated nerve blocks most commonly involve the glossopha-
ryngeal and superior laryngeal nerves (discussed in Chapter 4). 
Translaryngeal anaesthesia involves puncture of the cricothyroid 
membrane with a peripheral cannula, while aspirating air in a 
caudad direction. A 5 mL syringe containing 2 mL of 4% lidocaine is 
then attached, and the local anaesthetic is injected after the patient 
is asked to exhale forcefully. This causes the patient to inhale before 
coughing and aids lidocaine spread to the distal trachea. However, it 
can cause laryngeal injury and bleeding.
For nasal intubations, the nare that is selected for intubation 
may be influenced by the site of pathology and by the patient’s sub-
jective assessment of nasal patency. Some clinicians commence 
with serial dilatation of the nares with nasopharyngeal airways of 
increasing size, coated in lidocaine gel, to increase the likelihood 
of unobstructed tube passage into the pharynx. The passage of any 
airway risks trauma, particularly when tissues are friable, and should 
cease if significant resistance is met.
Scope (and later tube) advancement are assisted by tongue and 
jaw protrusion, and neck extension. In the unconscious patient, the 
tongue can be grasped gently with gauze and protruded by an as-
sistant, or a jaw thrust. Airway conduits, such as the Ovassapian 
and Berman airways, may prove useful for oral tracheal intubation.
Airway deformity can make identification of the glottis chal-
lenging, but is aided by slow advancement of the scope. Loss of 
landmarks should prompt slow withdrawal until the anatomy is dis-
cernible. This process may be aided by patient vocalization. If the 
image becomes blurred, gently touching the mucosa with the tip 
of the scope can clear the lens. The infrared red intubation system 
(IRRIS) is a promising device that emits infrared light through the 
cricothyroid membrane, transilluminating the glottis in a retrograde 
fashion, such that it is visible through a scope as a blinking beacon 
to guide advancement.29
Once the scope enters the trachea, it is advanced to the carina. This 
does not guarantee successful tracheal intubation, as advancement 
of the tube over the scope can prove challenging. Tube advancement 
is blind as it occurs proximal to the viewpoint of the scope, which 
uncommonly causes airway trauma. The tube can be warmed in hot 
water prior to use to soften it and should never be forced— gentle 
rotation can help facilitate insertion to the glottis.
Tracheal tube selection is important as difficulty with advance-
ment is proportionate to the gap between the scope and tracheal 
tube.30 This gap enables the course of the tube to deviate from that 
of the scope, most commonly towards the right arytenoid cartilage, 
but also towards the pyriform fossa, epiglottis, or oesophageal inlet. 
A snug fit makes tracheal tube advancement easier, favouring a nar-
rower diameter tube, a thicker fibreoptic scope, or the placement 
of an airway adjunct between the scope and the tube, such as an 
Aintree Intubation Catheter. A conventional polyvinyl chloride tube 
is more difficult to advance than a flexible tube, such as that used 
with the intubating LMA, or the Parker flex- tip tube, which has an 
inward- facing bevel that closely apposes the scope. Contact of the 
bevel of the tracheal tube with the right arytenoid cartilage can be 
overcome by 90° anticlockwise rotation of the tube, such that the tip 
is brought anterior to the arytenoids.
The distance between the tracheal tube and carina is measured as 
the scope is withdrawn. Final confirmation of tracheal placement is 
confirmed with detection of carbon dioxide. Cuff inflation is stimu-
lating if the subglottic space is not adequately anaesthetized and is 
often undertaken after induction of anaesthesia. Rarely, the cuff can 
rupture on advancement of the tube, and remain undetected until it 
fails to adequately inflate in the trachea, requiring exchange over a 
catheter.
Multiple attempts at fibreoptic intubation can lead to mucosal 
trauma, bleeding, and airway oedema. Rarely, the procedure will 
need to be abandoned and other methods of airway management 
selected, which may include AVL or awake tracheostomy. Despite 
failed AFOI, the anaesthetist may have gained sufficient insight into 
the patient’s airway anatomy to make a judgement that proceeding 
with induction of anaesthesia is safe. Fibreoptic intubation may re-
tain a role in intubation of that patient, occasionally in tandem with 
videolaryngoscopy, or via a SAD.
Difﬁcult airway
24
Awake videolaryngoscopy
Awake direct laryngoscopy is not adequately tolerated by patients as 
the forces necessary to obtain a view of the glottis stimulate airway 
reflexes and cause adverse autonomic effects. However, AVL is an 
emerging area.31 Airway instrumentation is less forceful and stimu-
lating when an indirect view of the laryngeal inlet can be obtained. 
Stimulation can be further reduced by tolerating a suboptimal view 
of the glottis and selecting a slender videolaryngoscope, such as the 
McGrath.32 Adequate airway topical anaesthesia and sedation are 
key contributors to success, particularly with blockade of afferent 
branches of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. A ‘spray- as- 
you- go’ local anaesthetic technique is commonly performed as the 
laryngoscope is progressively advanced.
AVL may be a suitable alternative to AFOI.33 This approach can 
succeed when AFOI has failed, such as with severe airway oedema, 
bleeding, or a large volume of secretions. AVL can more easily dis-
place tissues and create a path for tracheal tube passage. With AVL, 
tracheal tube placement occurs under vision, allowing for any ob-
struction to advancement to be diagnosed and corrected. In con-
trast, the tracheal tube is advanced blindly over the scope during 
AFOI, risking tissue trauma. An airway which is greatly narrowed is 
also susceptible to complete occlusion by a fibreoptic scope, while a 
videolaryngoscope does not pass through the narrowing and could 
allow for the passage of a smaller diameter tracheal tube.
Limitations of AVL include difficult or impossible insertion due to 
poor mouth opening or inadequate space between the mouth and chest 
wall, such as a fixed flexion deformity. Insertion of a videolaryngoscope 
can also cause tissue trauma, particularly if airway anatomy is ab-
normal, which may further compromise an already threatened airway.
AVL is most likely to fail when pharyngeal reflexes are not ad-
equately suppressed. However, the videolaryngoscope may still be 
temporarily tolerated to attain a view of the laryngeal inlet, offering 
some (but not complete) reassurance to the clinician that intubation 
would be possible following abandonment of awake intubation and 
induction of anaesthesia. There is no guarantee that a good view will 
translate to an easy intubation or even remain under anaesthesia.
Awake tracheostomy
Awake tracheostomies are performed for acute upper airway ob-
struction, in scenarios where oxygenation by other means has failed, 
is not secure, or is inappropriate to attempt.34,35 Rescue tracheos-
tomy may be required after a cricothyroidotomy has failed to obtain 
airway access. Awake tracheostomy should be strongly considered 
for an anticipated difficult airway, where other awake intubation 
techniques such as fibreoptic or videolaryngoscopic intubation 
proved unsuccessful, and where the anaesthetist judges the risks 
associated with induction of anaesthesia to be greater than a pre- 
emptive surgical airway.
Local anaesthesia alone may suffice in enabling this procedure to 
be performed. However, hypoxaemia, fear, and procedural demands 
for neck extension can all impair essential patient cooperation. 
Sedative drugs must be carefully titrated.
While tracheostomy is performed with the aim of avoiding ser-
ious morbidity and mortality, it also carries the risk of the same, 
including life- threatening haemorrhage and loss of the airway. 
Greatest risk is associated with emergency tracheostomies, which 
have been classically surgical in nature, but can also be undertaken 
by a percutaneous dilational technique.36
Retrograde intubation
Retrograde intubation involves advancement of a tracheal tube over 
a guide that has been percutaneously introduced into the trachea 
and passed in a retrograde manner through the vocal cords and out 
through the mouth or nose.37 The emerging guide offers a route for 
anterograde tube passage, assisting with navigation around upper 
airway abnormalities and avoiding the need to visualize the laryn-
geal inlet. The technique is, therefore, most beneficial with upper 
airway deformities, or where more common techniques prove chal-
lenging, such as airway bleeding that is preventing adequate visual-
ization with a fibreoptic scope.
Following topical anaesthesia and optional sedation, the crico-
thyroid or cricotracheal membrane is punctured with an appropriate 
needle. The Tuohy epidural needle is commonly used, as its bevel as-
sists with cephalad direction of the guide. Peripheral vascular access 
catheters or introducer needles from central venous access kits are 
alternatives. The lumen of the larynx is located with needle advance-
ment by aspiration of air, followed by advancement of the catheter in 
a cephalad direction into the larynx.
A guide is then advanced, most commonly a ‘J’- tipped guidewire 
from a central venous access kit, or an epidural catheter. The former 
is more visible and stiff, allowing for easier guide retrieval and sub-
sequent tube advancement. Its ‘J’- tip can assist with passage through 
upper airway obstacles and can be grasped by forceps to lift the wire 
from the pharyngeal mucosa and retrieve it by mouth, if the wire 
has not emerged with simple advancement. Should nasal intubation 
be necessary, but the guide has appeared by mouth, a catheter can 
be placed through the nose and retrieved by mouth. This can act as 
a conduit for the retrograde advancement of the guide through the 
nose, or the guide can be tied to the end of the catheter and pulled 
out through the nose.
Advancement of the tracheal tube over the guide can be difficult. 
It is important to keep the guide taut, so that it does not loop in 
the pharynx or allow for tube advancement into the oesophagus. 
However, excessive tension can depress the guide into the tissues, 
impede the passage of the tube, and increase the risk of tissue trauma. 
Difficulty with advancement also arises secondary to the large gap 
between the guide and the tube, allowing the tube to impinge upon 
adjacent structures, such as the arytenoid cartilages. Looping of 
the retrograde guide through the Murphy’s eye can offer a remedy. 
A hollow anterograde guide can also be placed over the retrograde 
guide to reduce this problematic gap, such as a suction catheter or 
airway exchange catheter.38 With fibreoptic- aided retrograde intub-
ation, the retrograde guidewire can be placed through the distal end 
of the working channel. The scope is loaded with a tracheal tube 
and is then railroaded into the trachea, allowing for tube placement 
under visualization.38
Contraindications to retrograde intubation include subglottic 
pathologies and coagulopathy. Complications include bleeding, in-
fection, surgical emphysema, vocal cord injury, and oesophageal 
puncture.
 
 
 
Intubation for maxillomandibular ﬁxation
25
Blind nasal intubation
This technique of airway management involves the gradual advance-
ment of a tracheal tube from the nostril to the trachea, guided by 
breath sounds or tactile sensation, rather than visualization. Key to 
success is optimal patient positioning, which involves lateral rota-
tion of the head towards the side of intubation, along with hyper- 
extension of the neck.39 Intubation is also aided by the preformed 
curve of the tracheal tube. In the breathing patient, the tube is ad-
vanced during inhalation and the anaesthetist assesses for airflow via 
the tube during exhalation. In the apnoeic patient, there is greater 
obstruction to tube advancement with loss of upper airway tone and 
the respiratory cycle is no longer present to assist the anaesthetist. 
Greater reliance is placed on tactile sensation, whereby the anaes-
thetist may sense obstruction to tube advancement at the vallecula 
or glottis, or appreciate forward motion of the tube into the trachea 
by palpation of the front of the neck.
The value of this technique is increasingly limited, as a blind tech-
nique has greater likelihood of causing trauma to the airway, cre-
ating a time- critical scenario where management options become 
limited and airway patency is compromised. Its role may be greatest 
in a resource- poor setting.
Cricothyroidotomy
Cricothyroidotomy is universally recommended in all major airway 
management guidelines as a rescue oxygenation technique, fol-
lowing failure of face mask ventilation, conventional tracheal intub-
ation, and SAD insertion.40
The laryngeal handshake can aid cricothyroid membrane identi-
fication. The thumb and middle finger pass down over the thyroid 
laminae to reach the cricoid cartilage, allowing the index finger to 
land upon the cricothyroid membrane.41 Difficulty in identifying 
the membrane by inspection and palpation greatly increases the 
failure rate of cricothyroidotomy. The membrane should, therefore, 
be identified as a component of preoperative assessment, assisted by 
ultrasound if necessary.
Successful cricothyroidotomy is reliant on timely performance 
and both technical and non- technical skills. A scalpel or cannula 
cricothyroidotomy is possible. Dedicated equipment sets are avail-
able. Scalpel cricothyroidotomy with familiar equipment is increas-
ingly favoured— a number 10 blade, a bougie, and a 6.0 mm internal 
diameter cuffed tracheal tube. A ‘stab, twist, bougie, tube’ technique 
has been described.41 A vertical rather than horizontal incision is 
made when the membrane is impalpable, followed by blunt dissec-
tion with the hands to locate the larynx.
The presence of a nearby surgeon may prove invaluable in assisting 
with rescue efforts should an airway crisis progress to this scenario.
Intubation for maxillomandibular ﬁxation
Nasotracheal intubation is typically used in lieu of orotracheal intub-
ation in order to enable maxillomandibular fixation during reduc-
tion of facial fractures. Occasionally, complex facial fractures may 
contraindicate or obstruct passage of a nasal tube. Tracheostomy 
can be performed if injuries are extensive. Retromolar and sub-
mental intubation techniques are alternatives for patients who are 
likely to require only short- term ventilatory support and for whom 
the clinician wishes to avoid tracheostomy- associated complica-
tions. A submental technique can also be suitable for a number of 
elective surgeries, for example, Le Fort III osteotomies, skull base 
surgeries, repair of cancrum oris defects, and complex cleft lift and 
palate surgeries.42
Retromolar intubation
Retromolar intubation was first described by Bonfils in 1983, using 
an eponymous rigid fibrescope.43 The retromolar space is bounded 
by the last molar, the maxillary tuberosity, and the anterior aspect 
of the ascending ramus of the mandible. The tracheal tube can rest 
in this space, allowing for complete dental occlusion. The space can 
also act as a conduit for the use of a flexible fibrescope or rigid intub-
ating fibrescope, and to enable passage of a suction catheter into the 
oropharynx.
To discern whether the retromolar space is large enough to ac-
commodate the tracheal tube, the patient’s index finger can be 
placed in the space and they are asked to slowly occlude the teeth. 
The extraction of a third molar, to expand an otherwise inadequate 
retromolar space, has been reported. A small diameter, reinforced 
tracheal tube is also helpful. Effort must be made to avoid deforming 
the tube when it is fixed with wire ligature.
A gap created by loss of teeth can fulfil a similar purpose to the 
retromolar space, accommodating tube passage for dental occlu-
sion. Risks of retromolar intubation include mucosal trauma, inad-
equate dental occlusion, and accidental extubation.
Submental intubation
A submental intubation is one that externalizes the proximal end of 
the tracheal tube through the floor of the mouth and submental re-
gion. To perform submental intubation, the trachea is first intubated 
by mouth using a reinforced tracheal tube.42 The universal connector 
of the selected tube must be easy to detach. An orocutaneous tunnel 
is created in order to divert the proximal end of the tracheal tube 
through the floor of the mouth. Under aseptic technique, a 15 mm 
incision is made in the submental region, paralleling the inferior 
border of the mandible, on the contralateral side to the fracture. The 
optimal site for incision has been contested and is based largely on 
clinician desire to avoid certain anatomical structures.
Blunt dissection is performed with forceps adjacent to the man-
dible, passing through fat, platysma, deep cervical fascia, the 
mylohyoid muscle, and between the two heads of digastric muscles, 
before the forceps is observed to indent the oral mucosa. The mu-
cosa is then incised to enable passage of the forceps into the cavity. 
The forceps blades are separated to enlarge the orifice sufficient to 
enable tube passage. Following a period of 100% oxygen delivery, 
the pilot balloon is deflated and pulled through the submental in-
cision by the forceps. This is followed by removal of the tracheal 
tube connector and pull through of the tube, before reconnection 
and confirmation of tube placement with capnography. The tube is 
sutured and taped in place. Following surgery, the tube can be re-
turned to the orotracheal position or left submentally for subsequent 
extubation. In order to reduce the likelihood of hypoxaemia which 
can arise with challenging tube retrieval and reconnection, some 
clinicians utilize a second tracheal tube.44 Following orotracheal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Difﬁcult airway
26
intubation, a reinforced tracheal tube is advanced from the exterior 
through the submental incision into the oropharynx. At this point, 
the orotracheal tube is removed, and the submental tube is advanced 
into the trachea (approaches to submental intubation are also dis-
cussed in Chapters 3 and 10).
Complications of submental intubation include bleeding, damage 
to adjacent structures (such as the lingual nerve, sublingual gland, 
and submandibular duct), desaturation due to tube positioning, dis-
placement of the tube (leading to extubation or endobronchial in-
tubation), superficial skin infection, and scar formation.
Tracheal extubation
During tracheal extubation, the anaesthetist aims to maintain an un-
interrupted delivery of oxygen to the lungs, as the patient transitions 
to an independent state of airway protection and gas exchange that 
no longer relies on the presence of a tracheal tube. There is often 
an underappreciation of the risks associated with extubation. In 
the fourth National Audit Project, one- third of major anaesthesia- 
related airway complications occurred on emergence or in recovery, 
and commonly involved patients who underwent head and neck 
surgery.1 Guidance on extubation has been issued by the Difficult 
Airway Society.45
Like intubation, challenges at extubation can be anatomical or 
physiological, and are exacerbated by human factors.46 Airway re-
flexes may be exaggerated or obtunded. Exaggerated reflexes can 
lead to laryngospasm, which is most likely to arise in a light plane 
of anaesthesia, with the presence of blood and secretions acting as 
stimuli. Obtunded airway reflexes can lead to airway obstruction or 
aspiration, secondary to the residual effects of anaesthetic agents, 
opioids, and neuromuscular blocking drugs. Initial airway instru-
mentation and surgical interventions can adversely affect the airway, 
including oedema, bleeding, haematoma formation, and nerve 
injury.
During intubation, the anaesthetist assumes full control of the 
patient by pharmacological means. In contrast, extubation is some-
what associated with a loss of control, as responsibility is progres-
sively transferred back to the patient to manage their own airway. 
Like intubation, extubation must be tailored to the needs of the pa-
tient. Ultimately, the anaesthetist must be prepared for reintubation 
and demonstrate awareness of the resources available to assist them 
in this regard, such as personnel and equipment. They must ask 
whether airway management at induction was predictive of a diffi-
cult extubation, or if the status of the airway has changed in the in-
terim. Consequently, the airway being managed by the anaesthetist 
at extubation may represent an airway not previously encountered. 
A classical scenario is the airway following intermaxillary fixation, 
where wire cutters should be available to enable oral access for emer-
gency reintubation.
Decisions regarding suitability for extubation must be individual-
ized. Multisystem assessment of the patient is crucial. Consciousness, 
haemodynamics, respiratory effort, acid– base status, thermoregula-
tion, and analgesia are examples of areas that should be optimized 
before extubation. Extubation should never be hurried. Indeed, 
extubation may be postponed for hours or days, in order to create 
more favourable airway circumstances, such as the resolution of 
oedema. The risk of airway compromise may be such that elective 
tracheostomy is performed, during the initial surgery or in the post-
operative period.
The upper airway must be thoroughly suctioned before extubation, 
ideally under direct vision to reduce the risk of trauma. Endoscopic 
or laryngoscopic assessment may be necessary to ensure the absence 
of clots in the upper airway. The presence of a throat pack in the 
airway must be clearly signposted at insertion in order to ensure re-
trieval before extubation. A gastric tube, if present, should be aspir-
ated. If neuromuscular blocking drugs have been used, a train of 
four ratio >0.9 should be confirmed by quantitative nerve stimulator 
monitoring before extubation, as residual neuromuscular blockade 
demonstrates a clear association with postoperative complications. 
Rapid return of neuromuscular function can be attained with the 
administration of sugammadex where rocuronium and vecuronium 
have been administered.
Preoxygenation at a FiO2 of 1.0 should precede extubation. Head- 
up tilt is the increasingly favoured position for extubation, as it im-
proves respiratory mechanics and is a familiar position for airway 
intervention. Airway oedema may benefit from steroid administra-
tion and adrenaline nebulization.47 Corticosteroids can reduce la-
ryngeal oedema and the likelihood of failed extubation, but require 
administration at least 4 hours prior to extubation for benefit. The 
presence of a cuff leak is a positive sign, but is not sufficiently sensi-
tive or specific to exclude a problem on extubation.
Deep extubation reduces the likelihood of coughing and associ-
ated adverse haemodynamic effects but can lead to upper airway 
obstruction and is not recommended. Alternatively, the Bailey man-
oeuvre involves the exchange of a tracheal tube for a SAD in a deep 
plane of anaesthesia before emergence. This can also enable fibre-
optic assessment of laryngeal and tracheal motion following the re-
sumption of spontaneous respiration but prior to emergence.
Airway exchange catheters are thin, blunt- ended hollow tubes that 
are passed through the tracheal tube and remain in the airway on 
extubation.48 They offer a conduit for the administration of oxygen 
via standard anaesthesia circuitry or jet ventilation, and can act as a 
guide for the passage of a tracheal tube in the event of reintubation. 
The distal end of the catheter should remain above the carina. 
There is a risk of barotrauma with both jet ventilation or continued 
oxygen insufflation when the path for gas egress is compromised. 
If reintubation is necessary, both laryngoscopy and the selection 
of a small tracheal tube can assist with railroading of the tracheal 
tube over the catheter. Gum elastic bougies and suction catheters 
are inferior substitutes for airway exchange catheters, as they typic-
ally do not allow for oxygen administration and can cause trauma, 
but they may be the only catheters available for use in resource- poor 
countries.
Opioids suppress airway reflexes. Remifentanil, administered 
by infusion, can allow for a patient to emerge from anaesthesia to 
the point of being fully awake while remaining tube tolerant. The 
volatile agent or propofol is discontinued in advance of extubation, 
allowing adequate time for drug washout, while the remifentanil 
infusion is continued. Patients can be encouraged to breathe while 
the remifentanil infusion is titrated down until normal respiration 
resumes and the tracheal tube can be safely removed with the pa-
tient fully conscious. Efforts to hasten extubation by vigorous stimu-
lation are inappropriate. Adequate spontaneous respiration should 
be ensured. Venous catheters should be aspirated or flushed of 
remifentanil and other agents no longer required, in order to avoid 
Conclusion
27
their adverse effects in the recovery room or ward. Respiratory status 
must be closely monitored with this approach, as patients remain at 
risk of apnoeic periods after extubation.
Particular caution must be applied to patients with intermaxillary 
fixation, such as ensuring tracheal extubation is undertaken when 
the patient is fully conscious and that wire cutters are immediately 
available (discussed in detail in Chapter 17).
Any complaint of difficult breathing by the patient following 
extubation, or observation of the same by nursing staff, demands 
urgent clinician assessment. History and examination should be 
undertaken to identify stridor or evidence of haematoma formation, 
which may indicate impending airway compromise, before abnor-
malities of vital signs or blood gas parameters are detected.
For patients being admitted to the intensive care unit, monitoring 
during transfer should replicate that seen prior to transfer, including 
capnography. The on- call anaesthesia service should be informed 
about the patient and an airway management plan agreed upon in 
the event of deterioration, with all necessary equipment located near 
the patient.
Human factors
Difficult airway management can be caused or complicated by 
human factors. During an airway crisis, several issues may unfold 
simultaneously, each demanding of attention during this time- 
critical scenario. The inability to rapidly prioritize this information 
to the point where it can impair decision- making is known as cog-
nitive overload. An overwhelmed anaesthetist may become fixated 
on one aspect of care to the overall detriment of the patient. For ex-
ample, repeated attempts at intubation can lead to airway trauma 
and jeopardize the delivery of oxygen to a patient who is easy to 
oxygenate by other means, such as bag mask ventilation.
Cognitive aids, such as the Vortex model of airway management 
or the airway algorithms of the Difficult Airway Society, aim to focus 
on the challenge at hand, suggesting methods of optimizing their 
current approach or alternative interventions, some of which may 
not have occurred to them. Verbalizing one’s thought process en-
ables those in attendance to be aware of the problem and positions 
them to offer optimal assistance. This may include questioning that 
thought process and recognizing that any individual, irrespective of 
traditional hierarchy, may be instrumental in solving the problem 
at hand.
Conclusion
All patients require an airway management plan that is tailored to 
their needs. This plan must consider the patient’s airway anatomy 
and broader clinical state, the skill set of the anaesthetist, the require-
ments for surgery, and the resources available. The shared airway 
has its own unique challenges and the surgery itself may create par-
ticular difficulties with extubation, such as anatomical changes and 
intermaxillary fixation. Surgical instruments and throat packs must 
be carefully documented for removal. During difficult airway man-
agement, the anaesthetist must remember that the immediate and 
principal goal is to secure oxygenation, which does not necessarily 
equate to tracheal intubation.
REFERENCES
 1. Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C; Fourth National Audit 
Project. Major complications of airway management in the 
UK: results of the Fourth National Audit Project of the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society. 
Part 1: anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 2011;106(5):617– 631.
 2. Shiga T, Wajima Z, Inoue T, Sakamoto A. Predicting difficult 
intubation in apparently normal patients: a meta- analysis 
of bedside screening test performance. Anesthesiology. 
2005;103(2):429– 437.
 3. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks AM, Tremper KK. Prediction 
and outcomes of impossible mask ventilation: a review of 50,000 
anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(4):891– 897.
 4. Khan ZH, Mohammadi M, Rasouli MR, Farrokhnia F, Khan RH. 
The diagnostic value of the upper lip bite test combined with 
sternomental distance, thyromental distance, and interincisor 
distance for prediction of easy laryngoscopy and intubation: a 
prospective study. Anesth Analg. 2009;109(3):822– 824.
 5. Randell T. Prediction of difficult intubation. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand. 1996;40(8):1016– 1023.
 6. Al Ramadhani S, Mohamed LA, Rocke DA, Gouws E. Sternomental 
distance as the sole predictor of difficult laryngoscopy in obstetric 
anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 1996;77(3):312– 316.
 7. Kristensen MS, Teoh WH, Rudolph SS. Ultrasonographic  
 identification of the cricothyroid membrane: best evidence, 
techniques, and clinical impact. Br J Anaesth. 2016;117(1): 
i139– i148.
 8. Mort TC. Emergency tracheal intubation: complications 
associated with repeated laryngoscopic attempts. Anesth Analg. 
2004;99(2):607– 613.
 9. El- Orbany M, Woehlck H, Salem MR. Head and neck position 
for direct laryngoscopy. Anesth Analg. 2011;113(1):103– 109.
 10. Nimmagadda U, Salem MR, Crystal GJ. 
Preoxygenation: physiologic basis, benefits, and potential risks. 
Anesth Analg. 2017;124(2):507– 517.
 11. Warters RD, Szabo TA, Spinale FG, DeSantis SM, Reves JG. 
The effect of neuromuscular blockade on mask ventilation. 
Anaesthesia. 2011;66(3):163– 167.
 12. Lundstrøm LH, Duez CH, Nørskov AK, Rosenstock CV, 
Thomsen JL, Møller AM, et al. Avoidance versus use of 
neuromuscular blocking agents for improving conditions 
during tracheal intubation or direct laryngoscopy in adults and 
adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;5:CD009237.
 13. Dalton AJ, Millar F. Neuromuscular monitoring and the AAGBI 
2016 monitoring guidelines. Anaesthesia. 2016;71(8):981– 982.
 14. Lyons C, Callaghan M. Uses and mechanisms of apnoeic 
oxygenation: a narrative review. Anaesthesia. 2019;74(4):497– 507.
 15. Levitan RM. (2010, 9 December). NO DESAT! Nasal oxygen 
during efforts securing a tube. Emergency Physicians Monthly. 
https:// www.epmont hly.com/ arti cle/ no- desat/ 
 16. Patel A, Nouraei SA. Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation 
ventilatory exchange (THRIVE): a physiological method 
of increasing apnoea time in patients with difficult airways. 
Anaesthesia. 2015;70(3):323– 329.
 17. Lyons C, Callaghan M. Apnoeic oxygenation with high- flow 
nasal oxygen for laryngeal surgery: a case series. Anaesthesia. 
2017;72(11):1379– 1387.
 18. Cook TM, Kelly FE. Time to abandon the ‘vintage’ laryngeal 
mask airway and adopt second- generation supraglottic airway 
devices as first choice. Br J Anaesth. 2015;115(4):497– 499.
Difﬁcult airway
28
 19. Van Zundert AA, Kumar CM, Van Zundert TC. Malpositioning 
of supraglottic airway devices: preventive and corrective 
strategies. Br J Anaesth. 2016;116(5):579– 582.
 20. Howath A, Brimacombe J, Keller C. Gum- elastic bougie- guided 
insertion of the ProSeal laryngeal mask airway: a new technique. 
Anaesth Intensive Care. 2002;30(5):624– 627.
 21. Wong DT, Yang JJ, Mak HY, Jagannathan N. Use of intubation 
introducers through a supraglottic airway to facilitate tracheal 
intubation: a brief review. Can J Anaesth. 2012;59(7):704– 715.
 22. Berkow LC, Schwartz JM, Kan K, Corridore M, Heitmiller ES. 
Use of the Laryngeal Mask Airway- Aintree Intubating Catheter- 
fiberoptic bronchoscope technique for difficult intubation. J Clin 
Anesth. 2011;23(7):534– 539.
 23. Cook TM, Tuckey JP. A comparison between the Macintosh and the 
McCoy laryngoscope blades. Anaesthesia. 1996;51(10):977– 980.
 24. Knill RL. Difficult laryngoscopy made easy with a ‘BURP’. Can J 
Anaesth. 1993;40(3):279– 282.
 25. El- Orbany M, Woehlck H, Salem MR. Head and neck position 
for direct laryngoscopy. Anesth Analg. 2011;113(1):103– 109.
 26. Dupanović M, Isaacson S, Borovcanin Z, Jain S, Korten S, Karan 
S, et al. Clinical comparison of two stylet angles for orotracheal 
intubation with the GlideScope video laryngoscope. J Clin 
Anesth. 2010;22(5):352– 359.
 27. Johnston KD, Rai MR. Conscious sedation for awake 
fibreoptic intubation: a review of the literature. Can J Anaesth. 
2013;60(6):584– 599.
 28. Du Rand IA, Blaikley J, Booton R, Chaudhuri N, Gupta V, Khalid 
S, et al. British Thoracic Society guideline for diagnostic flexible 
bronchoscopy in adults. Thorax. 2013;68:i1– i44.
 29. Kristensen MS, Fried E, Biro P. Infrared red intubation system 
(IRRIS) guided flexile videoscope assisted difficult airway 
management. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2018;62(1):19– 25.
 30. Asai T, Shingu K. Difficulty in advancing a tracheal tube over a 
fibreoptic bronchoscope: incidence, causes and solutions. Br J 
Anaesth. 2004;92(6):870– 881.
 31. Rosenstock CV, Thøgersen B, Afshari A, Christensen AL, Eriksen 
C, Gätke MR. Awake fiberoptic or awake video laryngoscopic 
tracheal intubation in patients with anticipated difficult airway 
management: a randomized clinical trial. Anesthesiology. 
2012;116(6):1210– 1216.
 32. McGuire BE. Use of the McGrath video laryngoscope in awake 
patients. Anaesthesia. 2009;64(8):912– 914.
 33. Paolini JB, Donati F, Drolet P. Review 
article: video- laryngoscopy: another tool for difficult intubation 
or a new paradigm in airway management? Can J Anaesth. 
2013;60(2):184– 191.
 34. Fang CH, Friedman R, White PE, Mady LJ, Kalyoussef 
E. Emergent awake tracheostomy— the five- year 
experience at an urban tertiary care center. Laryngoscope. 
2015;125(11):2476– 2479.
 35. Yuen HW, Loy AH, Johari S. Urgent awake tracheostomy for 
impending airway obstruction. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2007;136(5):838– 842.
 36. Davidson SB, Blostein PA, Walsh J, Maltz SB, VandenBerg SL. 
Percutaneous tracheostomy: a new approach to the emergency 
airway. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2):S83– S88.
 37. Dhara SS. Retrograde intubation— a facilitated approach. Br J 
Anaesth. 1992;69(6):631– 633.
 38. Vieira D, Lages N, Dias J, Maria L, Correia C. Retrograde 
intubation: an old new technique. OA Anaesthetics. 2013;1(2):18.
 39. Chauhan V, Acharya G. Nasal intubation: a comprehensive 
review. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2016;20(11):662– 667.
 40. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath 
R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
 41. Levitan RM. (2014, 6 February). Tips and tricks for performing 
cricothyrotomy. ACEP Now. https:// www.acep now.com/ arti cle/ 
tips- tri cks- per form ing- cri coth yrot omy/ 
 42. Das S, Das TP, Ghosh PS. Submental intubation: a journey 
over the last 25 years. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol. 
2012;28(3):291– 303.
 43. Bonfils P. [Difficult intubation in Pierre- Robin children, 
a new method: the retromolar route]. Anaesthesist. 
1983;32(7):363– 367.
 44. Amin M, Dill- Russell P, Manisali M, Lee R, Sinton I. Facial 
fractures and submental tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia. 
2002;57(12):1195– 1199.
 45. Difficult Airway Society Extubation Guidelines Group, Popat M, 
Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, Swampillai C, et al. Difficult Airway 
Society Guidelines for the management of tracheal extubation. 
Anaesthesia. 2012;67(3):318– 340.
 46. Cavallone LF, Vannucci A. Review article: extubation of 
the difficult airway and extubation failure. Anesth Analg. 
2013;116(2):368– 383.
 47. McCaffrey J, Farrell C, Whiting P, Dan A, Bagshaw 
SM, Delaney AP. Corticosteroids to prevent extubation 
failure: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Intensive Care 
Med. 2009;35(6):977– 986.
 48. Mort TC. Continuous airway access for the difficult 
extubation: the efficacy of the airway exchange catheter. Anesth 
Analg. 2007;105(5):1357– 1362.
3
Surgical airway
William P. L. Bradley and Gordon A. Chapman
Introduction
Oxygenation is the cornerstone of anaesthesia and airway manage-
ment. This is usually achieved by a supraglottic approach. However, 
there are times when infraglottic access may be required. Surgical 
airways in oral and maxillofacial surgery may be performed as 
elective or emergency procedures.
Elective procedures include the temporary or permanent trache-
ostomy performed as part of a surgical procedure, submental in-
tubation, the laryngostomy following total laryngectomy, as well 
as transtracheal jet ventilation. Usually, obstruction of the upper 
airway due to perioperative or infective swelling is temporary and 
a tracheostomy may only be required until these resolve. Urgent 
and planned procedures would include the percutaneous or sur-
gical tracheostomy in the intensive care unit (ICU) patient to ex-
pedite weaning and facilitate tracheobronchial toilet.
Emergency surgical airway procedures include the awake trache-
ostomy where an oral or nasal intubation may be deemed impossible 
or contraindicated. Emergency surgical airways in anaesthesia are 
most commonly associated with the ‘can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate’ 
(CICO) scenario. The CICO scenario is a relatively rare event with 
an estimated incidence of approximately 1 in 5000 to 1 in 10,000 
general anaesthetics.1,2
It is essential that a thorough airway assessment is performed 
to ensure the appropriate airway plans are put in place to min-
imize the risk of hypoxia to the patient. Non- technical and human 
factors are also important, and the anaesthetist should be cogni-
sant of their role in managing the surgical airway. In addition to 
the relevant chapters in this textbook (see Chapters 1, 2, and 18), 
the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists has pro-
duced downloadable online airway resources available to compli-
ment these areas (https:// libgui des.anzca.edu.au/ air way).
Several conditions (including previous surgery, radiotherapy, 
fixed cervical spine deformities, acute or chronic infective or inflam-
matory conditions, neoplastic disease of the neck, larynx, or trachea, 
obesity, trauma, and neck deformities such as torticollis) may dis-
tort the anatomy or make surface landmarks difficult to palpate. 
Infection, oedema related to an allergic reaction, and haemorrhage 
may make surgical access to the airway more difficult due to loss of 
normal surgical tissue planes.
Anatomy
Knowledge of the anatomy of the larynx, trachea, and surrounding 
structures is critical for successful infraglottic airway access and 
avoiding the potential risk of trauma to surrounding structures es-
pecially when the anatomy is distorted.
The larynx is comprised of six cartilages:
 • Thyroid cartilage.
 • Cricoid cartilage.
 • Epiglottis cartilage.
 • Arytenoid (paired) cartilage.
 • Corniculate (paired) cartilage.
 • Cuneiform (paired) cartilage.
The cricothyroid membrane is located between the thyroid and cri-
coid cartilages. The cricoid cartilage is the only complete ring and 
connects the trachea to the larynx.
The trachea is a pipe consisting of semicircular cartilaginous 
rings that connect the pharynx and larynx to the main bronchi. The 
trachealis muscle forms the posterior wall of the trachea. The tra-
cheal semicircular rings are joined by horizontal bands of fibrous 
connective tissue known as the annular ligaments of the trachea. 
The epiglottis is composed of elastic cartilage covered anteriorly by 
non- keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (consistent with the 
pharynx) and posteriorly by pseudo- stratified columnar epithelium 
(consistent with the larynx). Under the epithelial layer is a thin layer 
of areolar connective tissue that provides a loose attachment for 
the epithelium and supplies it with blood vessels and nerve fibres. 
During swallowing, the pharynx, hyoid, and larynx move superiorly. 
This movement of the hyoid allows the epiglottis to fold down over 
the glottis and prevents aspiration.
The thyroid gland lies anterior to the trachea and its isthmus usu-
ally crosses the trachea at the level of the second and third tracheal 
rings. The innominate artery crosses the mid- trachea but may be 
 
 
 
Surgical airway
30
in a higher position at the base of the neck. In this position cata-
strophic postoperative bleeding may occur from a trachea– vascular 
fistula when a tracheostomy tube erodes into the artery over time 
(discussed in detail in Chapter 16).
Posteriorly, the oesophagus contacts the trachea on the left and 
vertebral bodies on the right. The carotid artery and internal jugular 
veins are located laterally.
Elective tracheostomy
This can be performed either percutaneously or as an open surgical 
technique and may be either temporary or permanent. Generally, 
an open surgical technique may be performed in either an elective 
or emergency setting, whereas the percutaneous approach is usually 
performed semi- electively. The percutaneous dilatational trache-
ostomy is often a Seldinger- based technique with dilatation of the 
space between the tracheal rings compared to surgical dissection 
and placement under direct vision.
The indications for tracheostomy include the following:
 1. Bypass of an obstructed upper airway due to varying patholo-
gies such as tumour, infection, oedema, trauma, or congenital 
malformations.
 2. Protracted intubation and ventilation, that is, high cervical spine 
injuries or neuromuscular diseases and mechanical ventilation 
where tracheostomy facilitates weaning.
 3. Potential airway protection in patients with long- term reduced 
conscious states or bulbar disorders.
The advantages of a tracheostomy over tracheal intubation in the 
critically ill population who require prolonged intubation include 
patient comfort, reduced sedation requirements, reduced resistance 
to breathing, improved tracheal toilet so improving oropharyngeal 
hygiene, and early patient mobilization. Early use over late trache-
ostomy insertion may reduce the duration of mechanical ventilation 
but without mortality benefit.3
There are few absolute contraindications for tracheostomy 
other than patient refusal. In addition, percutaneous tracheos-
tomy is generally not recommended for emergency airway access 
or in children. Relative contraindications for tracheostomy may 
include morbid obesity, malignancy, radiotherapy, limited neck 
extension, kyphoscoliosis, unstable cervical spine, large goitres, 
coagulopathies, high ventilatory support (high risk of significant 
desaturation during procedure), and infection at the insertion site. 
Where tracheostomy is deemed necessary in the above- mentioned 
conditions, an open surgical technique is generally preferred.
Percutaneous techniques are associated with a lower inci-
dence of infections compared to the open surgical approach.4– 6 
Originally, it was suggested that the mortality rate and cardio-
respiratory complications were higher with the percutaneous 
route.7 However, recent reviews showed that there were no sig-
nificant statistical differences in haemorrhagic events, mor-
tality, stenosis rate, or false passage complications.5,6 The higher 
infection rate could be related to the more complex cases being 
performed as a surgical technique. The cost benefit of the per-
cutaneous technique is probably more related to it being per-
formed in an ICU setting rather than the operating theatre. 
A surgical tracheostomy performed in ICU is probably also more 
cost- effective than if it were performed in the operating theatre.8 
Finally, there may be better cosmetic results with a percutaneous 
approach.5
Training and education utilizing either manikins or biological 
models is encouraged to enhance the effective and safe performance 
of these techniques. Both the UK National Tracheostomy Safety pro-
ject (NTSP— https:// www.trach eost omy.org.uk/ ) and Australasian 
Tracheostomy Review and Management Services (TRAMS— 
https:// www.trach eost omyt eam.org/ ) aim to enhance patient safety 
with improvement in skills, knowledge, and competencies of clinical 
staff in dealing with tracheostomies.9
Percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy
These techniques may be used as part of the postoperative surgical 
airway management of oral and maxillofacial surgical patients. 
Percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy may be performed in ICU 
at the patient’s bedside (Table 3.1). This procedure may be quicker 
to perform than the open technique6 by avoiding the logistics of re-
turning the patient to the operating theatre.
The earliest dilatational tracheostomies were performed by a 
serial dilatational method developed by Ciaglia.10 Several other 
dilatational techniques have also been described, including a modi-
fication of the Ciaglia method employing a single dilator such as 
the Ciaglia Blue Rhino™ (Cook Critical Care, Bloomington, IL, 
USA),11,12 Griggs dilatational forceps approach (Portex®, Smiths 
Medical International Ltd., Hythe, Kent, UK)13, PercuTwist™ screw- 
action dilator technique (Rüsch, Kernen, Germany),14 and Fantoni’s 
translaryngeal method15 of placement.
Serial dilatational technique
Ciaglia described this technique in 1985. The procedure requires a 
series of dilators of gradually increasing gauge to create the stoma. It 
is considered to be easier to perform and associated with less com-
plications at 24 hours16 compared to the Griggs dilatational forceps 
method.
Balloon dilatational technique
This technique is slower, more challenging, and has a higher in-
cidence of minor bleeding complications than the single dilator 
technique.17
Forceps dilatational technique
One version was developed by Griggs in 199013 using modified 
Howard– Kelly forceps. A Seldinger technique is used to locate and 
pass a guide wire into the trachea. A pair of customized forceps is 
then threaded over the wire, firstly through the skin and subcuta-
neous tissue. The forceps are then opened to stretch up these tissues. 
The forceps are advanced further along the wire into the trachea it-
self and opened a second time to stretch up a hole in the tracheal 
wall. A tracheostomy tube is then passed over the wire through 
the passage created. This technique tends to cause more bleeding 
and is perceived to be more difficult to perform than the single 
dilator technique. However, less tracheal cartilage damage may 
occur.18,19
Surgical tracheostomy
31
Screw- action dilatation technique
A technique developed by Rusch known as PercuTwist™14 involves 
a single- step dilatation of the tracheal wall. In this device, the 
screw- like dilator lifts the anterior wall of the trachea during its in-
sertion. This contrasts with the posterior displacement of the an-
terior tracheal wall commonly observed with the use of the Blue 
Rhino™ dilator. This has the advantage of ensuring an unobstructed 
bronchoscopic view of the procedure. However, serious posterior la-
ryngeal wall injuries have been reported.20
Translaryngeal technique
This technique was developed by Fantoni in 1993.15 In this method, 
the guide wire placed in the trachea is directed superiorly through 
the larynx. A specially designed tracheostomy tube is then threaded 
over the guide wire and passed first through the larynx and then 
through the anterior tracheal wall. This technique may theoretically 
reduce the risk of damage to the posterior tracheal wall but is more 
complicated than other techniques. It is associated with a high inci-
dence of technical difficulties, a higher rate of serious complications, 
higher conversion rate to other techniques, and takes longer than the 
Griggs technique.21
Single dilator technique
This technique is generally faster than the serial dilatational tech-
nique22,23 and is perceived to be among the safer approaches.24
An airway assessment should be performed prior to any percutan-
eous technique to identify any potential difficulties and may include 
the use of an ultrasound scan to help locate the trachea (and prom-
inent blood vessels). A locally developed checklist is of benefit to 
ensure all the appropriate monitoring including capnography, emer-
gency airway equipment, bronchoscopic equipment, fasting status, 
coagulation profile, ventilation parameters, consent, sedation medi-
cation, neuromuscular agents, adequate assistance, and appropriate 
skill mix are met, prior to embarking on the procedure. Ultrasound 
has been shown to improve the accuracy of identifying anatomical 
landmarks.25
The surgeons should be made aware that a percutaneous trache-
ostomy is being performed and should be available in the event of a 
serious complication. As it is a planned procedure, it should be per-
formed during normal working hours.
Surgical tracheostomy
A surgical or open tracheostomy is most commonly performed in 
the operating theatre, although occasionally it is undertaken in the 
ICU. It is considered the gold standard for patients with difficult 
anatomy and provides better exposure to ensure haemostatic control 
and management of bleeding complications compared to the percu-
taneous approach (Table 3.2).
Ideally, the patient is positioned supine with the shoulders elevated 
and the neck extended. This position will maximally expose the tra-
chea and may be facilitated by placing a shoulder roll between the 
scapulae, or a pillow behind the patient’s shoulders. Although neck 
extension facilitates the procedure, overextension should be avoided, 
as it firstly tends to narrow the airway, and secondly may encourage 
the operator to place the stoma in too caudal a position, particularly 
in the paediatric patient with a very small and mobile trachea.
Table 3.1 A stepwise approach to percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy
1
The checklist must be completed and the team brief undertaken. Appropriate monitoring should be applied
A minimum of three skilled people are required: operator (performing the tracheostomy— OP), airway doctor (performing the 
supraglottic airway management— AD), and an assistant
The FiO2 should be increased to 1.0 to minimize the risk of desaturation during the procedure
Depth of sedation should be increased to minimize the risk of awareness
A neuromuscular blocking agent should be administered
2
The patient position should be optimized by extending the neck
Ultrasound should be used to identify and mark landmark anatomy
3
The AD should check the tracheal tube with a laryngoscope (videolaryngoscopy or direct laryngoscopy) and suction supraglottic 
secretions
If reintubation is considered to be difﬁcult (difﬁcult laryngoscopy and/ or intubation), consider expert help
4
The pilot balloon should be deﬂated, and AD should withdraw the tracheal tube under direct vision or ﬁbrescopic guidance, so that 
the cuff remains at or just below the vocal cords
Ensure that the tracheal tube is not dislodged from the trachea and re- inﬂate the pilot balloon. A Bodai Swivel adaptor (Sontek Medical, 
Inc., Hingham, MA, USA) should be used with the ﬁbrescope
5
The OP should prepare the neck using a strict aseptic technique and inﬁltrate local anaesthetic with adrenaline subcutaneously (to 
reduce bleeding)
All staff must be wearing appropriate personal protective equipment, including eye protection
6
A 2 cm horizontal incision should be made midway between the sternal notch and the cricoid cartilage
7
Blunt dissection should be undertaken to allow palpation of the trachea
The cannula should be inserted into the trachea while aspirating for air. The ideal location is between second and third tracheal rings
The ﬁbrescope can be used for internal visualization of the cannula passing into the trachea and optimization of the cannula position
8
A Seldinger technique should then be undertaken, ﬁnally placing the tracheostomy tube into the trachea. Placement should be 
conﬁrmed with capnography
9
The tracheostomy tube should be secured carefully. The tracheal tube can then be removed
Note: there are many different ways of performing the technique— including a different approach to the timing of the steps for skin incision and tracheal 
puncture. The exact method should be determined by local policy and expertise.
 
 
 
 
 
Surgical airway
32
A low position may result in a tube encroaching on the carina, 
or very close to the innominate artery. In the patient with a cervical 
spine injury, however, neck extension should be avoided, and inline 
immobilization maintained.
If the procedure is being performed in the awake patient under 
local anaesthesia, the positioning may have to be compromised to 
minimize patient distress, and it may be necessary to have the pa-
tient sitting or semi- recumbent.
Anterior tracheal ring removal technique
The anterior portion of one or more of the tracheal rings is removed 
to create a rectangular stoma. Stay sutures are placed in the tracheal 
wall at either side of the stoma and left uncut. These sutures are used 
to provide countertraction during the insertion of the tracheos-
tomy tube but are also usually left in situ following the procedure to 
facilitate reinsertion of an accidentally displaced tracheostomy tube 
(Fig. 3.1). This technique is associated with subsequent tracheal 
stenosis and should probably be reserved for permanent stomas.
T- shaped tracheal opening technique
A 2 cm incision is made horizontally through the tracheal wall be-
tween the second and third tracheal rings, or the third and fourth 
rings. A vertical incision is then made perpendicular to the first inci-
sion in the midline through the distal one or two tracheal rings using 
heavy scissors. Stay sutures are then inserted into each flap and taped 
to either side of the neck or upper chest.
U- or H- shaped tracheal opening technique
This method, described by Björk,26 involves the creation of an in-
verted U- shaped tracheal wall flap. The flap is made at the level of the 
(a)
Stay sutures
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.1 Approaches to surgical tracheostomy. (a) Ring removal. (b) T- shaped incision. (c) Inverted U- shaped incision.
Reproduced with permission from Shaw et al, The Oxford textbook of anaesthesia for oral and maxillofacial surgery, First Edition, Oxford University Press, UK.
Table 3.2 A stepwise approach to surgical tracheostomy in the operating theatre with an anaesthetized patient
1
Ensure checklist and World Health Organization timeout procedure has been completed, team brief undertaken, and appropriate monitoring applied
2
Optimize the patient position, extend the neck (if appropriate), and elevate the shoulders
3
Provide a sterile ﬁeld between the chin to below the clavicles. The skin overlying the second tracheal ring should be identiﬁed and inﬁltrated with a 
lidocaine and adrenaline mixture
4
A midline 2– 3 cm vertical skin incision should be made (a horizontal incision may provide a better long- term cosmetic outcome but traps more 
secretions)
5
Sharp dissection should be used to divide the platysma muscle. Any vessels (such as aberrant anterior jugular veins) should be cauterized or ligated. 
Haemostasis must be meticulous
6
Midline blunt dissection should then be used to divide the strap muscles. These are retracted laterally to expose the thyroid isthmus. If the isthmus 
lies superior to the third tracheal cartilage, it may simply be mobilized superiorly to gain access to the trachea. More commonly, however, the isthmus 
overlies the second and third rings— it must be incised or even completely divided to gain suitable access to the trachea
7
The anaesthetist should be informed that the trachea is about to be entered. The oropharynx should be aspirated of all secretions prior to surgical 
incision of the trachea. Access to the tracheal lumen is often associated with inadvertent puncture of the underlying tracheal tube cuff, resulting in a 
leak with ventilation. There is the option to insert the tracheal tube further into the trachea, which may avoid this occurring
8
Tracheal lumen access can be achieved in one of three ways, as described below:
 a. Anterior tracheal ring removal
 b. T- shaped tracheal opening
 c. U- or H- shaped tracheal opening
9
Once the tracheal stoma has been created, the tracheal tube should be withdrawn slowly under direct vision, such that the tracheal tube tip lies just 
proximal to the upper border of the stoma. Any secretions or blood within the trachea should be suctioned
10
The tracheostomy tube is then inserted through the stoma under direct vision, usually with an obturator in situ to guide it into place
11
Once the tracheostomy tube placement has been conﬁrmed by capnography, the tracheal tube may be removed, and the tracheostomy tube secured
12
The skin should be left open to avoid the risk of complications such as subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum
 
 
 
Submental tracheal intubation
33
second to fourth tracheal rings, and reflected downwards, with its 
upper border sutured to the skin, creating a bridge of tracheal tissue 
that assists with tube placement. In the emergency replacement of 
the displaced tube, the flap will not only assist in guiding the tracheal 
tube into the trachea lumen, but will also help to prevent the cre-
ation of a false passage through pre- tracheal tissues. A modification 
of this method involves the creation of an H- shaped flap in which 
the tracheal flaps are reflected and secured to skin both superiorly 
and inferiorly.
Complications of surgical and percutaneous 
tracheostomy
There are many potential complications associated with both 
surgical and percutaneous tracheostomy (Table 3.3), and so the 
risk:benefit ratio must be carefully considered in every patient be-
fore proceeding, particularly in the critical care setting. The com-
plications may be divided into immediate (procedural), early, and 
late. The periprocedural complication rate is between 4% and 9% 
(Australian New Zealand Intensive Care Society— https:// www.
anz ics.com.au/ wp- cont ent/ uplo ads/ 2018/ 08/ 2014- The- ANZ ICS- 
Percu tane ous- Dilat atio nal- Trach eost omy- Consen sus- Statem 
ent.pdf).
Bleeding
Bleeding within the first 48 hours is most often the result of 
venous injury (anterior jugular or inferior thyroid veins). The 
wound should be carefully explored and the source of the 
bleeding addressed by either the intensive care specialist or sur-
geon. Granulation tissue may be treated by excision or cautery. 
Pressure from the tracheostomy tube or cuff may erode the tra-
chea. Haemorrhage more than 48 hours postoperatively may be 
due to secondary haemorrhage, granulation tissue, or possibly 
a tracheo- innominate artery fistula (TIF).27 The latter is an un-
common complication (0.1– 1%) and may present at any time fol-
lowing tracheostomy. A ‘sentinel’ bleed (brief episode of brisk, 
bright red blood from the tracheostomy site) often precedes cata-
strophic haemorrhage by hours or days. It is therefore essential 
that the source of any tracheostomy bleeding should be carefully 
examined to ensure that the cause is not a TIF.
Tracheostomy tube designs often incorporate a gentle curve 
and compliant, low- pressure tracheal cuffs which have reduced 
the incidence of TIF. Other factors implicated in causing TIF in-
clude low tracheostomy tube placement, a malpositioned cannula 
tip, excessive neck movement, prior radiation, steroid use, and 
prolonged intubation. Management of catastrophic bleeding in-
cludes hyperinflation of the tracheostomy cuff or replacement of 
the tracheostomy tube with a tracheal tube. If unsuccessful, the 
‘Utley manoeuvre’ may be used where digital pressure is applied 
to compress the innominate artery against the posterior wall of the 
manubrium.28
Emergency airway rescue of a tracheostomy 
or laryngostomy
The multidisciplinary guidelines for the management of tracheos-
tomy and laryngectomy airway emergencies are essential reading.29 
They highlight that patients with a tracheostomy have a potentially 
patent upper airway while laryngectomy patients do not. This al-
ters the emergency management and requires oxygenation to be at-
tempted via the laryngectomy stoma. This can be accomplished by 
using a laryngeal or paediatric face mask applied over the stoma or a 
tracheal tube through the stoma.
The website for the guidelines is http:// www.trach eost omy.org.uk.
Submental tracheal intubation
This technique was first described in 1986 by Francisco Hernandez 
Altemir.30 It involves the passing of a tracheal tube through the 
anterior floor of the mouth (Table 3.4). It is useful by allowing 
intraoperative access to the oral, nasal, and base of skull regions, as 
well as permitting assessment of dental occlusion.31 It is beneficial 
in complex cranio- maxillofacial trauma32,33 and cancer surgery and 
may avoid the need for a tracheostomy and its inherent complica-
tions.34 Another advantage is the cosmetic effect of making the scar 
less visible than that of a tracheostomy. (This technique is also dis-
cussed in Chapters 2 and 10).
The complications of this procedure include bleeding, infec-
tion, mucocele or fistula formation, hypertrophy of the scar, and 
damage to the lingual nerve, salivary ducts, and glands. The imme-
diate concerns for the anaesthetist are tracheal tube obstruction, 
a main stem intubation, and accidental extubation. Therefore, a 
plan for emergency reintubation should be delineated with the 
entire surgical and anaesthetic team prior to embarking on this 
procedure.
Table 3.3 Complications of surgical and percutaneous tracheostomy
Immediate
Bleeding
Damage to tissues during procedure:
 • Puncture of adjacent structures: nerves, arteries, veins, 
oesophagus
 • Damage to the posterior tracheal wall
 • Cartilage fracture
 • Misplacement of tracheostomy tube: pretracheal, 
endobronchial, perforation of the posterior tracheal wall
Hypoxia and alveolar collapse
Hypercapnia owing to inadequate ventilation
Loss of airway and apnoea
Pneumomediastinum
Pneumothorax
Surgical emphysema
Type 2 post- obstructive pulmonary oedema
Early
Bleeding trachea- innominate artery ﬁstulae
Blockage of the tracheostomy tube with secretions, mucous, 
or blood
Displacement of the tracheostomy tube
Endobronchial or main stem bronchus intubation
Erosion of tissue due to pressure from the tracheostomy 
tube or cuff
Infection: cellulitis, mediastinitis, tracheitis
Mucosal ulceration
Subcutaneous emphysema
Tracheo- oesophageal ﬁstula
Late
Bleeding: tracheo- innominate artery ﬁstulae
Stoma scarring
Tracheal granulomas
Tracheal stenosis
Tracheo- cutaneous ﬁstula
Tracheo- oesophageal ﬁstula
Tracheomalacia
Surgical airway
34
Emergency front of neck airway
Patient positioning
The ideal position for all front of neck airway (FONA) procedures is 
the same as that for an elective surgical tracheostomy, that is, pillow 
removed, head ring, and sandbag under the shoulders to extend the 
neck. This may be very difficult to achieve during an emergency 
CICO scenario due to time pressures. Sliding the patient up the bed 
or operating table and allowing the head to gently hang over the 
top edge will provide moderate neck extension and improve access 
to the front of the neck, especially in the morbidly obese patient. 
This manoeuvre should be avoided when cervical spine injuries are 
suspected.
Needle versus scalpel cricothyroidotomy
The debate continues regarding the most appropriate method for 
anaesthetists to facilitate oxygenation during CICO while a defini-
tive airway is secured. Emergency front- of- neck airway (eFONA) 
courses in some parts of the world encourage teaching both scalpel 
and cannula techniques.35 However, opinions are divided con-
cerning the high failure rate of cannula cricothyroidotomy in CICO 
management when compared to surgical access.36– 39 Criticism 
of the needle cricothyroidotomy is based largely on the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists’ Fourth National Audit Project (NAP4) 
data.40 In NAP4, there were 58 anaesthetic cases (of the estimated 
2.9 million annual general anaesthetics) where attempts at emer-
gency reoxygenation were undertaken. In 25 of these cases, the an-
aesthetist initiated the primary rescue attempt and was successful 
in nine cases. Eleven cases were subsequently rescued by a surgical 
tracheostomy, three by tracheal intubation, one by a percutaneous 
tracheostomy performed by an anaesthetist, and one patient died.
Anaesthetists in this study tended to use cannula- based tech-
niques, with a narrow- bore cannula being used in 19 cases, with 
12 failures. Anaesthetists were therefore successful in only 33% 
with other techniques (two successes out of six cases). Conclusions 
that may be logically drawn suggest that anaesthetists untrained in 
CICO techniques exhibited a high failure rate with both cannula 
and scalpel techniques (63% and 67%, respectively).41 In contrast, 
surgeons achieved a high success rate using a scalpel but were slow 
in achieving a definitive airway under extreme pressure. Although 
rare, over half of experienced anaesthetists report encountering 
CICO at least once during their career.42
Before commencing eFONA rescue airway techniques, it is as-
sumed that all oxygenation attempts via the upper airway have 
been considered, performed, and exhausted (https:// www.das.
uk.com/ gui deli nes/ das_ in tuba tion _ gui deli nes). No patient should 
undergo percutaneous emergency oxygenation without having first 
undergone oxygenation attempts through facemask ventilation, 
supraglottic airway device insertion, and tracheal intubation via 
the upper airway. Where possible, oxygen and airway manoeuvres 
should continue to be administered via the upper airway (facemask 
or supraglottic airway device) at all times. Apnoeic oxygenation may 
occur if there is a patent aperture between the upper and lower air-
ways and this may also importantly provide an expiratory pathway.
Needle cricothyroidotomy
This is also referred to as needle cricothyroid puncture or needle 
cricothyrotomy. Simulating crisis in a live, anaesthetized animal 
model is arguably the closest method of reproducing the stressful 
conditions of CICO in humans. The Royal Perth Hospital group in 
Australia have observed over 10,000 CICO rescue attempts in anaes-
thetized sheep by practitioners and refined their approach over time. 
The rationale for using a cannula as a conduit for reoxygenation in-
cludes a high success rate with training, its potential for conversion 
by Seldinger technique to a cuffed airway, anaesthetists’ familiarity 
and confidence with the cannula, limited tissue destruction, and 
an attempt does not significantly impair subsequent attempts with 
either cannula or scalpel. The procedure may also be rapidly per-
formed. The 14 G Insyte™ cannula (BD Medical Systems, Oakville, 
Canada) is cheap and widely available, enabling anaesthetists to 
practise transtracheal access. The cannula and the Rapid- O2™ 
(Meditech Systems Ltd, Dorset, UK) oxygen insufflation device is 
an affordable combination as basic oxygenation equipment in all 
clinical areas. The cannula provides a temporary conduit to provide 
rescue oxygenation allowing the patient to resume spontaneous res-
piration and be woken up or failing which a definitive airway may 
be obtained using either more complex airway manoeuvres (e.g. 
Table 3.4 A stepwise approach to submental tracheal intubation
1
After conventional orotracheal intubation with a reinforced tracheal tube, a 2 cm skin incision is made in the submental 
area adjacent to the lower border of the mandible. A passage is created into the ﬂoor of the mouth by blunt dissection 
from the submental incision close to the lingual cortex of mandible, anterior to the sublingual caruncle
The FiO2 should be increased to minimize the risk of desaturation during the procedure
The anaesthetist must check that the universal connector can be removed from the tracheal tube prior to starting the procedure 
(some reinforced tracheal tubes do not have removable connectors)
2
The pilot balloon of the tracheal tube should be deﬂated and then brought through the newly formed tunnel
Care must be taken so the pilot balloon is not ruptured
3
The pilot balloon should be re- inﬂated
The patient is then disconnected from the ventilator, the universal connector removed from the tracheal tube, and the 
proximal end of the tube drawn through the tunnel to emerge through the skin of the submental region
Care must be taken to ensure that the tracheal tube is not dislodged from the trachea
4
The inner surface of the tracheal tube should be cleaned of any blood or tissue
5
The universal connector should be reattached and the patient connected to the breathing circuit and ventilator
There may be some difﬁculty in reattaching the connector to the tracheal tube
6
Once the tracheal tube position is satisfactory, it should then be sutured in place
Care must be taken not to advance the tracheal tube excessively into a main stem bronchus or to cause inadvertent extubation
 
 
 
 
Emergency front of neck airway
35
fibreoptic intubation) or converting to a surgical airway. If imme-
diately available, a competent surgeon may perform a tracheostomy 
or alternatively the cannula may be used to insert a Melker™ size 
5.0 mm cuffed airway (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, IN, USA).
Indications
Needle or cannula cricothyroidotomy may be performed as an 
elective part of the anaesthetic technique for oral and maxillofacial 
surgical procedures. Needle or cannula cricothyroidotomy may be 
used to topicalize the airway in preparation for awake fibreoptic 
intubation. The cannula may be favoured over the needle here as 
this may remain in the airway and allow for rescue in the event of a 
failed awake fibreoptic intubation or sudden patient deterioration. 
Similarly, the cannula may be inserted prophylactically in a patient 
where difficulty in securing the airway is anticipated and access to 
the infraglottic airway is likely. However, it is most commonly asso-
ciated with the CICO scenario. Therefore, it is commonly indicated 
for patients with impending or actual complete airway obstruction 
that may result from severe facial trauma, anaphylaxis, infection 
(e.g. submandibular abscess and epiglottitis), and laryngeal path-
ology (e.g. tumour).
Contraindications
In the elective scenario, relative contraindications include lack of 
adequate training, an uncooperative patient, and laryngeal human 
papillomavirus or carcinoma where virus and tumour cells may 
spread along the needle track and seed in the submandibular tissues. 
In the emergency CICO scenario, there are no absolute contraindi-
cations to cannula cricothyroidotomy or tracheotomy. Conditions 
such as previous neck surgery, radiotherapy to the neck with scar 
tissue, overlying infection, coagulopathy, and neck trauma may all 
serve to make all FONA procedures challenging, including cannula 
techniques.
Technique
If time allows, the skin should be prepared with an antiseptic so-
lution such as 2% chlorhexidine in alcohol and the skin should be 
anaesthetized using a local anaesthetic solution, most commonly 
lidocaine and adrenaline. Frerk and colleagues,43 in the Difficult 
Airway Society 2015 guidelines for management of unanticipated 
difficult intubation in adults, recommended Levitan’s ‘laryngeal 
handshake’ (Fig. 3.2) using the non- dominant hand to recognize 
the three- dimensional anatomy of the laryngeal structures. The 
larynx is stabilized between thumb and middle finger, and the index 
finger moves down the neck to palpate the cricothyroid membrane 
(Table 3.5).
Limitations
The cannula technique may fail because of kinking, blood, or vom-
itus in the airway and because of difficult anatomy. There may 
also be no obvious reason and after three attempts at cannula 
cricothyroidotomy in the hypoxic patient, the practitioner is encour-
aged to move on to prevent fixation error. In the patient with im-
palpable anterior neck anatomy, the first cannulation attempt should 
be performed in the apparent midline unless there is information 
suggesting a laterally located trachea. If the first cannula attempt fails 
then the second attempt should be performed lateral (approximately 
1 cm) to the first, that is, horizontally across the neck. The insertion 
attempts should remain vertical and parallel to the first insertion. 
A maximum of three blind attempts to cannulate the trachea should 
be considered before moving to the scalpel– finger– cannula tech-
nique described below.44
Scalpel– bougie cricothyroidotomy
Indications
These include failed cannula cricothyroidotomy in the patient with 
palpable anterior neck anatomy. Anaesthetists are familiar with the 
bougie and the deliberate stab incision reduces scalpel manipula-
tion. The hollow bougie also has the advantage of enabling oxygen-
ation, via a Rapi- Fit™ connector (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, 
IN, USA), prior to securing a cuffed airway. It must be emphasized 
that when inserted percutaneously, the tip of the bougie may be inad-
vertently placed more distally in the airway than intended (i.e. below 
the carina). High- pressure oxygenating devices should be used with 
extreme caution in these circumstances as this may result in baro-
trauma. Oxygenating using a self- inflating bag or anaesthetic circuit 
via the standard 15 mm Rapi- Fit™ connector minimizes this risk.
Technique
See Table 3.6 and Fig. 3.4.
Scalpel– ﬁnger– cannula cricothyroidotomy
Indications
These include the CICO scenario with failed cannula crico-
thyroidotomy due to impalpable anterior neck anatomy and failed 
Fig. 3.2 The laryngeal handshake.
Reproduced with Permission from H. G. Ryu, J. Lee, H. Lee, et al, Utility of the laryngeal handshake method for identifying the cricothyroid membrane, Acta Anaesthesiologica 
Scandinavica, Jun 21, 2018, 62(9) p.6, John Wiley and Sons.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surgical airway
36
scalpel– bougie technique in the patient with palpable anterior neck 
anatomy.
Technique
See Table 3.7.
Complications of eFONA techniques
Complications can be divided into immediate, intermediate, and late:
Immediate
These include failure to locate the trachea, misplacement of the tra-
cheal tube including endobronchial intubation, haemorrhage, and 
prolonged time to oxygenation resulting in significant morbidity 
and mortality.46– 48 Other potential complications include:
 • Pulmonary aspiration.
 • Kinking and obstruction of the cannula with inability to oxy-
genate the patient or inability passing the guide wire of the 
Melker™ airway.
 • Haemorrhage.
 • Trauma to trachea and surrounding structures.
 • Misplacement of the cannula leading to subcutaneous emphy-
sema, pneumothorax with attempted insufflation.
 • Barotrauma and volutrauma due to overzealous attempts at 
oxygenation.
 • Creation of a false passage leading to subcutaneous emphysema, 
mediastinal emphysema, and pneumothorax with attempted 
insufflation.
 • Progressive hypercapnia and acidosis with limited ventilation.
 • Reflex coughing on insufflation. This may be treated with injec-
tion of lidocaine down the cannula.
Intermediate complications
These include bleeding, infection, oesophageal perforation and 
tracheo- oesophageal fistula, recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, and 
dysphonia due to laryngeal trauma.
Late complications
The most significant delayed complication is subglottic stenosis.
Use of ultrasound
Ultrasound has been used to rapidly identify the cricothyroid 
membrane.49 Ultrasound may also help in assessing the loca-
tion of the trachea in patients with impalpable anterior neck 
anatomy because of deep tissue neck infections, tumours, and 
dysmorphia. Knowledge regarding the depth and deviation of 
the trachea may serve to fine- tune the percutaneous approach 
to the airway. The presence and location of major vessels can 
also be identified and avoided. An ultrasound machine, if im-
mediately available, may be useful even in the CICO situation 
in patients with impalpable anterior neck anatomy— improving 
accuracy and efficiency.33 If progression to a scalpel technique 
is required, the incision depth and position can be elucidated in 
Table 3.5 Stepwise approach to needle cricothyroidotomy
1
Stand on the patient’s left- hand side (if you are right hand dominant, and vice versa if left- hand dominant)
2
Connect a 5 mL syringe containing 2 mL saline to the 14 G Insyte™ needle- cannula, aligning the bevel of the needle with the graduation markings on the 
syringe to allow easy identiﬁcation of bevel position. Hold this in the dominant hand with ﬁngers between the barrel ﬂange and plunger, enabling an 
‘aspirate as you go’ technique
3
Identify and stabilize the cricothyroid membrane or trachea using the non- dominant hand. Place the thumb and middle ﬁnger on either side of the 
thyroid cartilage with the index ﬁnger resting over the cricothyroid membrane
4
Insert the tip of the needle through the skin and advance in a caudal direction while continually aspirating (Fig. 3.3). Insertion angle should be as shallow 
as practical. Aspirate while advancing. Never aspirate while withdrawing as the cannula may inadvertently be separated from the needle creating an air 
leak between the needle and cannula. This enables air to be aspirated between the inner surface of the cannula and outer surface of the needle. This 
explains how air may be inadvertently ‘aspirated’ despite the needle not being in the trachea. This is known as a false- positive aspiration of air. Similarly, 
pre- loosening the cannula off the needle is discouraged for the same reason
5
Successful free aspiration of air to the full length of the syringe barrel and then releasing it without recoil conﬁrms intratracheal placement (‘check’ 
aspiration)
6
The non- dominant hand should stabilize the cannula at the hub. The dominant hand should move to hold the needle. The non- dominant hand is used 
to advance the cannula off the needle into the tracheal lumen
7
Grip the cannula hub with the non- dominant hand and remove the syringe and needle
8
Expel the air from the 5 mL syringe containing 2 mL saline and reconnect to the cannula. Repeat the ‘check’ aspiration prior to jet oxygenation. If 
the re- check fails, the cannula should be withdrawn slightly while aspiration is continued. If the cannula is kinked or tip impacted on the posterior 
pharyngeal wall, this will be easily corrected
Fig. 3.3 Insertion of the needle during needle cricothyroidotomy.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conversion techniques
37
advance. This leads to a safer and more confident approach. 
However, task fixation and delays using ultrasound should be 
avoided.
Conversion techniques
One such technique involves the use of the Melker™ Emergency 
Cricothyrotomy Catheter set (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, IN, 
USA). The set contains a scalpel, needle, guide wire, and the cuffed 
airway with dilating introducer.
Technique
See Table 3.8 for a stepwise approach to using a Melker™ Emergency 
Cricothyrotomy set. The commonest reason for difficulty when 
advancing the Melker™ airway is that the dilator slips back within 
the Melker™ airway creating a ‘step’ between the dilator and the tip 
Table 3.6 Stepwise approach to scalpel– bougie cricothyroidotomy
1
Operator stands on the patient’s left- hand side (if right hand dominant, and vice versa if left hand dominant)
2
Identify and stabilize the cricothyroid membrane or anterior trachea using the non- dominant hand (as described in Table 3.5)
3
Make a horizontal stab incision through the cricothyroid membrane or anterior trachea with the cutting edge of the size 10 scalpel blade facing 
towards the operator
4
The operator should apply gentle traction towards them and then rotate the blade 90° so that the cutting edge of the blade points caudally. This is to 
reduce the risk of trauma to the vocal cords
5
Keeping the scalpel vertical, the operator should now gently pull the scalpel towards them. This creates a triangular hole with the blade of the scalpel 
forming the base
6
Swap hands to hold the scalpel with the non- dominant hand
7
The dominant hand now holds the bougie parallel to the ﬂoor with the coudé tip pointing towards the operator and inferiorly, i.e. the bougie is 
parallel to the ﬂoor and perpendicular to the patient (Fig. 3.4). Using the scalpel blade as a guide, slide the bougie tip down the scalpel blade until 
it lies within the trachea. The triangular hole created by the combination of incision, rotation, and gentle traction of the blade is often crucially 
underappreciated when practising on manikins or cadavers. Signiﬁcant bleeding, which commonly occurs at this point, will obscure the incision. This 
not only makes insertion of the bougie difﬁcult but also risks the inadvertent creation of a false passage
8
Rotate and align the bougie to allow gentle insertion observing the characteristic feel of tracheal rings (clicks); ‘hold up’ may be encountered
9
The scalpel blade may now be carefully removed
10
Oxygenate via the hollow oxygenating bougie (if used) using the Rapi- Fit™ 15 mm standard connector and self- inﬂating bag or anaesthetic circuit if 
immediately available. Conﬁrm placement of the bougie within the trachea using capnography
11
Remove the Rapi- Fit™ connector if this is being used and railroad a lubricated size 6.0 cuffed tracheal tube over the bougie. Continual rotation of the 
tracheal tube starting as it is advanced down the bougie prevents ‘hold up’ of the tube tip at the skin. A size 5.0 cuffed Melker™ airway may also be 
‘railroaded’ over the bougie. The Melker™ airway sits snuggly over the bougie eliminating the need for the Melker™ introducer45
12
Remove the bougie, inﬂate the cuff, and ventilate via the tracheal tube or Melker™. Conﬁrm using capnography. Insertion of a tracheal tube through 
the anterior neck is prone to endobronchial intubation. Prior to securing the tracheal tube, ensure to exclude this complication
13
Secure the tube or Melker™ in position
Fig. 3.4 Scalpel– bougie– tube cricothyroidotomy technique.
Table 3.7 A stepwise approach to scalpel– ﬁnger– cannula 
cricothyroidotomy
1
Stabilize the skin of the neck with the non- dominant hand. With a size 
10 scalpel blade make a generous, vertical, midline incision. For the 
right- handed practitioner standing on the patient’s left- hand side, the 
incision should be made in a caudad to cephalad direction. If time 
allows, the right- handed operator would be best making an incision 
from cephalad to caudal by standing on the patient’s right- hand 
side (the opposite would be advised for a left- handed practitioner). 
The incision should be performed in the midline to avoid vascular 
structures located laterally unless it is suspected that the airway is 
laterally displaced. The incision should be superﬁcial, passing through 
skin and subcutaneous tissue and down to the strap muscles
2
Insert the ﬁngers of both hands into the incision to separate the strap 
muscles by blunt dissection and therefore avoiding damage caused 
by a more signiﬁcant scalpel incision
3
The non- dominant hand should be used to identify the airway. The 
trachea is mobile, has tracheal cartilage rings, and the ability to get 
behind it with the ﬁngers
4
Stabilize the airway with the non- dominant hand. Insert a 14 G 
Insyte™ cannula directly into the trachea as described previously
5
Jet oxygenation may then be performed via the cannula
6
Following rescue oxygenation, a wire may be passed down the 
cannula, followed by insertion of a size 5.0 cuffed Melker™ using the 
Seldinger technique. When inserting the Melker™ airway directly into 
the trachea, no further incision is required
Surgical airway
38
of the airway. Ensure that the dilator Melker™ airway unit is always 
properly engaged. Check the incision is continuous with the wire 
and extend the incision as necessary. The wire may become kinked 
from an overly forceful attempt at insertion. A wire from a ‘central 
venous catheter’ set may be used as an alternative if required. Re- 
passing the cannula back over the wire and further jet oxygenation 
may be required.
Retrograde intubation
Retrograde intubation refers to a translaryngeal- guided tracheal in-
tubation technique. First described in 1960 by Butler and Cirillo,50 
the approach outlined by Waters in 196351 is most commonly used 
today (retrograde intubation is also discussed in Chapter 2).
Indications
Its use tends to be limited to adults and children in whom semi- 
urgent intubation is required and where other airway techniques 
have failed because of anatomical abnormalities such as limited 
mouth opening, unstable cervical spine injuries, and/ or the pres-
ence of blood or secretions in the supraglottic airway (e.g. in 
oromaxillofacial trauma). Other indications include patients with 
impending airway obstruction in whom an awake fibreoptic intub-
ation is not feasible and a tracheostomy is not desirable.
Complications
Retrograde intubation is more complex, time- consuming, and has po-
tentially more complications than other surgical airway techniques. 
Bleeding, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, pneumomedias-
tinum, and trigeminal nerve trauma have all been described.52
Technique
Using the Cook retrograde intubation set (Cook Critical Care, 
Bloomington, IN, USA), the technique is described in Table 3.9.
It is important to select a tracheal tube with a diameter just slightly 
larger than that of the guide wire catheter, as this helps to reduce the 
incidence of ‘hold- up’ at the glottis.
Given the proximity of the cricothyroid membrane to the glottis, 
unsurprisingly the guide wire– catheter tends to ‘flick’ or ‘flip’ out of the 
airway while advancing the tracheal tube and withdrawing the wire 
and catheter resulting in an oesophageal intubation. Modifications of 
the above technique have attempted to reduce this occurring and so 
improve the success rates. These techniques include:
 • Removing the J guide wire and advancing the catheter distally 
into the airway before passing the tracheal tube.53
 • Inserting the guide wire through the Murphy’s eye of the tra-
cheal tube.54
 • Inserting the needle into the trachea well below the level of the 
cricothyroid membrane, using a pulling technique and a multi- 
lumen catheter.55– 57
 • Fibreoptic- assisted techniques that allow visual verification 
and confirmation of intratracheal placement (i.e. retrograde- 
guided fibreoptic intubation or oral fibreoptic intubation over 
a retrograde wire).58,59 The guide wire may be passed through 
the distal opening of the fibreoptic scope’s suction port, 
guided through the glottis and into the airway. Success rates are 
further improved if the tracheal tube is passed over the guide 
wire and the fibreoptic scope is then passed through the lumen 
of the tracheal tube adjacent to the wire. The tracheal tube may 
be followed and seen to be abutting the cricothyroid mem-
brane. The fibreoptic scope is then advanced into the airway 
towards the carina. The guide wire is removed at this point and 
the tracheal tube passed over the fibreoptic scope and into the 
trachea.60
Table 3.8 A stepwise approach to use of the Melker™ Emergency 
Cricothyrotomy set
1
Stand on the left- hand side of patient (if right hand dominant, 
and vice versa if left hand dominant). Insert the soft ﬂexible tip of 
the wire through the cannula. Kinking of the cannula may lead to 
difﬁculty passing the guide wire. Withdrawing the cannula slightly 
should allow the guide wire to pass
2
Withdraw the cannula over the guide wire. If desaturation occurs 
prior to successful Melker™ insertion, the cannula may be passed 
back over the guide wire and jet oxygenation recommenced
3
Make an incision along the guide wire with the cutting edge of the 
scalpel blade pointing caudally to a depth sufﬁcient to enter the 
airway. Ensure the incision is continuous with the guide wire
4
Grip the dilator and cuffed Melker airway to ensure that the dilator 
and Melker™ airway remains fully engaged. The ‘Vulcan hand grip’ 
(Fig. 3.5) is one way of gripping the dilator and Melker™ airway 
in the dominant hand to ensure there is no disengagement. It 
minimizes the risk of the wire injuring the operator and allows a 
ﬂuid insertion motion, while avoiding hang up on the chin
5
Pass the guide wire through the tip of the dilator Melker™ airway
6
Continuously advance the Melker™ dilator airway over the guide 
wire. With the non- dominant hand stabilizing the trachea, the 
dominant hand advances the Melker™ airway in a caudal direction. 
Moderate force is required
7
Once the airway is fully inserted, securely hold the 15 mm 
connector, remove the guide wire and dilator, inﬂate the cuff, and 
ventilate via a self- inﬂating bag or anaesthetic circuit. Check for 
end- tidal carbon dioxide, look for chest movement, and observe 
the anterior neck for swelling
Fig. 3.5 The ‘Vulcan hand grip’.
 
 
 
 
 
Jet oxygenation
39
 • The use of a lightwand to facilitate the retrograde intubation pro-
cedure has also been described.61
Jet oxygenation
Oxygenation does not require the correct identification of the 
cricothyroid membrane. Whether eFONA is performed through 
the cricothyroid membrane or anterior wall of the trachea is not 
likely to be important.62 Retrospective analysis of emergency 
cricothyrotomies and tracheotomies undertaken in a trauma centre 
in the US found no complications in either group.63
Transtracheal jet ventilation has, justifiably, been implicated in 
secondary barotrauma and highlights the pitfalls of attempting to 
achieve minute volume ventilation via a fine bore cannula without 
sufficient training. The use of a cannula may be inappropriate without 
an appropriate jet oxygenation device and suitable training. CICO 
prioritizes oxygenation over ventilation and carbon dioxide elimin-
ation. Ventilation in the obstructed airway may in fact be harmful. 
The preferred term in these circumstances is therefore ‘jet oxygen-
ation’. Oxygen delivery is aimed at preventing cardiac arrest and lim-
iting hypoxic consequences, before rapidly moving on to secure the 
airway or waking the patient up (depending on the circumstances).
Ideal features of a jet oxygenation device
 • Affordable, so it may be used for training and be stocked at all an-
aesthesia locations.
 • Easily transportable.
 • Intuitive function.
 • Quick and easy to set up.
 • High safety rating.
 • True on– off device.
 • Delivers a known and accurate oxygen flow rate:
 
■ Wall supply at 15 L/ min, or cylinder supply at 250 mL/ sec.
 
■ For example, the Manujet™, set at 0.5– 1 bar, can deliver flow 
rates in the region of 250– 300 mL/ sec.64,65
 • Allows passive expiration.
 • If flow is not delivered, the device should provide feedback to the 
operator.
Between jets, the device should enable expiration and, more import-
antly, pressure relief via the cannula. Users should be aware that a 
significant disadvantage of the Manujet™ is the complete lack of an 
expiratory pathway and hence pressure relief via the device during 
expiration when it is connected directly to a cannula.65
Jet oxygenation plan
In the elective scenario, jet ventilation may be modified as con-
sidered clinically relevant.
In CICO, however, it is not how frequently one should provide jet 
oxygenation, but how infrequently. The focus is to provide oxygen-
ation for only as long as it takes to either wake the patient up or to 
secure the airway.
A suggested technique might be as follows:
 1. Four- second initial jet delivering 1000 mL of oxygen (e.g. using 
Rapid- O2 oxygen insufflation device connected to oxygen flow 
meter at 15 L/ min).
 2. Wait for peak in oxygen saturation (SpO2) response and then 
wait for drop by 5% from peak.
 3. Subsequent jets of 500 mL (2 seconds), waiting for each peak and 
drop by 5% and repeat.
 4. If there is no response to first jet within 20 seconds, then imme-
diately deliver second jet of 500 mL.
 5. If no SpO2 reading is available to guide the jetting rate, deliver 
500 mL jets every 30 seconds after the initial 1000 mL.
 6. Move as quickly as practical to secure a definitive airway.
 7. If poor response and obviously patent expiratory pathway, con-
sider Manujet™ at 4.0 bar delivering 1- second insufflations. 
Again, secure a definitive airway as quickly as possible.
Jet oxygenation devices
There are a number of jet oxygenation devices currently available. 
Training in the device is essential for safe usage, as each have their 
nuances:
Cook® Enk oxygen ﬂow modulator (Cook Medical Inc., 
Bloomington, IN, USA)
This device (Fig. 3.6a) has an oxygen supply connector at one 
end and a Luer- lock connection for attachment to a needle/ can-
nula cricothyroidotomy at the other. Intermittently covering and 
Table 3.9 Stepwise approach to retrograde intubation
1
A cricothyroid membrane puncture is made using the 18 G introducer 
needle
2
The guide wire is advanced cephalad through the introducer until it 
can be retrieved from the naso- or oropharynx using Magill’s forceps
3
The wire is withdrawn through the mouth or nose until the neck 
positioning mark draws level with the skin. The guide wire is then 
anchored with artery forceps
4
The tapered catheter is then inserted over the guide wire from above 
until it abuts the cricothyroid membrane
5
The tracheal tube is then advanced over the catheter and into the 
airway as the guide wire and catheter are removed
Fig. 3.6 (a) Cook® Enk oxygen ﬂow modulator and (b) Rapid- O2™ 
cricothyroidotomy insufﬂation device.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surgical airway
40
releasing the five holes (by pressing thumb and index finger together) 
allows control of oxygen delivery and acts as pressure and flow relief 
vents. When the holes are occluded, oxygen is delivered and when 
uncovered, passive expiration occurs. The device has a side- port for 
drug administration. The side- port cap should remain closed to en-
sure oxygen delivery. The device usually comes with an Emergency 
Transtracheal Airway Catheter™, which is wire reinforced to prevent 
kinking or collapsing once inserted over its needle.
Rapid- O2™ cricothyroidotomy insufﬂation device  
(previously known as the ‘Leroy’— Meditech Systems Ltd., 
Dorset, UK)
This device (Fig. 3.6b)66 is sold through GE Healthcare. This modi-
fied T- piece is affordable, simple, and easy to use, and allows jet oxy-
genation as soon as the transtracheal cannula has been sited. It is a 
true on– off device, provides feedback, and also affords an expiratory 
pathway. Expiration is possible through the cannula.
Manujet™ (VBM Medizintechnik GmbH, Sulz am Neckar, 
Germany)
This is a pressure- regulated jet ventilation device designed for use 
with either oxygen or compressed air and comes supplied with a 
pressure hose attached. The device requires a working pressure of 
>4 bar. The device may be attached via a Luer- lock connecting tube 
to the cannula (VBM Ravussin 13- gauge needle). The pressure regu-
lator knob needs to be pulled out to allow adjustment prior to use. 
Turning the black knob of the pressure regulator enables the respir-
ation pressure to be decreased or increased as appropriate. Once set, 
the knob should be pushed back into position prior to use. Once 
connected to the cannula, the device itself affords no expiratory op-
tion. It is important to observe the patient at all times. The rise and 
subsequent fall of the patient’s chest indicates successful respiration, 
but the operator should closely monitor the patient for barotrauma 
and inadvertent cannula displacement.
Ventrain™ (Dolphys Medical B.V., Eindhoven,  
The Netherlands)
This device offers the possibility of suction- generated, assisted expir-
ation designed to achieve physiological minute ventilation in CICO. 
It is supplied together with a flexible 2 mm needle cricothyrotomy 
catheter, Cricath™. It is recommended that the device only be used 
together with the Cricath™ as the negative pressure generated during 
expiration may be sufficient to cause collapse of the cannula lumen 
if using other devices. Timing of inspiration and expiration need to 
be matched to avoid excessive flow in one direction.
Three- way tap and oxygen tubing
Bulk oxygen gas supply and cylinder oxygen are delivered at 4 bar 
(345– 380 kPa or 50– 55 psi). Unsurprisingly, there is a high risk of 
barotrauma when oxygen is delivered from a flow meter through 
a rudimentary three- way tap and oxygen- tubing device if the side 
port is not occluded, as there is neither pressure nor flow relief.65,67,68 
During supposed ‘expiration’ (i.e. no active jetting), flow will con-
tinue into the trachea and dangerously high intrathoracic pressures 
may be generated. The same situation may arise with the use of 
oxygen tubing with a hole cut into the sidewall. These techniques are 
often taught and tested in manikins and bench top models with a pa-
tent expiratory pathway. However, under CICO conditions with an 
obstructed upper airway, the risk of barotrauma becomes obvious. 
This method of oxygen delivery should not be used in contemporary 
practice.
Conclusion
Anaesthetists should make every effort to anticipate the difficult 
airway through a thorough history, examination, and review of spe-
cial investigations. The preoperative assessment should inform the 
airway plan. However, reality dictates that despite rigorous assess-
ment, unexpected difficulty may be encountered, and the practi-
tioner should be equipped to deal with the CICO scenario should 
this arise. Surgical airways, whether elective or urgent, are always 
potentially hazardous interventions. Understanding the dangers 
and pitfalls associated with the various procedures should enable the 
anaesthetist to anticipate problems and make every effort to min-
imize risks.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Kaye Cantlay, Consultant in 
Anaesthesia and Critical Care, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne— for her valued contribution as author of The surgical 
airway in the Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia for Oral and Maxillofacial 
Surgery First Edition.
REFERENCES
 1. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks AM, Tremper KK. Prediction 
and outcomes of impossible mask ventilation: a review of 50,000 
anesthetics. Anesthesiology. 2009;110(4):891– 897.
 2. Nagaro T, Yorozuya T, Sotani M, Adachi N, Tabo E, Arai T, et al. 
Survey of patients whose lungs could not be ventilated and whose 
trachea could not be intubated in university hospitals in Japan.  
J Anesth. 2003;17(4):232– 240.
 3. Young D, Harrison DA, Cuthbertson BH, Rowan K, TracMan 
C. Effect of early vs late tracheostomy placement on survival 
in patients receiving mechanical ventilation: the TracMan 
randomized trial. JAMA. 2013;309(20):2121– 2129.
 4. Delaney A, Bagshaw SM, Nalos M. Percutaneous dilatational 
tracheostomy versus surgical tracheostomy in critically ill 
patients: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Crit Care. 
2006;10(2):R55.
 5. Higgins KM, Punthakee X. Meta- analysis comparison of 
open versus percutaneous tracheostomy. Laryngoscope. 
2007;117(3):447– 454.
 6. Johnson- Obaseki S, Veljkovic A, Javidnia H. Complication rates 
of open surgical versus percutaneous tracheostomy in critically ill 
patients. Laryngoscope. 2016;126(11):2459– 2467.
 7. Dulguerov P, Gysin C, Perneger TV, Chevrolet JC. Percutaneous 
or surgical tracheostomy: a meta- analysis. Crit Care Med. 
1999;27(8):1617– 1625.
 8. Grover A, Robbins J, Bendick P, Gibson M, Villalba M. Open 
versus percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy: efficacy and cost 
analysis. Am Surg. 2001;67(4):297– 301.
 9. Cameron TS, McKinstry A, Burt SK, Howard ME, Bellomo R, 
Brown DJ, et al. Outcomes of patients with spinal cord injury 
Acknowledgements
41
  before and after introduction of an interdisciplinary tracheostomy 
team. Crit Care Resusc. 2009;11(1):14– 19.
 10. Ciaglia P, Firsching R, Syniec C. Elective percutaneous 
dilatational tracheostomy. A new simple bedside procedure; 
preliminary report. Chest. 1985;87(6):715– 719.
 11. Byhahn C, Lischke V, Halbig S, Scheifler G, Westphal K. [Ciaglia 
blue rhino: a modified technique for percutaneous dilatation 
tracheostomy. Technique and early clinical results]. Der 
Anaesthesist. 2000;49(3):202– 206.
 12. Byhahn C, Zgoda M, Birkelbach O, Hofstetter C, Gromann 
T. Ciaglia Blue Dolphin: a new technique for percutaneous 
tracheostomy using balloon dilation. Crit Care. 2008;12 Suppl 
2;P333.
 13. Griggs WM, Worthley LI, Gilligan JE, Thomas PD, Myburg JA. 
A simple percutaneous tracheostomy technique. Surg Gynecol 
Obstet. 1990;170(6):543– 545.
 14. Westphal K, Maeser D, Scheifler G, Lischke V, Byhahn C. 
PercuTwist: a new single- dilator technique for percutaneous 
tracheostomy. Anesth Analg. 2003;96(1):229– 232.
 15. Fantoni A, Ripamonti D. A non- derivative, non- surgical 
tracheostomy: the translaryngeal method. Intensive Care Med. 
1997;23(4):386– 392.
 16. Nates JL, Cooper DJ, Myles PS, Scheinkestel CD, Tuxen DV. 
Percutaneous tracheostomy in critically ill patients: a prospective, 
randomized comparison of two techniques. Crit Care Med. 
2000;28(11):3734– 3739.
 17. Cianchi G, Zagli G, Bonizzoli M, Batacchi S, Cammelli R, Biondi 
S, et al. Comparison between single- step and balloon dilatational 
tracheostomy in intensive care unit: a single- centre, randomized 
controlled study. Br J Anaesth. 2010;104(6):728– 732.
 18. Ambesh SP, Pandey CK, Srivastava S, Agarwal A, Singh DK. 
Percutaneous tracheostomy with single dilatation technique: a 
prospective, randomized comparison of Ciaglia blue rhino 
versus Griggs’ guidewire dilating forceps. Anesth Analg. 
2002;95(6):1739– 1745.
 19. Añón JM, Escuela MP, Gómez V, Moreno A, López J, Díaz R, 
et al. Percutaneous tracheostomy: Ciaglia Blue Rhino versus 
Griggs’ guide wire dilating forceps. A prospective randomized 
trial. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2004;48(4):451– 46.
 20. Byhahn C, Westphal K, Meininger D, Gurke B, Kessler P, Lischke 
V. Single- dilator percutaneous tracheostomy: a comparison of 
PercuTwist and Ciaglia Blue Rhino techniques. Intensive Care 
Med. 2002;28(9):1262– 1266.
 21. Cantais E, Kaiser E, Le- Goff Y, Palmier B. Percutaneous 
tracheostomy: prospective comparison of the translaryngeal 
technique versus the forceps- dilational technique in 100 critically 
ill adults. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(4):815– 819.
 22. Johnson JL, Cheatham ML, Sagraves SG, Block EF, Nelson 
LD. Percutaneous dilational tracheostomy: a comparison of 
single- versus multiple- dilator techniques. Crit Care Med. 
2001;29(6):1251– 1254.
 23. Byhahn C, Wilke HJ, Halbig S, Lischke V, Westphal K. 
Percutaneous tracheostomy: Ciaglia Blue Rhino versus the basic 
Ciaglia technique of percutaneous dilational tracheostomy. 
Anesth Analg. 2000;91(4):882– 886.
 24. Cabrini L, Monti G, Landoni G, Biondi- Zoccai G, Boroli F, Mamo 
D, et al. Percutaneous tracheostomy, a systematic review. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2012;56(3):270– 281.
 25. Rudas M, Seppelt I, Herkes R, Hislop R, Rajbhandari D, 
Weisbrodt L. Traditional landmark versus ultrasound guided 
tracheal puncture during percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy 
in adult intensive care patients: a randomised controlled trial. 
Crit Care. 2014;18(5):14.
 26. Bjork VO. Partial resection of the only remaining lung with 
the aid of respirator treatment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1960;39:179– 288.
 27. Grant CA, Dempsey G, Harrison J, Jones T. Tracheo- innominate 
artery fistula after percutaneous tracheostomy: three case reports 
and a clinical review. Br J Anaesth. 2006;96(1):127– 131.
 28. Utley JR, Singer MM, Roe BB, Fraser DG, Dedo HH. Definitive 
management of innominate artery hemorrhage complicating 
tracheostomy. JAMA. 1972;220(4):577– 579.
 29. McGrath BA, Bates L, Atkinson D, Moore JA; National 
Tracheostomy Safety Project. Multidisciplinary guidelines for 
the management of tracheostomy and laryngectomy airway 
emergencies. Anaesthesia. 2012;67(9):1025– 1041.
 30. Hernandez Altemir F. The submental route for endotracheal 
intubation. A new technique. J Maxillofac Surg. 1986;14(1):64– 65.
 31. Amin M, Dill- Russell P, Manisali M, Lee R, Sinton I. Facial 
fractures and submental tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia. 
2002;57(12):1195– 1199.
 32. Caron G, Paquin R, Lessard MR, Trepanier CA, Landry 
PE. Submental endotracheal intubation: an alternative to 
tracheotomy in patients with midfacial and panfacial fractures. J 
Trauma. 2000;48(2):235– 240.
 33. Biglioli F, Mortini P, Goisis M, Bardazzi A, Boari N. Submental 
orotracheal intubation: an alternative to tracheotomy in 
transfacial cranial base surgery. Skull Base. 2003;13(4):189– 195.
 34. Malhotra N, Bhardwaj N, Chari P. Submental endotracheal 
intubation: a useful alternative to tracheostomy. Indian J Anaesth. 
2002;46(5):400– 402.
 35. Heard AMB, Green RJ, Eakins P. The formulation and 
introduction of the ‘can’t intubate, can’t ventilate’ algorithm into 
clinical practice. Anaesthesia. 2009;64(6):601– 608.
 36. Baker PA, O’Sullivan EP, Kristensen MS, Lockey D. The great 
airway debate: is the scalpel mightier than the cannula? Br J 
Anaesth. 2016;117 Suppl 1:i17– i19.
 37. Duggan LV, Ballantyne Scott B, Law JA, Morris IR, Murphy MF, 
Griesdale DE. Transtracheal jet ventilation in the ‘can’t intubate 
can’t oxygenate’ emergency: a systematic review. Br J Anaesth. 
2016;117 Suppl 1:i28– i38.
 38. Pracy JP, Brennan L, Cook TM, Hartle AJ, Marks RJ, McGrath 
BA, et al. Surgical intervention during a can’t intubate can’t 
oxygenate (CICO) event: emergency front- of- neck airway 
(FONA)? Br J Anaesth 2016:117(4):426– 428.
 39. Kristensen MS, Teoh WH, Baker PA. Percutaneous emergency 
airway access; prevention, preparation, technique and training. 
Br J Anaesth. 2015;114(3):357– 361.
 40. Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C; Fourth National Audit 
Project. Major complications of airway management in the 
UK: results of the Fourth National Audit Project of the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society. 
Part 1: anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 2011;106(5):617– 631.
 41. Bradley P. Continued provision of cannula cricothyroidotomy 
equipment. Anaesthesia. 2016;71(7):854– 855.
 42. Wong DT, Lai K, Chung FF, Ho RY. Cannot intubate- cannot 
ventilate and difficult intubation strategies: results of a Canadian 
national survey. Anesth Analg. 2005;100(5):1439– 1446.
 43. Freck CM, Mitchell V, McNarry A, Mendonca C, Bhagrath R, 
Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for the 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
Surgical airway
42
 44. Heard A. Instructor check- lists for percutaneous emergency 
oxygenation strategies in the ‘can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate’ 
scenario. 2014. https:// www.sma shwo rds.com/ books/ view/ 494 739
 45. Parameswaran A, Beckmann L, Nadarajah P. Scalpel- bougie 
cricothyroidotomy. Anaesthesia. 2014;69(5):517– 518.
 46. McGill J, Clinton JE, Ruiz E. Cricothyrotomy in the emergency 
department. Ann Emerg Med. 1982;11(7):361– 4.
 47. Erlandson MJ, Clinton JE, Ruiz E, Cohen J. Cricothyrotomy 
in the emergency department revisited. J Emerg Med. 
1989;7(2):115– 118.
 48. Schillaci CR, Iacovoni VF, Conte RS. Transtracheal aspiration 
complicated by fatal endotracheal hemorrhage. N Engl J Med. 
1976;295(9):488– 490.
 49. Nicholls SE, Sweeney TW, Ferre RM, Strout TD. Bedside 
sonography by emergency physicians for the rapid identification 
of landmarks relevant to cricothyrotomy. Am J Emerg Med. 
2008;26(8):852– 856.
 50. Butler FS, Cirillo AA. Retrograde tracheal intubation. Anesth 
Analg. 1960;39:333– 338.
 51. Waters DJ. Guided blind endotracheal intubation. For 
patients with deformities of the upper airway. Anaesthesia. 
1963;18:158– 162.
 52. Dhara SS. Retrograde tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia. 
2009;64(10):1094– 1104.
 53. King HK, Wang LF, Khan AK, Wooten DJ. Translaryngeal 
guided intubation for difficult intubation. Crit Care Med. 
1987;15(9):869– 871.
 54. Bourke D, Levesque PR. Modification of retrograde guide for 
endotracheal intubation. Anesth Analg. 1974;53(6):1013– 1014.
 55. Abou- Madi MN, Trop D. Pulling versus guiding: a modification 
of retrograde guided intubation. Can J Anaesth. 1989;36(3, Pt 
1):336– 339.
 56. Dhara SS. Retrograde intubation— a facilitated approach. Br J 
Anaesth. 1992;69(6):631– 633.
 57. Shantha TR. Retrograde intubation using the subcricoid region. 
Br J Anaesth. 1992;68(1):109– 112.
 58. Bissinger U, Guggenberger H, Lenz G. Retrograde- guided 
fiberoptic intubation in patients with laryngeal carcinoma. Anesth 
Analg. 1995;81(2):408– 410.
 59. Gupta B, McDonald JS, Brooks JH, Mendenhall J. Oral 
fiberoptic intubation over a retrograde guidewire. Anesth Analg. 
1989;68(4):517– 519.
 60. Lenfant F, Benkhadra M, Trouilloud P, Freysz M. Comparison of 
two techniques for retrograde tracheal intubation in human fresh 
cadavers. Anesthesiology. 2006;104(1):48– 51.
 61. Hung OR, al- Qatari M. Light- guided retrograde intubation. Can 
J Anaesth. 1997;44(8):877– 882.
 62. Law JA. Deficiencies in locating the cricothyroid membrane by 
palpation: We can’t and the surgeons can’t, so what now for the 
emergency surgical airway? Can J Anaesth. 2016;63(7):791– 796.
 63. Dillon JK, Christensen B, Fairbanks T, Jurkovich G, Moe KS. The 
emergent surgical airway: cricothyrotomy vs. tracheotomy. Int J 
Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2013;42(2):204– 208.
 64. Bould MD, Bearfield P. Techniques for emergency 
ventilation through a needle cricothyroidotomy. Anaesthesia. 
2008;63(5):535– 539.
 65. Abstracts presented at the Difficult Airway Society’s Annual 
Meeting in Nottingham, November 2011. Anaesthesia. 
2012;67(5):558– 561.
 66. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath R, 
Patel A, et al. Reply. Br J Anaesth. 2016;117(4):535– 536.
 67. Hamaekers A, Borg P, Enk D. The importance of flow and 
pressure release in emergency jet ventilation devices. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2009;19(5):452– 457.
 68. Hamaekers AE, Borg PA, Enk D. A bench study of ventilation 
via two self- assembled jet devices and the Oxygen Flow 
Modulator in simulated upper airway obstruction. Anaesthesia. 
2009;64(12):1353– 1358.
4
Regional anaesthesia
Shona Love and Ian Bailes
Introduction
Regional anaesthesia is a fundamental and valuable technique in the 
armamentarium of any anaesthetist. Deployed correctly, it can allow 
many surgical procedures to be undertaken without the need for 
general anaesthesia, or when employed as an adjunct, it can improve 
patient experience, reduce systemic analgesia (and the associated 
side effects), and reduce recovery time.
Oromaxillofacial surgery is no exception. However, the applica-
tion of regional anaesthesia to this particular anatomical area differs 
greatly from lower limb anaesthesia, for instance, where the nerves 
supplying the affected area are relatively superficial and often clearly 
identifiable on ultrasound. Instead, sensation to the head and neck is 
supplied by the cranial nerves (CNs) and upper cervical nerve roots. 
The paired CNs arise deep within the brainstem and have torturous 
paths through the bony skull base before emerging as multiple small 
terminal branches with short courses, each supplying sensation to 
small, often variable, areas of the skin or mucosa. This anatomical 
distribution renders oromaxillofacial surgery less amenable to the 
targeted nerve blocks traditionally associated with regional anaes-
thesia. There are, however, some notable exceptions, for example, 
the inferior alveolar nerve block used in dental procedures.
The multiplicity of small nerves means the superficial tissues of 
the head and neck are generally amenable to a field block. Local 
subcutaneous or submucosal infiltration of local anaesthetic agents 
often provides very good anaesthesia. When combined with vaso-
constrictors this also helps prepare the surgical field and reduce 
bleeding.
Unlike other parts of the body, where regional anaesthesia tech-
niques are principally undertaken to facilitate surgical operations, 
regional anaesthesia of the airway may be performed solely to fa-
cilitate anaesthetic interventions. The obvious example is awake tra-
cheal intubation, in which anaesthesia of the oral or nasal cavity, the 
pharynx, and the larynx may be undertaken to aid passage of an oral 
or nasal tracheal tube.
Rather than proffering an exhaustive description of head and 
neck and oromaxillofacial anatomy, this chapter focuses on areas of 
particular relevance to the anaesthetist. The head and neck may be 
considered as six functional units, consisting of the face, the scalp, 
the nasal cavity, the oral cavity, the pharynx, and the larynx. Each 
functional unit is considered in turn, with a practical approach to 
the anatomy and innervation, to enable sufficient knowledge and 
understanding to safely anaesthetize selected tissues.
The face
The face is the anterior part of the head, bounded superiorly by the 
hairline, inferiorly by the chin, and laterally by the pinnae of the 
ears. The main sensory supply to the face is derived from the fifth 
CN, the trigeminal nerve (CN V). Since this is the dominant sen-
sory nerve in the head and neck, its anatomy and branches will be 
described in detail.
The trigeminal nerve emerges from the pons as a large sensory 
and small motor root. Prior to exiting the skull, at the trigeminal 
(Gasserian) ganglion, the nerve divides into three primary divi-
sions named according to the area of the face that they supply: the 
ophthalmic (CN V1), maxillary (CN V2), and mandibular (CN V3) 
branches of the trigeminal nerve (Figs 4.1 and 4.2).1
The ophthalmic division (CN V1)
Just prior to reaching the superior orbital fissure, the ophthalmic 
division of the trigeminal nerve divides into three major branches 
(the frontal, nasociliary, and lacrimal nerves).2 The major branches 
then divide further. All of the branches have sensory function. Those 
providing cutaneous supply to the face are outlined below. The area 
covered includes the skin of the forehead, upper eyelid, and most of 
the surface of the nose.
The frontal nerve
The frontal nerve has two branches, both providing facial sensation1,3:
 • The supraorbital nerve runs in the superior aspect of the orbit, in 
the extraconal space, and exits the orbit through the supraorbital 
foramen. It supplies the skin of the forehead and scalp, and the 
conjunctivae of the upper eyelid.
 • The supratrochlear nerve runs in the superomedial aspect of the 
orbit, passes over the trochlea, and exits the orbit more medially 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional anaesthesia
44
via the frontal notch. It supplies the skin of the medial forehead, 
the medial upper eyelid, and medial canthus.
The nasociliary nerve
The nasociliary nerve has five branches. Two of these provide facial 
sensation1:
 • The infratrochlear nerve runs in the medial aspect of the orbit, 
in the extraconal space, and emerges from the orbit below the 
trochlea. It supplies sensation to the inner canthus, and the skin 
of the bridge of the nose.4
 • The anterior ethmoid nerve terminates as the external nasal 
nerve. This terminal branch pierces the nasal cartilage and sup-
plies the skin of the dorsal aspect of the nose.
The other branches of the nasociliary nerve provide sensation 
to the sinuses, the globe, and the dura of the anterior cranial 
fossa.5
Superior
orbital
ﬁssure
V1
V2
V3
Foramen
rotundum
Foramen
ovale
Trigeminal
ganglion
Pons
Posterior
cranial
fossa
Petrous
temporal
bone
Meckel’s
cave
Fig. 4.1 Anatomical relations of the trigeminal nerve as it emerges from the brainstem.
Ophthalmic
Maxillary
Mandibular
Mental nerve
Long buccal nerve
Auriculotemporal nerve
Infraorbital nerve
Zygomatico facial nerve
Zygomatico-
temporal nerve
Infratrochlear nerve
External nasal nerve
Lacrimal nerve
Supra trochlear nerve
Supra orbital nerve
Fig. 4.2 The sensory supply to the face and anterior scalp from the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve. The right half of the diagram shows some of 
the major branches of the trigeminal nerve as they emerge from the skull.
 
The face
45
The lacrimal nerve
The lacrimal nerve runs in the lateral aspect of the orbit, and exits 
the orbit under the lateral part of the superior orbital margin. It sup-
plies the skin of the lateral part of the upper eyelid.6
The maxillary division (CN V2)
The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve exits the skull via the 
foramen rotundum, then divides into its various branches.1 Two of 
these branches provide sensory supply to the face. The area covered 
includes the skin of the lower eyelid, the most lateral part of the ex-
ternal nose, the upper lip, the skin over the zygomatic arch, and the 
anterior part of the temple.
The infraorbital nerve
The infraorbital nerve enters the orbit through the inferior orbital fissure, 
then runs on the inferior aspect of the orbit in the infraorbital groove. 
As it runs in the groove, it gives off sensory branches to the teeth and 
the maxillary sinus.1 The nerve then passes through the infraorbital for-
amen to emerge onto the face. Once through the infraorbital foramen, 
the infraorbital nerve separates into a number of terminal branches:
 • Palpebral branches, that supply the lower eyelid and cheek.
 • Nasal branches, that supply the lateral side of the nose.
 • Superior labial branches, that supply the upper lip.
The zygomatic nerve
The zygomatic nerve divides in the lateral wall of the orbit to become 
two nerves with sensory function5:
 • The zygomaticotemporal nerve, which emerges through the 
zygomaticotemporal foramen and supplies the skin over the 
anterior temporal region.
 • The zygomaticofacial nerve, which emerges onto the face through 
the zygomaticofacial foramen, and supplies the skin over the 
zygomatic arch.
The mandibular division (CN V3)
The mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve is the largest 
branch and has both sensory and motor components (Fig. 4.3). 
The sensory nerve is larger and arises from the trigeminal gan-
glion, while the smaller motor root arises in the motor nucleus in 
the pons. These roots unite to become the main trunk of the man-
dibular nerve. The nerve passes through the foramen ovale into the 
infratemporal fossa where it then divides.2 The main branches are 
the anterior and posterior divisions. These have both sensory and 
motor components. The sensory supply of the mandibular division 
is to the skin of the tragus of the ear, the skin anterior to the ear, 
the temple region, the lateral part of the cheek, the chin, and the 
lower lip.1
Lacrimal nerve
Supraorbital nerve
External nasal nerve
Internal nasal branches
Supratrochlear nerve
Middle meningeal nerve
Infraorbital nerve
Zygomatic nerve
Long buccal nerve
Lateral pterygoid nerve
Deep temporal nerve
Mental nerve
Incisive branch
Molar branch
Mylohyoid nerve
Auriculotemporal nerve
Inferior alveolar nerve
Lingual nerve
Meningeal nerve
Superior alveolar nerves
Palpebral branches
Nasal branches
Labial branches
Nasopalatine nerve
Zygomaticotemporal nerve
Zygomaticofacial nerve
Greater palatine nerve
Frontal nerve
V1
V2
V3
Ophthalmic
(sensory only)
Maxillary
(sensory only)
Mandibular
(sensory & motor)
Nasociliary nerve
Infratrochlear nerve
Anterior ethmoidal nerve
Ciliary branch
Fig. 4.3 Schematic showing branches and divisions of the trigeminal nerve.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional anaesthesia
46
The anterior division
The anterior branch of the mandibular nerve has one sensory 
branch, and three motor branches. The buccal nerve is the sensory 
branch. It provides cutaneous supply to an area of skin inferior to 
the lateral part of the cheek. It also provides sensation to some of the 
molar teeth, the inner cheek, and the gums.5
The posterior division
The posterior division has two sensory branches, and one branch 
with mixed motor and sensory function. Two of these supply sen-
sation to the face:
 • The auriculotemporal nerve, which emerges behind the temporo-
mandibular joint. It supplies the skin of the posterior part of the 
temple, and the tragus, concha, and external acoustic meatus of 
the ear.1
 • The inferior alveolar nerve, which branches to become the mental 
nerve. This terminal branch emerges from the mental foramen 
and supplies the skin of the chin and the lower lip.3
Anaesthetizing the face
Anaesthetists rarely perform local anaesthetic blocks of the face; 
however, a working knowledge of the most common regional tech-
niques performed during surgical practice is useful.
Field blocks
Field blocks can be used to provide anaesthesia for operative pro-
cedures performed under local anaesthesia alone, or as an adjunct in 
more extensive surgery performed under general anaesthesia. Local 
anaesthetic is frequently combined with adrenaline to provide vaso-
constriction and so aid haemostasis in the operative field. Any area 
of facial tissue can be anaesthetized by infiltrating local anaesthetic 
around its margins. Examples of procedures that can be performed 
under field block include excision of small lesions of the skin and sub-
cutaneous tissues, and cosmetic procedures such as blepharoplasty.
Nerve blocks
Superficial nerve blocks of the face are commonly used by 
oromaxillofacial and plastic surgeons when repairing superficial la-
cerations of the face, without the need for general anaesthesia. In the 
paediatric population they also serve as a useful adjunct to cleft lip 
surgery.7 Nerve blocks of the face involve anaesthetizing the major 
branches of the trigeminal nerve at the point where they emerge 
either from the cranium, or more superficially where they emerge 
from foramen in the facial bones.3,8
Supraorbital nerve block (CN V1)
Palpate the supraorbital foramen, found at the junction of the 
medial one- third and lateral two- thirds of the supraorbital ridge, 
and generally in line with the ipsilateral pupil. Insert a short 27 G 
needle just below this landmark and perform a test aspiration (the 
nerve lies in close proximity to the supraorbital vessels). Inject up to 
1 mL of local anaesthetic solution, then apply pressure to encourage 
spread.3,9 Ultrasound can add accuracy to the landmark technique, 
by identifying the foramen.
Supratrochlear nerve block (CN V1)
This can be performed through the same injection point as the 
supraorbital nerve block, with the needle being directed slightly 
more medially. Alternatively, insert the needle just medial to the 
supraorbital foramen, and superior to the level of the eyebrow. Inject 
0.5– 1 mL of local anaesthetic solution, then apply pressure to en-
courage spread.3,9
Lacrimal nerve block (CN V1)
The lacrimal nerve can be blocked by depositing 1– 2 mL of local an-
aesthetic behind the lacrimal gland. The entry point for the needle 
is just below the superolateral orbital rim, at a depth of approxi-
mately 2 cm.9
Maxillary nerve block (CN V2)
Complete maxillary nerve block can be performed to achieve a 
larger field of anaesthesia, for instance, in cancer resection surgery 
involving the maxilla or hard palate. The maxillary nerve can be ac-
cessed in the pterygopalatine fossa using a percutaneous technique. 
The suprazygomatic approach is preferred, as the risk of complica-
tions is lower. A long 25 G needle is inserted at the angle formed by 
the posterior orbital ridge and the upper aspect of the zygomatic 
arch, and directed towards the sphenoid wing. It is then redirected, 
and advanced towards the pterygopalatine fossa, where 3– 5 mL 
of local anaesthetic is injected.3,8 Ultrasound guidance can prove 
very useful in this block, allowing both the pterygopalatine fossa, 
and the maxillary artery to be identified. The probe is placed in the 
infrazygomatic position (out of plane with the needle) such that the 
pterygopalatine fossa can be visualized between the maxilla and the 
sphenoid.
The maxillary nerve can also be anaesthetized using two dif-
ferent intraoral approaches: via the greater palatine canal, and via 
an infrazygomatic approach to the pterygopalatine fossa. The latter 
carries a significant risk of injury to the maxillary artery.3
Infraorbital nerve block (CN V2)
Two approaches have been described to anaesthetize this terminal 
branch of the maxillary nerve.3,8,9 Both involve deposition of local 
anaesthetic near the infraorbital foramen, taking care not to enter 
it. The foramen is sometimes palpable, located 0.5– 1 cm below the 
mid- point of the inferior border of the orbit, in line with the pupil. 
Ultrasound can be used to identify the foramen.
In the external approach, a 27 G needle is inserted percutaneously 
in the vicinity of the infraorbital foramen until bony resistance is 
encountered, and 1– 3 mL of local anaesthetic is injected. An alter-
native approach is the intraoral route, passing the needle through 
topicalized buccal mucosa, in line with the first canine tooth and up-
wards towards the infraorbital foramen. In both instances, a finger 
should be placed in the foramen to ensure the injection is not inad-
vertently intraorbital.
Mental nerve block (CN V3)
The mental foramen is located in line with the lower canine on the 
mental protrusion of the mandible. Ultrasound can be used to iden-
tify the foramen with greater accuracy. A 27 G needle is inserted lat-
eral to the foramen and advanced towards the midline, with 1– 3 mL 
of local anaesthetic deposited outside the foramen.1 An alternative 
The nasal cavity
47
approach is the intraoral route, passing the needle inferiorly through 
topicalized mucosa alongside the lower canine tooth, and towards 
the foramen.3,8
The scalp
The scalp is bounded posteriorly by the superior nuchal lines of the 
occipital bone, anteriorly by the supraorbital margin of the frontal 
bone, and laterally by the zygomatic arches.
Sensory innervation of the scalp
Sensory innervation anterior to the auricle of the ear is from all 
three branches of the trigeminal nerve. The course of these nerves 
has been described previously and is illustrated in Figs 4.1 and 4.2. 
Sensory innervation posterior to the auricle of the ear is from the 
spinal cutaneous nerves of the second (C2) and third (C3) cervical 
nerves.10
The lesser occipital nerve
The lesser occipital nerve arises from the primary ventral rami of C2 
and C3 and travels along the posterior border of the sternocleido-
mastoid muscle. It supplies the lateral portion of the posterior scalp, 
and the cranial surface of the pinna of the ear.
The greater occipital nerve
The greater occipital nerve arises from the dorsal rami of C2 and 
emerges at the back of the head above the superior nuchal line, and 
approximately two- thirds of the distance between the mastoid pro-
cess and the external occipital protuberance. It lies medial to the oc-
cipital artery. It supplies sensation to the posterior part of the scalp 
and the cranial vertex.
The great auricular nerve
The great auricular nerve arises from C2 and C3 and travels along the 
posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. It divides into 
an anterior and a posterior branch. The posterior branch supplies 
the skin overlying the mastoid process, and part of the lobule of the 
ear. The anterior part supplies the skin overlying the parotid gland.
Anaesthetizing the scalp
Local anaesthetic field blocks can be used to anaesthetize small parts 
of the scalp. Full anaesthesia of the scalp can be achieved using a 
‘scalp block’.11,12
Scalp block
The nerves of the scalp may be anaesthetized for a variety of reasons. 
These include chronic pain procedures, and the treatment of some 
varieties of migraine. Additionally, blocking these nerves may be 
used to augment postoperative pain relief following coronal inci-
sion. A complete scalp block involves anaesthetizing seven nerves 
on each side.3,11 The amount of local anaesthetic used must be care-
fully calculated for each patient. Infiltration of the scalp has been 
shown to result in a more rapid rise in plasma concentrations of local 
anaesthesia than other regional techniques.13,14
The supraorbital nerve (CN V1)
As described in the section on nerve blocks of the face.
The supratrochlear nerve (CN V1)
As described in the section on nerve blocks of the face.
The zygomaticotemporal nerve (CN V2)
Infiltrate from the lateral margin of the supraorbital ridge to the 
distal portion of the zygomatic arch. The local anaesthetic must be 
infiltrated both superficially and deep to the temporalis muscle.
The auriculotemporal nerve (CN V3)
Insert a 25 or 27 G needle approximately 1 cm anterior to the tragus 
of the ear, above the level of the temporomandibular joint. Care 
should be taken to avoid the superficial temporal artery.
The greater auricular nerve (C2– C3)
Insert a 25 or 27 G needle at the level of the tragus, and approxi-
mately 1.5 cm posterior to the auricle of the ear.
The lesser occipital nerve (C2– C3)
Infiltrate posterior to the ear, from the upper pole of the auricle to 
the level of the superior nuchal line (the bony ridge extending lat-
erally from the occipital protuberance).
The greater occipital nerve (C2)
Insert a 25 or 27 G needle just medial to the occipital artery, at the 
level of the superior nuchal line. Care should be taken to avoid the 
occipital artery. Following injection of local anaesthetic, apply pres-
sure to encourage spread.
The nasal cavity
The nasal cavity extends from the nares anteriorly through the vesti-
bule, the atrium, and the conchae to the posterior pharyngeal wall.15 
It is lined with highly vascular mucous membrane (apart from the 
vestibule, which is lined with hairy skin) and has a large surface 
area, allowing it to warm and humidify inhaled air, and providing 
the sense of smell. The nasal cavity is formed by:
 • Floor— hard palate (maxilla and palatine bones).
 • Roof— sphenoid bone posteriorly, cribriform plate of the ethmoid 
bone (through which pass olfactory nerve fibres). Anteriorly, the 
frontal bone, then the nasal bone and the nasal cartilage.
 • Medial wall— nasal septum. The upper part is the vertical plate 
of the ethmoid bone, the posterior part is formed by the vomer 
bone, the anterior part from septal cartilage.
 • Lateral wall— three folds called conchae, each with an opening 
below it, called a meatus.
The conchae increase surface area and make air flow turbulent, 
slowing its passage, allowing it to be warmed and humidified. The 
air sinuses open onto the lateral wall of the nasal cavity:15
 • The sphenoid sinus opens into the sphenoethmoidal recess.
 • The posterior ethmoidal sinus opens into the superior meatus.
 • The middle ethmoidal sinus opens into the middle meatus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional anaesthesia
48
 • The anterior ethmoidal sinus opens into the infundibulum of the 
middle meatus.
 • The frontal sinus opens into the infundibulum of the middle meatus.
 • The maxillary sinus opens into the hiatus semilunaris, a ridge that 
lies within the middle meatus.
The nasal cavity has a rich blood supply. The anterior ethmoidal ar-
tery, posterior ethmoidal artery, and sphenopalatine artery meet the 
superior labral artery in the part of the septum known as Little’s area. 
It is therefore important to target the septum when administering 
vasoconstrictors to the nose in preparation for nasal procedures.
Sensory innervation of the nasal cavity
The nasal cavity has a dual sensory supply. Olfaction is supplied by 
the olfactory nerve (CN I). Olfactory nerves embedded in the ol-
factory mucosa perforate the cribriform plate to form the olfactory 
bulb intracranially.
Of more relevance to anaesthesia, however, is the provision of 
general sensation. The nasociliary nerve (a branch of the ophthalmic 
division of the trigeminal nerve) supplies sensation to the anterior 
and superior parts of the nasal cavity, directly and via the internal 
nasal branches of the anterior ethmoidal nerve (one of the divisions 
of the nasociliary nerve).3 The nasociliary nerve also supplies sensa-
tion to the sphenoidal, ethmoidal, and frontal sinuses. The posterior 
parts of the nasal cavity are supplied by the maxillary division of the 
trigeminal nerve. The nasopalatine nerve is a terminal branch of the 
zygomatic nerve, which arises from the maxillary division of the tri-
geminal nerve. It supplies the posterior septum, while the anterior 
septum and the lateral vestibule are supplied by nasal branches of the 
infraorbital nerve, a major branch of the maxillary division of the 
trigeminal nerve (Fig. 4.3).
Anaesthetizing the nasal cavity
Indications for nasal anaesthesia generally comprise ear, nose, and 
throat procedures such as functional endoscopic sinus surgery, 
septoplasty, rhinoplasty, septorhinoplasty, sphenopalatine artery 
ligation, or biopsy in the affected area. Other surgical specialties 
may also require nasal anaesthesia, such as in neurosurgery for an 
endoscopic approach to trans- sphenoidal hypophyseal resection, 
or for skull base resection. Usually this is as an adjunct to general 
anaesthesia, designed to augment intra- and postoperative anal-
gesia, but there are reports of patients undergoing septoplasty under 
local anaesthesia alone.16 For biopsies, local anaesthesia alone will 
frequently be sufficient. Passage of flexible fibreoptic scopes and 
nasotracheal tubes may also require anaesthesia of the nasal cavity 
(discussed below).
Topical anaesthesia
Most of the local anaesthesia applied to the nasal cavity will be top-
ical. This is almost always combined with a vasoconstrictor to reduce 
the volume of the mucosa and reduce bleeding. This improves sur-
gical access and visibility.
Moffett’s solution
In 1947, Moffett described a solution of 2 mL of 8% cocaine, 2 mL 
of 1% sodium bicarbonate, and 1 mL of adrenaline 1:1000, to be 
instilled in a patient’s nose.17 Cocaine is an ester local anaesthetic 
which, unlike most amide local anaesthetics in use currently, is 
also a potent vasoconstrictor. Adrenaline further adds to the vaso-
constriction, while the bicarbonate raises the pH and therefore in-
creases the unionized proportion of the local anaesthetic (a weak 
base), and so speeds up the onset of action. Systemic absorption 
of the cocaine and adrenaline contained in Moffett’s solution has 
been associated with hypertension, coronary artery vasospasm, 
exacerbation of ischaemic heart disease, arrhythmias, and post-
operative cognitive dysfunction.18 The maximum recommended 
dose for cocaine is 1.5 mg/ kg19 so the described recipe represents 
an overdose for most patients. For that reason, many practitioners 
choose to dilute the solution and there are many variations on 
this mixture in practice. Typically, the solution is sprayed into the 
nares, coating the mucosa. Alternatively, the solution can be in-
stilled after insertion of a throat pack, such that it fills the nasal 
cavity and can be removed by suction after a few minutes (dis-
cussed in Chapter 9).
Co- phenylcaine
A preparation of local anaesthetic and vasoconstrictor that can be 
used in place of Moffett’s solution. It contains lidocaine 5% and 
phenylephrine 0.5%, and typically comes in a bottle containing 2.5 
mL of solution, to be used as a spray. The pump spray delivers the 
mixture in a directed fashion.
Field blocks
Submucosal infiltration of local anaesthetic solution (usually con-
taining dilute adrenaline for its vasoconstrictor action) can be per-
formed. While this technique may be useful for small procedures 
such as excision biopsies of intranasal lesions, it is unlikely to pro-
vide the widespread anaesthesia required for sinus surgery.
Nerve blocks
Although not commonly practised, various nerve block techniques 
have been described to provide anaesthesia to the nasal cavity. 
Note that these often need to be performed in combination, and 
bilaterally.
Nasociliary nerve block
Using a 27 G needle, 1– 2 mL of local anaesthetic is injected 1– 1.5 cm 
above the medial canthus, with the needle directed medially onto 
bone. No adrenaline may be used with this block as there is a risk of 
retinal artery vasoconstriction.3
External nasal nerve block
Using a 27 G needle, 1– 2 mL of local anaesthetic is injected 0.5– 1 cm 
from the midline at the osseocartilaginous junction of the nose.3
Infraorbital nerve block
As described in the section on nerve blocks of the face.
Maxillary nerve block
As described in the section on nerve blocks of the face.
Pterygopalatine ganglion block
This is essentially an intraoral approach to the maxillary nerve and is 
described in the dental nerve blocks section of this chapter.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anaesthetizing the mouth
49
The mouth
The mouth extends from the lips anteriorly to the oropharynx pos-
teriorly, and comprises the vestibule (between the lips and teeth) 
and the main oral cavity, within the alveolar arches. It is lined with 
mucous membrane (in which the opening of the parotid duct can 
be identified at the level of the second upper molar). It contains the 
teeth, gums, tongue, hard palate, soft palate, and uvula.
Sensory innervation of the mouth
The buccal cavity
The roof is supplied by the greater palatine nerve and, anteriorly, 
by the nasopalatine nerve. Both are branches of the maxillary div-
ision of the trigeminal nerve. The floor is supplied by the lingual 
nerve, a branch of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. 
The cheeks are supplied by the buccal nerves, branches of the man-
dibular division of the trigeminal nerve.15
The teeth
Humans have 20 deciduous teeth in childhood, replaced in adult-
hood by 32 permanent teeth. The maxillary arch and mandibular 
arch each contain four incisors, two canines, four premolars, and six 
molars (including the third molars, known as ‘wisdom teeth’).
The pulp, investing structures, and gingiva are supplied by 
branches of the trigeminal nerve. The upper jaw is supplied by the 
maxillary division and the lower jaw by the mandibular division, 
as shown in Fig. 4.4. There is also some periosteal supply to the 
upper jaw from the greater palatine nerve and nasopalatine nerve 
(branches of the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve). Some 
periosteal sensation to the lower jaw is supplied by the long buccal 
nerve and the lingual nerve, which are both branches from the man-
dibular division of the trigeminal nerve.15,20
The tongue
The tongue is a structure of striated muscle, divided along the mid-
line by the median fibrous septum. It is lined with mucous mem-
brane, which form papillae on the superior surface. The underside 
contains lymphoid tissue. The anterior two- thirds reside in the 
mouth, while the posterior third sits in the pharynx and derives a 
different innervation. They are demarcated by the sulcus terminalis. 
At the pharyngeal level, the tongue can be thought of as congruent 
with the pharyngeal musculature.15
The intrinsic muscles
These have no bony attachment, consisting of longitudinal, trans-
verse, and vertical fibres, and are supplied by the hypoglossal nerve 
(CN XII).
The extrinsic muscles
All the extrinsic muscles are supplied by the hypoglossal nerve, ex-
cept palatoglossus which is supplied by the pharyngeal plexus (CN 
X, described later).
 • Genioglossus— inserts on the genial body of mandible.
 • Hypoglossus— inserts on the body and greater cornu of the 
hyoid bone.
 • Styloglossus— inserts on the styloid process of the temporal bone.
 • Palatoglossus— inserts on the palatine aponeurosis, and con-
stricts the pharynx.
The sensory supply to the posterior third of the tongue (including 
the vallate papillae) is from the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) 
(Fig. 4.5). In the anterior two- thirds, general sensation is supplied 
by the lingual nerve, a branch of the mandibular division of the tri-
geminal nerve. Taste is supplied by the chorda tympani, a branch of 
the facial nerve (CN VII).
Anaesthetizing the mouth
Topical anaesthesia
Topical application of local anaesthesia gel, for instance, benzocaine 
10% or lidocaine 2%, is commonly used to provide anaesthesia for 
intraoral lesions and as preparation for intraoral injection of local 
anaesthesia.
Field block
This is the most common method of providing anaesthesia to the 
buccal mucosa and gingiva, and for excision of small tongue lesions. 
Since the nerves enter individual teeth via the root, local anaesthetic 
solution injected towards the apex of the tooth will adequately an-
aesthetize the tooth and periodontium (although the molars may 
require an additional nerve block). A narrow (27 G) needle is used, 
often with prefilled dental anaesthetic cartridges. These typically 
contain 2 mL of lidocaine 2% with adrenaline, up to 1:80,000 for 
vasoconstriction (a higher concentration than typically used in 
other surgical specialties).
Anterior superior alveolar nerve
Middle superior alveolar nerve
Posterior superior
alveolar nerve
Inferior alveolar never
Incisive nerve
Lower 
jaw
Upper
jaw
Fig. 4.4 Sensory innervation of the teeth. The upper jaw derives 
innervation from branches of the maxillary division of the trigeminal 
nerve. The lower jaw derives innervation from branches of the 
mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional anaesthesia
50
Nerve blocks
There are many nerve blocks described in dental practice. For anaes-
thetists, an exhaustive knowledge of these is rarely required; how-
ever, they should be aware of common nerve blocks.
Inferior alveolar nerve block
This will anaesthetize the mandibular teeth on the ipsilateral side (inci-
sors have some crossed innervation). Using a long 25 G needle, 2 mL of 
local anaesthetic solution can be injected through topicalized oral mu-
cosa. The needle is inserted between the coronoid notch of the mandible 
and the pterygomandibular raphae (lateral to the mandible). Once bone 
is contacted, the needle is redirected posteriorly and most of the local 
anaesthetic injected. The lingual nerve can then be blocked by injecting 
the remainder of the local anaesthetic as the needle is withdrawn.20 
There are various alternative approaches to blocking this nerve, such as 
the Gow-Gates approach or the Akinosi– Vazirani approach.21
Maxillary nerve block
This can be used to anaesthetize ipsilateral maxillary teeth, when local 
infiltration is contraindicated. It is described earlier in this chapter in 
the section on nerve blocks of the face. Alternatively, the needle can 
be passed up the greater palatine foramen after topicalization of the 
hard palate. The foramen is just anterior to the border between the hard 
palate and the soft palate. A fine needle is passed approximately 30 mm 
up the foramen where 2 mL of local anaesthetic can be deposited.20
Infraorbital nerve block
As described in the section on nerve blocks of the face.
The pharynx
The pharynx is part of the aerodigestive tract, extending from the 
skull base to the larynx and oesophagus.
The pharyngeal wall
The pharyngeal wall consists of a two- layered muscular tube. The 
outer, mainly circular, layer of muscle consists of three overlapping 
constrictor muscles. The pharyngeal constrictors arise anteriorly and 
come together posteriorly to form the pharyngeal raphe.5 There are 
gaps between the pharyngeal constrictor muscles that allow entry of 
a number of structures, including blood vessels and nerves. The con-
strictor muscles are responsible for swallowing. The inner, mainly 
longitudinal, layer of muscle consists of the palatopharyngeus, 
stylopharyngeus, and salpingopharyngeus. These muscles are re-
sponsible for lifting the larynx and pharynx during eating and 
speaking.
The inner pharynx
The inner part of the pharynx can be split into three anatomical areas:
 • Nasopharynx.
 • Oropharynx.
 • Laryngopharynx.
The nasopharynx
The nasopharynx is the upper part of the pharynx, and communi-
cates with the nasal cavity. The main features of the nasopharynx are 
the entry of the Eustachian tube in the lateral wall, and the presence 
of lymphoid tissue known as the adenoids. The nasopharynx ends at 
the level of the soft palate.2
The oropharynx
The oropharynx is the middle part of the pharynx, and commu-
nicates with the oral cavity via the oropharyngeal isthmus. This is 
formed by the soft palate, the palatoglossal arches, and the posterior 
third of the tongue.2 The main feature of the oropharynx are two 
folds of mucosa known as the tonsillar pillars or fauces. The anterior 
fold is the palatoglossal arch, running between the soft palate and the 
lateral part of the tongue. The posterior fold is the palatopharyngeal 
arch, running between the soft palate and the lateral part of the oro-
pharynx. The triangular space created between the two arches is 
the tonsillar fossa, and contains an aggregation of lymphoid tissue, 
the palatine tonsil.5 This common surgical target is separated from 
surrounding tissue by a capsule and covered in mucous membrane. 
The inferior border of the oropharynx is formed by the base of the 
tongue and epiglottis.
Foramen caecum
Sulcus terminalis
Vallate papillae
Glossopharyngeal nerve
General sensation
= lingual nerve (CN V3)
Taste
= chorda tympani (CN VII)
Fig. 4.5 Innervation of the tongue. The anterior two- thirds are supplied by the trigeminal nerve (general sensation) and the facial nerve (taste). The 
posterior third is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The larynx
51
The laryngopharynx
The laryngopharynx is the inferior part of the pharynx. It commu-
nicates with the oesophagus, and with the larynx via the laryngeal 
inlet. The laryngopharynx is at its widest at the level of the epiglottis, 
and then narrows at the level of the cricoid cartilage.1 The inferior 
border of the laryngopharynx is the piriform fossa, a recess on either 
side of the laryngeal inlet.5
Sensory innervation of the pharynx
The nerve supply to the pharynx comes mainly from the pharyn-
geal plexus. This plexus of nerves lies in the external fascia of the 
pharynx and is formed by branches of the glossopharyngeal and 
vagus nerves.1 Some of the structures within the pharynx are innerv-
ated by branches of the trigeminal nerve.
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
The pharyngeal branch is a small sensory nerve that runs between 
the sphenoid and palatine bones. It supplies much of the mucosa 
of the pharynx and Eustachian tube. The tonsillar branch provides 
sensory supply to the structures of the oropharyngeal isthmus. The 
stylopharyngeus muscle receives motor supply from the glossopha-
ryngeal nerve (Table 4.1).
Trigeminal nerve (CN V)
The maxillary branch supplies much of the mucosa of the nasopharynx.
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Pharyngeal and superior laryngeal branches provide motor supply 
to the major muscles of the pharynx, except the stylopharyngeus 
(Table 4.1).
Anaesthetizing the pharynx
Topical anaesthesia
The pharynx is rarely a target of regional anaesthesia for surgery, but 
it is discussed later in the section on topicalization techniques util-
ized for awake tracheal intubation.
Nerve blocks
Glossopharyngeal nerve block
Most pharyngeal sensation derives from the glossopharyngeal 
nerve. It can be blocked via an intraoral or percutaneous approach. 
The intraoral approach requires the patient to have sufficient mouth 
opening to allow access. This may limit the use of this approach for 
patients requiring awake tracheal intubation for trismus. A tongue 
depressor or laryngoscope may be used to facilitate this approach. 
The glossopharyngeal nerve has a relatively superficial course at 
the base of the tonsillar pillars. As such, it is possible to block the 
nerve by applying gauze soaked in local anaesthetic to this area.22 
Alternatively, the surgeon may inject 2– 3 mL of lidocaine at the base 
of the tonsillar pillar, lateral to the tongue, bilaterally.22,23
An external approach has also been described. The styloid pro-
cess of the mandible is palpated between the angle of the jaw and 
the mastoid process, and a 25 or 27 G needle advanced towards it. 
The needle is then advanced posteriorly, off the bone, and 5 mL of 
local anaesthetic can be injected. This process should be repeated on 
both sides.22 The nerve lies in close proximity to the carotid artery at 
this point, and care must be taken to avoid intravascular injection. 
Ultrasound guidance can be a useful adjunct.24
The larynx
The larynx separates the pharynx from the trachea, and performs the 
dual functions of protecting the airway and phonation. It is formed 
of cartilage, namely the thyroid cartilage and the ring- shaped cri-
coid cartilage, and muscle, attached to the hyoid bone. It is lined by a 
mucous membrane, except on the vocal cords where the epithelium 
becomes stratified squamous. The extrinsic muscles that act upon 
the larynx derive their innervation from the CNs and upper cervical 
nerve roots (Table 4.1).15
The intrinsic muscles close the glottic opening and adjust the 
vocal cord position during speech. They are innervated by branches 
of the vagus nerve (CN X)15:
 • Oblique arytenoid passes from the muscular process of one aryt-
enoid cartilage to the apex of the contralateral arytenoid. It ad-
ducts and lifts the vocal cords.
 • Aryepiglottic muscles are extensions of the oblique arytenoid and 
close the glottis against the epiglottis, acting together as a sphincter.
 • Cricothyroid tenses the vocal cords.
 • Thyroarytenoid (also known as vocalis muscle) relaxes the 
vocal cords.
 • Lateral cricoarytenoid adducts the vocal cords.
 • Transverse arytenoid closes the glottis.
 • Posterior cricoarytenoid abducts the vocal cords.
All intrinsic muscles of the larynx are supplied by the recurrent la-
ryngeal nerves, except cricothyroid. The recurrent laryngeal nerves 
are bilateral branches of the vagus nerve, which leave the main vagus 
nerve distal to the larynx. The left nerve loops under the arch of the 
aorta, the right loops under the right subclavian artery. They then 
travel cranially alongside the trachea to the larynx. The cricothyroid 
muscle is supplied by the external laryngeal nerve, another branch 
of the vagus nerve.
Table 4.1 Extrinsic muscles of the larynx and pharynx, and their 
nerve supply
Muscle
Nerve supply
Digastric
Mandibular division of trigeminal (CN V3)
Mylohyoid
Mandibular division of trigeminal (CN V3)
Stylohyoid
Facial (CN VII)
Geniohyoid
C1– C3 (ansa cervicalis)
Stylopharyngeus
Glossopharyngeal (CN IX)
Palatopharyngeus
Glossopharyngeal (CN IX)
Salpingopharyngeus
Branch of vagus (CN X)
Sternothyroid
C1– C3 (ansa cervicalis)
Sternohyoid
C1– C3 (ansa cervicalis)
Omohyoid
C1– C3 (ansa cervicalis)
Thyrohyoid
C1– C3 (ansa cervicalis)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional anaesthesia
52
The sensory supply to the larynx is also derived from branches 
of the vagus nerve. The internal laryngeal nerve, a branch of the su-
perior laryngeal nerve, supplies the mucosa above the vocal cords. 
The recurrent laryngeal nerve supplies sensation below the vocal 
cords (Fig. 4.6).
Anaesthetizing the larynx
Indications for anaesthetizing the larynx include awake fibreoptic 
tracheal intubation, awake videolaryngoscopic tracheal intubation, 
vocal cord surgery, flexible bronchoscopy, and occasionally as an ad-
junct to reduce coughing in other airway surgery.
Topical anaesthesia
Local anaesthetic solution can be applied topically to the larynx in 
several ways:
 • In an anaesthetized patient, 5 mL of 2% or 2.5 mL of 4% lidocaine 
can be directly applied to the vocal cords during laryngoscopy. 
Mucosal atomization devices can be used to increase spread of the 
local anaesthetic.
 • Lidocaine can be sprayed directly via an intubating bronchoscope 
(‘spray- as- you- go’ technique, discussed later in the section on 
awake tracheal intubation).
 • An awake patient can gargle with 10 mL of 2% lidocaine.
 • Nebulized local anaesthetic (e.g. 10 mL of 2% lidocaine or 5 mL of 
4% lidocaine) can be inhaled through the upper airway, anaesthe-
tizing the larynx and upper trachea. Although favoured by some 
anaesthetists for awake tracheal intubation, the nebulized route 
compares poorly with ‘spray- as- you- go’ or cricothyroid injection 
in patients undergoing bronchoscopy.25
Field block
Local anaesthetic, for example, 4 mL of 4% lidocaine, can be injected 
directly through the cricothyroid membrane. Studies in patients 
undergoing bronchoscopy suggest this achieves less coughing and 
better patient satisfaction.26 The skin is cleaned with chlorhexidine 
and the cricothyroid membrane identified. A 27 G needle is passed 
perpendicular to the cricothyroid membrane, with gentle aspiration 
until air bubbles are observed. The lidocaine is then injected and 
the needle withdrawn rapidly. The patient will cough, spreading the 
local anaesthetic very effectively above and below the vocal cords. 
Ultrasound can be used to identify the cricothyroid membrane, es-
pecially in patients with large necks or altered anatomy, and this may 
improve the success of the technique.
Nerve blocks
The recurrent laryngeal nerve should never be blocked bilaterally as 
it can result in vocal cord abduction. The superior laryngeal nerve 
may be blocked with 2 mL of local anaesthetic injected below the su-
perior cornu of the hyoid bone.22 An alternative landmark is above 
the superior cornu of the thyroid cartilage. In both approaches, 
ultrasound can be used to identify the landmarks with greater ac-
curacy. Superior laryngeal nerve block should be performed bilat-
erally as there is some cross- innervation.
Awake tracheal intubation
Various techniques exist for anaesthetizing the airway for awake tra-
cheal intubation. Many practitioners combine airway topicalization 
techniques with ‘light’ sedation, in the form of a propofol target- 
controlled infusion (effect site concentration of 0.5– 1.5 mcg/ mL) 
or analgesia with a remifentanil target- controlled infusion (effect 
site concentration of 1– 2 ng/ mL). Both agents are easily and rapidly 
titratable, as well as having antitussive qualities. A second sedative 
agent, most commonly a benzodiazepine such as midazolam, can 
also be employed as an anxiolytic, but caution must be taken when 
using multiple agents due to the risk of inducing apnoea. The am-
nesic effects of midazolam are seldom required if effective local an-
aesthetic topicalization has been undertaken, and sedation should 
never be considered a substitute for poor topicalization.
A range of local anaesthetic topicalization techniques are available 
to facilitate awake tracheal intubation, depending upon the nature of 
the clinical situation, urgency, patient pathology, and intended route 
of tracheal intubation (oral/ nasal)22,27:
 • Mucosal atomization spray of local anaesthetic can be used to top-
icalize the nasal cavity or oropharynx. A vasoconstrictor can be 
Vagus nerve
Pharyngeal nerve
Superior laryngeal nerve
Internal laryngeal nerve
External 
laryngeal 
nerve
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Fig. 4.6 Nerve supply to the larynx.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Complications of regional anaesthesia
53
added to the local anaesthetic when a nasal intubation is planned 
(e.g. co- phenylcaine).
 • Cotton buds or ribbon gauze soaked in local anaesthetic can be 
applied to the nasal passages to topicalize the nasal cavity.
 • Local anaesthetic ointment can be applied by the patient to their 
own nasal mucosa.
 • Local anaesthetic gargle (e.g. 10 mL of 2% lidocaine) can be used 
to anaesthetize the pharynx and larynx.
 • Nebulized local anaesthetic (e.g. 10 mL of 2% lidocaine or 5 mL 
of 4% lidocaine) can be used to anaesthetize the upper airway, 
larynx, and upper trachea. The patient should inhale the nebu-
lized local anaesthetic for 10– 20 minutes prior to the procedure. 
The British Thoracic Society does not recommend the nebulized 
route for bronchoscopy.25,27
 • ‘Spray- as- you- go’ delivery of local anaesthetic solution (e.g. 2% 
or 4% lidocaine) can be achieved via the suction port of the bron-
choscope, directing local anaesthetic at the vocal cords in par-
ticular. An epidural catheter can be passed down the suction port 
to facilitate this method of local anaesthetic administration.
 • Trans- cricothyroid puncture and injection of local anaesthesia 
(as described earlier) can be employed in compliant patients. 
A cannula, rather than needle, can also be utilized for this pur-
pose, and be left in situ after injection of the local anaesthetic. 
This cannula can then be used for oxygenation, end- tidal carbon 
dioxide monitoring, or to facilitate subsequent retrograde 
intubation.
The Difficult Airway Society, UK, has produced awake tracheal 
intubation guidelines, and these provide a useful resource to those 
unfamiliar with awake fibreoptic and awake videolaryngoscopic 
techniques.28 Patients should be fully monitored at all times in ac-
cordance with local guidelines, have reliable intravenous access 
sited, and suitably trained personnel should be present. The awake 
tracheal intubation guidelines emphasize the importance of oxy-
genation (in particular, high- flow humidified nasal oxygenation), 
having the appropriate number of staff available, optimizing the 
ergonomics of the environment, and standardization of equip-
ment set- up.
The maximum dose of local anaesthetic should be calculated 
prior to undertaking the topicalization procedure and resuscitation 
equipment (including Intralipid) should be immediately available. 
Traditionally, the maximum dose of lidocaine was considered to be 
3 mg/ kg. However, a significant proportion of nebulized local an-
aesthetic will not be absorbed, and similarly, topically applied an-
aesthetic may be swallowed. Patients have safely received 7– 9 mg/ 
kg lidocaine via the airway with no adverse effects, although case 
reports of toxicity have also occurred in much lower doses.29
Complications of regional anaesthesia
Although useful as either a stand- alone anaesthetic technique, or as 
part of a multimodal approach to anaesthesia and analgesia, the ad-
ministration of local anaesthetic agents is not without risk. Strategies 
to minimize these risks are summarized in Table 4.2.
Complications of regional anaesthesia can be broadly divided 
into localized and generalized complications.
Localized complications
Any structure in the vicinity of the infiltrating/ block needle has the 
potential to be damaged.
Nerve injury
Nerve injury may present with sensory or motor symptoms, and 
may be transient or permanent. The main mechanisms of nerve in-
jury are:
 • Direct damage to the nerve from the needle.
 • Nerve ischaemia from local anaesthetic agents, or compressive 
haematoma.
 • Cytotoxic axonal damage from the local anaesthetic agent.
Vascular injury
Vascular complications may be more likely in the head and neck due 
to the rich blood supply in this area. Inadvertent vessel puncture 
may present with localized bleeding and resultant haematoma for-
mation. An expanding haematoma, dependent on its location, can 
have its own complications (e.g. airway compromise). Vascular in-
jury from the infiltrating needle may also present with symptoms of 
systemic absorption of the drug, as described below.
Soft tissue damage
The local anaesthetic itself, or other components of the solution can 
cause localized soft tissue reactions in the area of infiltration. This 
may present with signs of a localized irritation such as oedema, ery-
thema, and itch. Localized soft tissue infection can also occur as a 
complication of local anaesthetic infiltration. If local anaesthetic has 
been injected in the vicinity of the muscles of mastication, trismus 
can occur. This is more likely if there has been direct injection into 
the muscle, or if a high volume of local anaesthetic has been used.30
Generalized complications
Systemic absorption of adrenaline
Given the highly vascular nature of the tissues of the head and neck, 
the likelihood of systemic effects from adrenaline are increased 
when compared to other anatomical areas. This is likely to present 
as a short- lived tachycardia, with or without an associated rise in 
systemic blood pressure, although there is the risk of precipitating 
arrhythmias and ischaemia.
Table 4.2 Strategies to minimize the risk of complications 
from regional anaesthesia
Local anaesthetic  
agent
Utilize lowest mass of agent to achieve desired result
Utilize lowest concentration of agent to achieve 
desired result
Local anaesthetic 
administration
Careful selection of appropriate needle size
Careful selection of appropriate needle type
Ancillary equipment
Full anaesthetic monitoring and intravenous access
Sterile equipment including gloves and needles
Immediately available resuscitation equipment, 
Intralipid, and emergency algorithms
Use of ultrasound to increase accuracy and 
minimize volume injected
Use of nerve stimulator to increase accuracy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional anaesthesia
54
Local anaesthetic toxicity
Local anaesthetic toxicity can occur following injection of local 
anaesthesia. Care should be taken not to exceed the maximum 
advised dose, particularly when staged infiltration occurs. Toxic 
doses may be lower than those classically recognized due to in-
creased vascularity and uptake from the tissues of the head and 
neck.31 Toxicity classically presents with cardiovascular and/ or 
neurological symptoms. If suspected, both cardiovascular and 
neurological status must be assessed and an appropriate man-
agement algorithm, such as that produced by the Association of 
Anaesthetists should be followed.32 Intravenous lipid emulsion 
(Intralipid) is a specific treatment for local anaesthetic toxicity, 
thought to bind the local anaesthetic molecules and stabilize neur-
onal cell membranes. It is typically given as a 1.5 mL/ kg bolus of 
20% lipid emulsion, followed by an infusion at 15– 30 mL/ kg/ hr, 
with a maximum dose of 12 mL/kg.33
Local anaesthetic allergy
An allergic reaction can occur in response to injection of local an-
aesthetic agents (Table 4.3).33 This can be precipitated by either 
the local anaesthetic compound itself, or any of its preservatives. 
An attempt should be made to differentiate a true allergic reaction 
from the side effects of intravascular absorption of either the agent 
or accompanying vasoconstrictor. Symptoms and signs of hyper-
sensitivity (rash, generalized oedema, or cardiorespiratory com-
promise) should be managed using an anaphylaxis guideline such 
as that produced by the Association of Anaesthetists.34 The patient 
should be referred to an allergy clinic for follow- up and to defini-
tively identify the responsible agent.
Other adverse drug reactions
A rare complication of local anaesthetic administration is the de-
velopment of methaemoglobinaemia. This is most likely with 
prilocaine.
Conclusion
Regional anaesthesia is a key component of oromaxillofacial sur-
gery. Although anaesthetists rarely perform head and neck nerve 
blocks to facilitate surgery, they should be aware of the relevant 
anatomy, and the potential benefits of the regional anaesthetic 
techniques employed by their surgical colleagues. For the anaes-
thetist undertaking awake tracheal intubation, an understanding 
of the anatomy of the upper airway, and how this can be anaesthe-
tized, is fundamental. It is crucial to also be aware of the poten-
tial complications of local anaesthetic administration, and how to 
manage and avoid them.
REFERENCES
 1. Moore K, Agur A. Essential Clinical Anatomy. Baltimore, 
MD: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 1995.
 2. McMinn R, Hutchings R, Pegington J, Abrahams P. A Colour 
Atlas of Human Anatomy, 3rd ed. London: Wolfe; 1993.
 3. New York School of Regional Anesthesia. Nerve blocks of the 
face. n.d. https:// www.nys ora.com/ nerve- blo cks- face
 4. Hartstein ME, Holds JB, Massry GG. Pearls and Pitfalls in 
Cosmetic Oculoplastic Surgery. New York: Springer; 2008.
 5. Ellis H. Clinical Anatomy, 9th ed. London: Blackwell 
Science; 1997.
 6. Dartt D, Besharse J, Dana R. Encyclopaedia of the Eye. 
Cambridge: Academic Press; 2010.
 7. Somerville N, Fenlon S. Anaesthesia for cleft lip and palate 
surgery. CEACCP. 2005;5(3):76– 79.
 8. Kanakaraj M, Shanmugasundaram N, Chandramohan M, 
Kannan R, Perumal SM, Nagendran J. Regional anesthesia in 
faciomaxillary and oral surgery. J Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2012; 
4(2):S264– S269.
 9. Schiedler V, Sires B. Regional nerve blocks in oculofacial 
surgery. In: Harstein M, Holds J, Massry G (eds) Pearls 
and Pitfalls in Cosmetic Oculoplastic Surgery, pp. 22– 26. 
New York: Springer; 2008.
 10. Agur A, Dalley A. Grant’s Atlas of Anatomy, 11th ed. Baltimore, 
MD: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2006.
 11. Burnard C, Sebastien J. Anaesthesia for awake craniotomy. 
CEACCP. 2014;14(1):6– 11.
 12. Osborn I, Sebeo J. ‘Scalp block’ during 
craniotomy: a classic technique revisited. J Neurosurg 
Anaesthesiol. 2010;22(3):187– 194.
 13. Costello TG, Cormack JR, Mather LE, LaFerlita B, Murphy MA, 
Harris K. Plasma levobupivicaine concentrations following scalp 
block in patients undergoing awake craniotomy. Br J Anaesth. 
2005;94(6):848– 851.
 14. Audu P, Wilkerson C, Bartowski R, Gingrich K, Viscusi E, 
Andrews D. Plasma ropivicaine levels during awake intracranial 
surgery. J Neurosurg Anaesthesiol. 2005;17(3):153– 155.
 15. Snell R. Clinical Anatomy for Medical Students, 4th ed. Boston, 
MA: Little, Brown and Company; 1992.
 16. Vives I, Mateo D, Botana C, Agreda G, Salgado I. Septoplasties 
with local anesthetic and sedation in ambulatory surgery; clinical 
outcomes. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2008;25:19.
 17. Moffett A. Nasal analgesia by postural instillation. Anaesthesia. 
1947;2:31– 34.
Table 4.3 Commonly used local anaesthetic preparations 
in oromaxillofacial surgery
Lidocaine
Amide local anaesthetic
Presented with or without adrenaline (1 in 80,000– 200,000)
With adrenaline: 5, 10, 20 mg/ mL solutions
Without adrenaline: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg/ mL solutions
Available in preﬁlled dental cartridges
Bupivacaine
Amide local anaesthetic
Presented with or without adrenaline (1 in 200,000)
With adrenaline: 2.5, 5 mg/ mL solutions
Without adrenaline: 2.5, 5 mg/ mL solutions
Articaine
Amide local anaesthetic
Presented with adrenaline (1 in 100,000)
With adrenaline: 40 mg/ mL solution
Available in preﬁlled 2.2 mL dental cartridges
Mepivacaine
Amide local anaesthetic
Presented with or without adrenaline (1 in 100,000)
With adrenaline: 20 mg/ mL solution
Without adrenaline: 30 mg/ mL solutions
Both available in preﬁlled 2.2 mL dental cartridges
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion
55
 18. Dwyer C, Sowerby L, Rotenberg BW. Is cocaine a safe topical 
agent for use during endoscopic sinus surgery? Laryngoscope. 
2016;126(8):1721– 1723.
 19. Electronic Medicines Compendium. Cocaine hydrochloride 
solution 10% w/ v. 2020. https:// www.medici nes.org.uk/ emc/ prod 
uct/ 3692#gref
 20. New York School of Regional Anesthesia. Oral & maxillofacial 
regional anesthesia. n.d. https:// www.nys ora.com/ regio nal- ane 
sthe sia- for- speci fic- surgi cal- pro cedu res/ head- and- neck/ maxill 
ofac ial/ oral- maxill ofac ial- regio nal- ane sthe sia/ 
 21. Haas D. Alternative mandibular nerve block techniques: a review 
of the Gow- Gates and Akinosi- Vazirani closed- mouth mandibular 
nerve block techniques. J Am Dent Assoc. 2011;142(9):8– 12.
 22. New York School of Regional Anesthesia. Regional and topical 
anesthesia for awake endotracheal intubation. n.d. https:// www.
nys ora.com/ regio nal- and- topi cal- ane sthe sia- for- awake- endot 
rach eal- int ubat ion
 23. Benumof J. Management of the difficult airway. Anaesthesiology. 
1991;75(6):1087– 1110.
 24. Ažman J, Stopar Pintaric T, Cvetko E. Ultrasound- guided 
glossopharyngeal nerve block: a cadaver and a volunteer 
sonoanatomy study. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2017;42(2):252– 258.
 25. Stolz D, Chhajed P, Leuppi J, Pflimlin E, Tamm M. Nebulized 
lidocaine for flexible bronchoscopy: a randomized, double- blind, 
placebo- controlled trial. Chest. 2005;128(3):1756– 1760.
 26. Madan K, Mittal S, Gupta N, Biswal SK, Tiwari P, Hadda V, et al. 
The cricothyroid versus spray- as- you- go method for topical 
anesthesia during flexible bronchoscopy: the CRISP randomized 
clinical trial. Respiration. 2019;98(5):440– 446.
 27. Du Rand IA, Blaikley J, Booton R, Chaudhuri N, Gupta V, Khalid 
S, et al. British Thoracic Society guideline for diagnostic flexible 
bronchoscopy in adults: accredited by NICE. Thorax. 2013; 68 
Suppl 1: i1– i44.
 28. Ahmad I, El- Boghdadly K, Bhagrath R, Hodzovic I, McNarry AF, 
Mir F, et al. Difficult Airway Society guidelines for awake tracheal 
intubation (ATI) in adults. Anaesthesia. 2020;75:509– 528.
 29. Williams K, Barker G, Harwood R, Woodall N. Plasma lidocaine 
levels during local anaesthesia of the airway. Anaesthesia. 
2003;58(5):508– 509.
 30. Stone J, Kaban L. Trismus after injection of local anaesthetic. Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1979;48(1):29– 32.
 31. Christie L, Picard J, Weinberg G. Local anaesthetic systemic 
toxicity BJA Educ. 2015;15(3):136– 142.
 32. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. 
Management of severe local anaesthetic toxicity. 2010. https:// 
anaest heti sts.org/ Home/ Resour ces- publi cati ons/ Gui deli nes/ Man 
agem ent- of- sev ere- local- anae sthe tic- toxic ity
 33. British National Formulary. Local anaesthesia. 2020. https:// bnf.
nice.org.uk/ treatm ent- summ ary/ anae sthe sia- local.html
 34. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. 
Quick reference handbook: guidelines for crises in anaesthesia. 
Section 3- 1. Anaphylaxis. 2022. https:// anaest heti sts.org/ Port 
als/ 0/ PDFs/ QRH/ QRH_ 3- 1_ Ana phyl axis _ v5.pdf?ver= 2022- 04- 
12- 124 225- 493
5   
Imaging
Indu Mitra
Introduction
The head and neck region incorporates structures from the skull 
base to the thoracic inlet, encompassing numerous complex ana-
tomical entities in a confined and vital area. An understanding of the 
complex anatomy is important when faced with oral and/ or max-
illofacial pathologies that can result in anaesthetic dilemmas such as 
airway compromise and skeletal instability. This chapter describes 
how imaging can assist in foreseeing possible anaesthetic difficulties, 
exploring the different imaging modalities available, looking at the 
strengths and weaknesses of each, and how traditional radiological 
studies are still used to complement the use of more modern tech-
niques. Using radiological examples, clinically applicable anatomy is 
reviewed and common pathologies relevant to anaesthetic interven-
tion are discussed.
Imaging modalities
The four main types of imaging modality commonly used in 
oromaxillofacial specialities are X- ray, ultrasound, computed 
tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Each 
imaging modality has its strength and weakness, such that occa-
sionally different modalities are used in conjunction to define cer-
tain structures such as bone, soft tissue, and cartilage.
X- ray
X- ray is one of the oldest and most commonly used modalities in 
dental imaging. Radiation exposure is low (0.005 mSv, which is 
equivalent to 0.2% of the annual UK average radiation dose). The 
images are used to assess not only bone architecture and dentition, 
but certain soft tissue structures as well. Many current practices have 
moved away from traditional X- rays which were captured on plain 
film as these have been replaced by digital X- rays. Although the 
image generation by X- rays is largely unaltered, the digital acqui-
sition confers slightly less radiation, faster image production, and 
improved image quality. Software can also be used to manipulate 
the images with regard to contrast and magnification, resulting in 
enhanced image interpretation.
Dental radiographs can be taken intra- or extraorally. For intraoral 
images, a sensor is placed inside the mouth and can be used to gen-
erate periapical, bitewing, or occlusal views. Extraoral radiographic 
views, such as lateral cephalometric views, are primarily used in 
orthodontics and orthognathic surgery.
Panoramic views are generated by rotating the X- ray source and 
sensor around a patient who is standing in the upright position. 
This technique gives a good overview of the maxilla and man-
dible. The orthopantomogram is one of the most commonly seen 
panoramic radiographs. In addition to dentition, other bony land-
marks, soft tissue structures, and paranasal sinuses are also visible 
(Fig. 5.1), and hence other non- dental pathologies can be seen on 
these views.
Ultrasound
This imaging modality is radiation free as it uses sound waves to 
generate images and is best used to assess soft tissue structures of the 
neck. The benefit of this modality is that it uses real- time imaging 
and can be tailored to answer specific questions, such as demon-
strating neck vessel patency/ stenosis or vocal cord paralysis.
Computed tomography
CT uses a gantry which contains a rotating X- ray source and digital 
sensors, resulting in multiple image slices, ranging from <1 mm 
to 10 mm in thickness. The very fine cuts (0.65 mm thick) are 
often used to assess detailed skull base bone anatomy. The cross- 
sectional images are acquired in minutes and provide comprehen-
sive anatomical detail of the soft tissues and bone architecture. 
Iodine- based intravenous contrast can be used to highlight soft 
tissue structures more clearly. Since the images acquired are 
digital, they can be manipulated using imaging information tech-
nology. By varying window width and the grey level, the digital im-
ages can be optimized for visualization of different structures such 
as bone, brain, lung, liver, and so on (Fig. 5.2). Three- dimensional 
(3D) reconstructions can be generated from the two- dimensional 
(2D) images obtained. This is useful for identifying subtle cra-
nial fractures and helps in the clinical interpretation of complex 
facial fractures. Often CT is used to image preoperative implant 
resin moulds. The 3D reconstruction images generated can be used 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imaging
58
to assist in preoperative assessment prior to facial reconstructive 
surgery.
Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI does not use ionizing radiation, but utilizes a strong magnet 
to align protons within the body. Radiofrequency waves cause 
the protons to spin. When the radiofrequency pulse is removed, 
the protons return to a resting state and emit a signal which is 
detected by receptor coils around the patient. It is these signals 
which are used to generate an image, using complex software. By 
using different pulse sequences, varying signals can be generated 
dependent on the composition of the structures. The images gen-
erated enable structural and compositional assessment. Head and 
neck structures are separated anatomically into compartments 
with intervening fat planes. MRI can depict pathology that has 
resulted in distortion of these fat planes. Even when a pathology 
results in minimal structural change, MRI can demonstrate subtle 
signal changes, helping in the diagnosis of early pathologies.
Trauma imaging
X- ray and CT scanning are the most commonly used modalities 
in trauma imaging. A 2D image can be obtained quickly using X- 
rays, but the patient needs to be able to comply with positioning 
requirements. For example, for an orthopantomogram, the pa-
tient must be able to stand. When there are other synchronous 
injuries, this may not be possible, in which case a CT scan is often 
required. CT is often used to help assess more subtle injuries and 
better define soft tissue structures. The additional detail pro-
vided can help in pre- empting complications and assisting in 
management.1
Hard Palate
Tongue
Cervical spine
Inferior Alveolar Canal
Maxillary Sinus
Mental foramen
Nasal Septum
Orbital Floor
Lamina Dura
Zygoma
External Auditory Canal
Mandibular 
Condyle
Coronoid Process
Hyoid
Fig. 5.1 Example of an orthopantomogram with relevant landmarks identiﬁed.
Fig. 5.2 Paediatric CT head axial images demonstrating how window width and greyscale level is used to assess different structures. For example, the 
soft tissue window level reconstructions (a) show a shallow right subdural haemorrhage (arrow) and a haematoma (star) overlying the right parietal 
bone. On the bone window levels (b), there are right parietal bone fractures evident.
 
 
Dentition
59
Dentition
Within the field of medicine, it is crucial to standardize terminology 
to avoid confusion and facilitate reproducibility and communica-
tion between medical professionals. This is particularly pertinent to 
dental description, and relevant to all anaesthetists undertaking pre-
operative dental assessment, not least since dental damage is one of 
the most common medicolegal claims against an anaesthetist.2 As in 
medical imaging, dental description is based on the understanding 
that the patient’s right- hand side corresponds to the left of the image.
Dental nomenclature
Dental nomenclature assists in standardizing dental description. 
Worldwide, there are several dental notation systems, with varying 
usage preference according to each country. The common basis of all 
these systems is to divide the mouth into four quadrants. The maxil-
lary and mandibular components are divided into two at the midline 
between the front two incisors (Fig. 5.3).
The dental notation developed by the FDI World Dental 
Federation, often shortened to FDI (in French, Fédération Dentaire 
Internationale) is widely used, and the International Standards 
Organization Designation System (ISO 3950) defined by the World 
Health Organization is based on this. It uses two digits, where the 
first digit indicates the quadrant, and the second digit indicates 
the tooth within the quadrant. In addition to this, the first number 
also describes whether the tooth is primary (deciduous/ baby) or 
permanent (adult). For example, 1– 4 as the first digit indicates pri-
mary dentition, whereas 5– 8 indicates permanent dentition.
Although the FDI system is easier for electronic documenta-
tion, the older Zsigmondy Palmer notation system from 1861 is still 
favoured in the UK. This system describes the quadrants as right 
upper, right lower, left upper, and left lower and gives each a symbol 
(┘, ┐, └, and ┌, respectively). Permanent teeth are numbered from 
1 to 9, and primary teeth are numbered alphabetically from A to E.
The Universal notation system was devised in 1968 and is most 
commonly used in the US. For permanent dentition, each tooth is 
given a number from 1 to 32 in a clockwise manner starting with the 
right maxillary third molar and finishing at the right mandibular 
third molar. Primary teeth are numbered in a similar clockwise pat-
tern, but the suffix ‘d’ is placed after the number.
Radiographic assessment of dentition
Dental disease can be assessed by a clinical history of predisposing 
factors such as smoking, xerostomia, diabetes, autoimmune condi-
tions, immunocompromise, Down syndrome, and connective tissue 
disorders; by direct visualization of missing teeth, gingivitis, or ab-
scess formation; and by radiological assessment, to identify poten-
tial problematic teeth.
The most commonly used modality is X- ray because the dental 
anatomy such as enamel, dentine, pulp, and alveolar bone can be 
demonstrated. The lamina dura (Fig. 5.1) is clearly demonstrated as a 
fine line of compact bone outlining the socket. This compacted bone 
margin, together with the periodontal ligaments, provides tooth 
stability. Loss of the lamina dura often occurs in periapical disease 
and can identify a potentially unstable tooth. Other causes of lamina 
dura loss include Paget’s disease, leukaemia, multiple myeloma, 
Permanent
Permanent
Permanent
Permanent
Dentition
Primary
Primary
Primary
Primary
Palmer
Universal
FDI/ISO System
MMMPPCIIIICPPMMM
MMMPPCIIIICPPMMM
I — incisors C — Canine P — Premolar M — Molar
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
E D C B A
E D C B A
A B C D E
A B C D E
18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41
31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25
24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
1d 2d 3d 4d
55 54 53 52 51
85 84 83 82 81
71 72 73 74 75
61 62 63 64 65
5d
6d 7d 8d 9d 10d
15d 14d 13d 12d 11d
15d
16d
14d13d12d11d
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
MMPCIIIIICPMM
MMPCIIIIICPMM
MMPCIIIIICPMM
Fig. 5.3 Dental nomenclature.
 
 
 
 
Imaging
60
osteomalacia, rickets, hypoparathyroidism, renal osteodystrophy, 
and histiocytosis.2
A variant of dental X- rays is cone- beam CT. This uses X- rays in 
the shape of a cone to generate multiple images which are recon-
structed by the software to produce multiplanar (axial, coronal, sa-
gittal) 2D and 3D images. Cone- beam CT differs from multidetector 
CT with regard to the temporal resolution of the detectors, resulting 
in slow acquisition, increased motion artefact, and increased image 
reconstruction time. However, when used for small field of view 
areas such as the mandible and maxilla, cone- beam CT can de-
liver diagnostic images at a lower radiation dose than conventional 
multidetector CT, which is useful in planning orthodontic surgery. 
The 3D images generated can be used in computer- assisted design 
or manufacturing to produce implants made from either titanium or 
resin to assist in complex facial reconstruction surgery.
Craniofacial anatomy
The skull (cranium) is composed of the vault and the skull base. The 
vault comprises several flat bones— frontal, parietal, occipital, tem-
poral, and sphenoid bones. It is important to know conventional su-
ture positions as fine, undisplaced skull fractures can occasionally 
be mistaken for sutures (Fig. 5.2). The skull base can be divided into 
the anterior (orbital plate of the frontal, lesser wing sphenoid, crib-
riform plate of the ethmoid bones), middle (greater wing sphenoid, 
temporal bones), and posterior (petrous temporal, occipital bones) 
cranial fossae. Throughout the skull base are foramina containing 
blood vessels and nerves.
The face is composed of the mandible, maxilla, pterygoid plates of 
the sphenoid, palatine, zygomatic, nasal, frontal, and lacrimal bones. 
When considering facial anatomy, the face can be divided into upper, 
middle, and lower thirds to aid in fracture description and planning 
of surgical approach; or, it can be viewed as a buttress composed of 
four transverse and four paired vertical supports (Fig. 5.4)4:
 • Upper transverse maxillary (nasofrontal suture, inferior orbital 
rim, zygoma, to temporozygomatic suture).
 • Lower transverse maxillary (maxillary alveolar process and hard 
palate).
 • Upper transverse mandibular (mandibular alveolar process, 
through mandibular ramus, to posterior cortical margin of the 
mandible).
 • Lower transverse mandibular (inferior margin of the mandible).
 • Medial maxillary (nasofrontal suture, medial orbital wall, medial 
wall maxillary sinus, to maxillary alveolar process).
 • Lateral maxillary (frontozygomatic suture, lateral orbital wall, 
lateral maxillary sinus, body of zygoma, to maxillary alveolar 
process).
 • Posterior maxillary (pterygoid plates).
 • Posterior mandibular (mandibular rami).
These supports are characterized by increased bone thickness5; they 
connect to the skull base and calvarium, and provide structure for 
facial appearance, skeletal support for the orbits, assist in func-
tioning of the facial soft tissues, and withstand the forces of mastica-
tion. Between these, there are areas of thin bone or bone containing 
foramina (e.g. infraorbital or mental nerve foramina), which in the 
context of trauma can act as ‘crumple zones’, dissipating energy to 
minimalize intracranial damage.
Craniofacial fractures
There are various classifications of craniofacial fractures.6 The clas-
sifications can be anatomically based (e.g. skull base, midface, and 
lower face), based on skeletal support mechanisms,7 or based on 
Lateral Maxillary
(+ Lateral Orbital
Wall)
Medial Maxillary
(+ Medial Orbital
Wall)
Posterior Maxillary
(Pterygomaxillary)
Posterior Vertical
Vertical
Buttresses
Transverse
Buttresses
Upper Transverse
Maxillary
(+ Orbital Floor)
Lower Transverse
Maxillary
(+ Palate)
Upper Transverse
Mandibular
Lower Transverse
Mandibular
Fig. 5.4 Diagram of the horizontal and vertical buttresses and sites of potential complication following fractures at these positions.
Hopper, RA Salemy S, Sze RW. Diagnosis of midface fractures with CT: what the surgeon needs to know. Radiographics. 2006;26:783– 793.
 
 
 
Craniofacial fractures
61
the severity of the injury and potential complications. The most 
common fracture trajectories and frequently used classifications are 
described below:
Lower facial fractures
These most commonly involve the mandible. The mandible should 
be thought of as forming a ring with the calvarium via the temporo-
mandibular joints. This is because when it fractures, it often does 
so in more than one location. Occasionally, only a single fracture 
line is visible and this is most likely due to intermittent dislocation 
of a temporomandibular joint; hence, it is also important to check 
for temporomandibular joint continuity and exclude an ‘empty tem-
poromandibular joint socket’.
The natural lines of weakness in the mandible run through the 
roots of the teeth (Fig. 5.5); hence, teeth can become displaced, dis-
lodged, or fragmented.
When the fracture line involves the anterior aspects of the man-
dible, there is the potential for a floating segment, which can lead 
to instability during positive pressure ventilation. Often mandibular 
fractures alone do not cause airway issues. However, the tongue is 
composed of the genioglossus muscles which attach into the genial 
tubercle on the lingual aspect of the mandibular symphysis, such 
that a bilateral anterior fracture can result in a floating bone segment 
and posterior tongue displacement in the supine position, causing 
airway compromise.
Midface fractures
The most popular midface fracture classification is the Le Fort clas-
sification which dates back to 1901 and is based upon experimental 
fracture patterns to identify the lines of weakness. It provides a 
system to describe three patterns of midface fractures, all of which 
involve the pterygoid plates. These fracture patterns can occur sin-
gularly or in combination. The Le Fort type I fracture pattern in-
volves fractures through the lower transverse maxillary buttress, 
and is known as a ‘floating palate’ or Guérin fracture. This is best 
depicted on coronal views due to the transverse nature of the frac-
ture. The Le Fort type II fracture involves the nasofrontal suture and 
extends along the medial orbital walls, orbital floor, and through the 
zygomaticomaxillary suture. This results in a pyramidal midface 
segment which may move independently from the rest of the upper 
midface and skull base. This fracture type is best seen on axial and 
coronal views due to the varying planes. The Le Fort type III fracture 
begins at the nasofrontal suture and extends through the medial and 
lateral orbital walls to involve the zygomatic arch. This fracture type 
involves complete craniofacial dissociation.
The Le Fort classification is based on cadavers and does not con-
sider complex fractures which can often involve additional fronto- 
orbital or nasoethmoidal fractures.
Upper third craniofacial fractures
These fractures may include frontal bone, sphenoid, naso- orbital– 
ethmoidal complex, and paranasal sinuses. They are often associated 
with enophthalmos due to an increase in orbital volume, dural tears, 
or cerebrospinal fluid leak— with an increased risk of ascending in-
fection. It is crucial for an anaesthetist to recognize these particular 
fractures as a nasotracheal tube, nasogastric tube, or nasopharyn-
geal temperature probe placed within the nasal passage may inad-
vertently pass into the cranial fossa.8
Zygomaticomaxillary complex fractures
These fractures are usually caused by direct trauma to the cheekbone, 
resulting in disruption of the zygomaticofrontal, zygomaticomaxillary, 
zygomaticotemporal, and zygomaticosphenoidal suture posteriorly. 
This complex fracture pattern is known as a tetrapod fracture— 
previously, tripod fracture, as only three of the fractures were vis-
ible on plain radiographs (Fig. 5.6). Potential complications include 
enophthalmos due to involvement of the lateral orbital wall, and frag-
ment instability due to the forces applied by surrounding muscles 
(particularly the masseter muscle).
Fig. 5.5 Orthopantomogram showing a fracture through the angle of 
the right mandible, extending to the root of the lower mandibular molar 
tooth—a natural point of weakness. There is associated periapical lucency 
suggesting that this tooth may have become loose as a result of the 
fracture. Note that the temporomandibular condyles are appropriately 
enlocated and articulate with the articular eminence of the temporal 
bone bilaterally.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.6 Examples of a complex zygomaticomaxillary fracture: (a) 3D reconstruction demonstrating complex left zygomatic frontal and maxillary 
fractures; (b) coronal image demonstrating complex butterﬂy and displaced fractures of the left orbital lateral wall and ﬂoor, together with the left 
medial and lateral maxillary antral walls; (c) axial image, showing left anterior maxillary wall and zygomaticomaxillary fractures.
 
 
 
 
Imaging
62
Orbital fractures
A single buttress fracture of the orbital wall can occur following 
direct traumatic force to the globe— also known as a ‘blowout’ 
fracture because the resultant increase in orbital pressure causes 
fracture lines at the points of weakness, for example, fracture lines 
are common along the floor of the orbit (due to the natural weak-
ness caused by the infraorbital foramen), or the medial orbital wall 
(which is formed by the thin lamina papyracea) (Fig. 5.7). When 
the orbital floor is involved, the fracture can be characterized as an 
‘open door’ or ‘trapdoor’. In an open- door fracture, there is a large 
defect in the floor of the orbit, compared to a trapdoor fracture 
where the fracture is hinged and herniation of the orbital contents 
is followed by spontaneous reduction of the fracture fragment. The 
latter is also known as a ‘white- eyed blowout’ because of the few 
overt physical and radiological features.9 Potential complications 
of blowout fractures include extraocular muscle herniation and 
entrapment, intraorbital haemorrhage, and globe or infraorbital 
nerve injury. CT is the modality of choice for this injury as 2D 
reconstructions can provide the necessary information to assess 
these potential complications, and because the thin slice thickness 
(0.75 mm) on the bone windows provides accurate fracture line 
analysis.
Cervical spine
When considering facial fractures, it is important to consider poten-
tial traumatic force to the cervical spine and likelihood of a cervical 
spine fracture. These can be easily missed when there is distracting 
pain from other injuries. Lateral view radiographs (Fig. 5.8) are 
often the most useful, with 90% of cervical spine fractures able to be 
diagnosed. The contour lines (anterior, posterior, and spinolaminar) 
should be aligned and there should be no prevertebral soft tissue 
thickening. In an adult, the prevertebral soft tissue should measure 
<6 mm at C2 and <22 mm at C6. In paediatric patients, the pre-
vertebral soft tissue should be between half to two- thirds of the an-
terior posterior width of the vertebral body.
The mechanism of injury can sometimes help to predict the likely 
injury incurred:
Cervical spine ﬂexion injuries
Flexion injuries are the most common mechanism and can result 
in rupture of posterior ligaments with subsequent anterior sublux-
ation of the vertebral body— because the anterior and posterior col-
umns are intact, this fracture is stable. However, high- impact flexion 
injuries can result in wedge fractures, which can be unstable when 
there is involvement of the anterior column and posterior inter-
spinous ligaments. Flexion and rotation can result in unilateral 
facet dislocation. Bilateral facet dislocation can occur when there 
has been extreme flexion, and this is an unstable injury with a high 
incidence of cord damage. Flexion teardrop fractures occur after 
extreme flexion and axial loading— again, these are unstable with a 
high incidence of cord damage.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.7 CT images of the face and orbits of a patient who had been punched in the face. The axial bone reconstructions (a) demonstrate 
comminuted, depressed fractures of the right lamina papyracea, and surgical emphysema anterior to the right globe. The coronal soft tissue window 
levels image (b) shows a comminuted depressed fracture of the right orbital ﬂoor. Both the medial wall and ﬂoor of the right orbital fractures have 
associated herniation of the infraorbital fat, and the altered appearance of the medial and inferior recti muscles suggests that these may also be 
herniating or impinged.
spinolaminar
posterior vertebral line
anterior vertebral line
Fig. 5.8 Lateral cervical spine radiograph demonstrating the normal 
contours such as the anterior vertebral, posterior vertebral, spinolaminar 
lines, and the normal prevertebral soft tissue thickness of an adult 
cervical spine.
 
 
 
 
Tumours
63
Cervical spine extension injuries
Extension injuries, such as Hangman’s fracture (Fig. 5.9), extension 
teardrop fracture, and axial compression, can result in a burst frac-
ture. When this involves the C1 ring, it is known as a ‘Jefferson frac-
ture’. These are considered unstable fractures and require the utmost 
care during manipulation of the head and neck, especially during 
tracheal intubation.
Infection
Head and neck infections can present with life- threatening emer-
gencies such as airway obstruction or mediastinal spread, both 
of which can hinder airway management (discussed in detail in 
Chapter 12). As previously mentioned, the head and neck region 
is composed of several virtual compartments separated by fascial 
layers and intervening fat planes (Fig. 5.10). The orofacial planes 
permit odontogenic infection to spread from bone into the 
subperiosteal region, through to the fat planes superiorly and into 
the infratemporal fossa, posteriorly to the pharyngeal space, infer-
iorly into the submandibular fat planes, or in very severe cases into 
the mediastinal fat planes.
Tumours
Potential anaesthetic difficulties in oromaxillofacial patients may 
arise from the presence of head and neck masses, whether these 
are congenital, malignant, or benign. The best imaging modalities 
are cross- sectional modalities such as CT or MRI. Occasionally, 
both are required. For example, Fig. 5.11 shows the imaging of a 
lung cancer patient who presented with neurological symptoms of 
headache, left trigeminal paraesthesia, diplopia, left ptosis, and 
left tongue deviation. The CT scan of the patient’s brain did not de-
pict the extent of skull base metastatic disease as comprehensively 
as the MRI scan.
Similarly, both CT and MRI were required in the diagnosis 
and in evaluating the extent of a large neuroplexiform mass 
(Fig. 5.12).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.9 Hangman’s fracture. Lateral cervical spine radiograph (a) demonstrating disruption of the anterior and posterior contour lines with increase 
in prevertebral soft tissue thickness. Subsequent CT performed, with the sagittal (b) and coronal (c) bone reconstruction images demonstrating the 
displaced fracture involving the C2 vertebra.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.10 CT images of a patient with spontaneous 
pneumomediastinum. The reconstructed CT coronal image (a) shows 
air tracking within the neck and chest, and demonstrates how the 
cervical and mediastinal fat planes communicate with one another. 
The reconstructed axial images (b) and (c) demonstrate how different 
structures in the neck region are divided by fascial planes, for example, 
the submandibular gland, carotid sheath, and thyroid are separated from 
each other by fascia.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.11 Comparison of imaging modalities in the same patient. The 
CT axial slice (a) demonstrates architectural bone change within the left 
skull base. The MRI axial slice (b) shows the extent of the soft tissue mass 
central on the left skull base with inﬁltration of the clivus.
 
 
 
Imaging
64
There is a vast range of potential aetiologies relating to 
oromaxillofacial tumours.10 With regard to anaesthesia, the dif-
ficulties faced may be primary, such that the mass itself results 
directly in airway compromise or difficult tracheal intubation; or 
secondary, where the mass involves other head and neck structures 
such as muscle or nerves, which may result in trismus. These issues 
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 15.
Conclusion
Although head and neck anatomy is complex, a basic understanding 
of the most common pathologies and fracture patterns can help 
when assessing oromaxillofacial patients for anaesthetic interven-
tion. When the appropriate imaging investigation is used, it can aid 
patient assessment and help pre- empt potential anaesthetic prob-
lems that may arise as a result of the underlying pathology.
REFERENCES
 1. Chesshire NJ, Knight DJW. The anaesthetic management of facial 
trauma and fractures. BJA CEPD Rev. 2001;1(4):108– 112.
 2. Abeysundara L, Creedon A, Soltanifar D. Dental knowledge for 
anaesthetists. BJA Education. 2016;16(11):362– 368.
 3. Mishra N, Shrivardhan K. Significance of lamina dura— a review. 
Int J Contemp Med Surg Radiol. 2017;2(1):1– 4.
 4. Hopper RA, Salemy S, Sze RW. Diagnosis of midface fractures 
with CT: what the surgeon needs to know. Radiographics. 
2006;26(3):783– 793.
 5. Winegar BA, Murillo H, Tantiwongkosi B. Spectrum of 
critical imaging findings in complex facial skeletal trauma. 
Radiographics. 2013;33(1):3– 19.
 6. Hardt N, Kuttenberger J. Classification of craniofacial fractures. 
In: Hardt N, Kuttenberger J (eds), Craniofacial Trauma, pp. 31– 54. 
Berlin: Springer; 2010.
 7. Donat TL, Endress C, Mathog R. Facial fracture classification 
according to skeletal support mechanisms. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg. 1998;124(12):1306– 1314.
 8. Morosan M, Parbhoo A, Curry N. Anaesthesia and common oral 
and maxillo- facial emergencies. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care 
Pain. 2012;12(5):257– 262.
 9. Yew C, Shaar R, Rahman SA, Alam MK. White- eyed blowout 
fracture: diagnostic pitfalls and review of literature. Injury. 
2015;46(9):1856– 1859.
 10. Harnsberger R. Diagnostic Imaging: Head and Neck, 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.12 Congenital neuroplexiform mass on (a) axial MRI and (b) coronal MRI, shown as a large soft tissue mass distorting the right facial structures. 
The mass involves the pterygoid muscles and extends into the right parapharyngeal fat space, potentially resulting in poor mouth opening and 
compromised airway calibre. The coronal CT image (c) shows right sphenoid wing absence and bone remodelling. These ﬁndings are in keeping with 
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1.
6   
Sedation
 James W. D. Mann and Vivian Yuen
Introduction
Sedation has a long and often fraught history in oromaxillofacial 
surgery and dentistry. When performed correctly, it improves pa-
tient comfort, reduces anxiety, and facilitates medical interventions 
and procedures to be performed without the need for general an-
aesthesia. Sedation, being a medical procedure in its own right, 
has its own associated risks, but is generally more straightforward, 
quicker, and cheaper than providing general anaesthesia. However, 
because sedation is deemed more straightforward, and can often be 
carried out by non- anaesthetists, the risks are not always fully ap-
preciated by patients and medical professionals alike. The term sed-
ation means different things to different people. Patients will often 
confuse sedation with meaning asleep or general anaesthesia; sur-
geons might sometimes suggest ‘sedation’ for a procedure, but still 
expect an unconscious and motionless patient, really alluding to a 
state of general anaesthesia. It is imperative that the intended level of 
sedation is clearly communicated to manage the expectations of the 
patient and the surgeon.
This chapter focuses on sedative agents and sedation techniques 
for maxillofacial, craniofacial, and dental procedures, though clearly 
some of these can be extrapolated to other settings. Whether or not 
the procedures are suitable to be performed under sedation will 
depend on the patient and the extent of the underlying pathology. 
Procedures that lend themselves well to sedation are those where 
concurrent local anaesthesia can attenuate most, if not all, of the 
pain. Sedation does not treat pain— analgesia is required for that pur-
pose. Sedation treats procedure- related anxiety, and helps patients 
tolerate unpleasant procedures. Sedation may fail in some patients 
where they become disinhibited, confused, and non- compliant (so- 
called paradoxical effects). Very painful procedures are best carried 
out under general anaesthesia. Combining sedatives and opioids 
markedly increases the risk of patient complications, as seen in the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) closed claims study, 
where poor technique led to significant harm (including cardiac ar-
rest) during procedures under sedation in both adults and children. 
These cases also highlighted a lack of appropriate monitoring and 
the inability of staff to manage oversedation.
Logistically, there are not enough anaesthetists to meet the de-
mand for provision of sedation for the number of procedures where 
it has been requested. This has led to an increasing number of non- 
anaesthetists providing a sedation service, often in settings away 
from the operating theatre. Doctors and allied health professionals 
of various grades and levels of training across many specialties have 
had to rise to meet the demand. Overall, demand has increased ex-
ponentially as new invasive diagnostic and therapeutic procedures 
have been developed and healthcare services have become more ac-
cessible. Patient expectations have risen, such that uncomfortable 
or painful procedures are, understandably, not tolerated without the 
relief provided by sedation. Fear and anxiety about dental work, or 
dental phobia, are common and place added demand on sedation 
services, when behavioural techniques do not suffice.
Aims of sedation
The principal objective of sedation is to reduce the anxiety and 
discomfort of patients undergoing procedures. Sedation is a drug- 
induced reduction in consciousness, the desired endpoints of which 
lie on a continuum between a state of wakefulness through to gen-
eral anaesthesia. This altered state of consciousness can be achieved 
with a myriad of agents, in a number of different settings, to enable a 
wide range of procedures to be performed.
There are a number of recognized measures of depth of sedation, 
and the ASA has provided some clarity over the terminology used 
to describe these (Table 6.1).1 Other validated measures of sed-
ation include the Ramsay Sedation Scale, Observer’s Assessment 
of Alertness/ Sedation (OAA/ S) scale, and the Richmond Agitation 
Sedation Score, though the latter is more applicable to sedation of 
patients in the intensive care unit (ICU).
 • Minimal sedation/ anxiolysis: this refers to a drug- induced state 
of calm, with a subtle reduction in cognition and coordination 
but no cardiorespiratory impairment. Patients should maintain a 
normal response to verbal stimulation.
 • Moderate sedation (‘conscious sedation’): this refers to a drug- 
induced depression of consciousness during which patients 
respond purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or ac-
companied by light tactile stimulation (reflex withdrawal from 
a painful stimulus is not considered a purposeful response). No 
66
Sedation
interventions are required to maintain a patent airway, and spon-
taneous ventilation is adequate. Cardiovascular function is usu-
ally maintained.
 • Deep sedation: this refers to a drug- induced depression of con-
sciousness during which patients cannot easily be aroused but 
respond purposefully following repeated or painful stimulation. 
The ability to independently maintain ventilatory function may 
be impaired. Patients may require assistance in maintaining a pa-
tent airway.
 • General anaesthesia: this refers to a drug- induced loss of con-
sciousness, during which patients are not rousable, even by 
painful stimulation. The ability to independently maintain venti-
latory function is often impaired. Patients often require assistance 
in maintaining a patent airway, and positive pressure ventila-
tion may be required because of depressed spontaneous venti-
lation or drug- induced depression of neuromuscular function. 
Cardiovascular function may be impaired.1
‘Conscious sedation’ is an oxymoron2— a confusing and contra-
dictory term, that unfortunately, is in common parlance. It is in-
tended to mean sedation without the loss of consciousness— which 
is the definition of sedation! Deep sedation requires skills normally 
attributed to anaesthetists, in order to rescue the patient from unin-
tended general anaesthesia.
It is important to differentiate between procedures that will re-
quire analgesia in addition to sedation, and those that just require 
anxiolysis or minimal sedation. The sedation technique is deter-
mined by a number of factors: the operative conditions required, 
the intended depth of sedation, the type of procedure, how painful 
the procedure is likely to be, and the comorbidities of the patient. 
The required procedural conditions then govern the level of training 
of the sedationist, level of monitoring, location, and level of sup-
port staff required. Analgesia can be achieved with a multimodal 
approach including local anaesthetic infiltration, nerve blocks, and 
analgesic medication, for example, paracetamol, non- steroidal anti- 
inflammatory drugs, and opioids. Oromaxillofacial surgical proced-
ures are particularly amenable to infiltration of local anaesthesia or 
peripheral nerve blocks (discussed in Chapter 4). In dental proced-
ures, general anaesthesia for the purposes of anxiolysis should be 
the last resort,3 and only be employed when local anaesthesia and 
sedation techniques have either failed or are not suitable. Often, gen-
eral anaesthesia is necessary for children requiring longer restora-
tive and conservation dental treatments, and in those with learning 
difficulties.
For some procedures, good communication and rapport with the 
patient may be all that is needed. Using sedation does not negate the 
need to maintain a good rapport with the patient.
Advantages of sedation
 • Avoids general anaesthesia.
 • May be more acceptable to the patient.
 • May be quicker.
 • Less expensive than general anaesthesia.
 • Fewer medications; lower doses than general anaesthesia.
 • Less airway instrumentation/ intervention.
 • Less disruptive for patient; day case possible.
Potential complications of sedation
 • Desaturation.
 • Nausea and vomiting.
 • Undersedation.
 • Oversedation.
 • Aspiration.
 • Respiratory depression.
 • Airway obstruction.
 • Prolonged recovery.
 • Failure of sedation/ incomplete abandoned procedure.
 • Fear; the potential for post- traumatic stress disorder.
 • Cardiac arrest.
The Paediatric Sedation Research Consortium has published a 
retrospective report on the incidence and nature of adverse events 
during paediatric sedation/ anaesthesia with propofol for proced-
ures outside the operating room (Table 6.2).4 The report involved 
almost 50,000 cases of propofol sedation. The consortium has 
Table 6.1 The continuum of depth of sedation— deﬁnitions of general anaesthesia and levels of sedation
Minimal sedation/ anxiolysis
Moderate sedation/ analgesia
Deep sedation/ analgesia
General anaesthesia
Responsiveness
Normal response to verbal 
stimulation
Purposeful response to verbal 
or tactile stimulation
Purposeful response following 
repeated or painful stimulation
Unarousable, even with 
painful stimulation
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be required
Intervention often required
Spontaneous ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Frequently inadequate
Cardiovascular function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
May be impaired
Source: American Society of Anesthesiologists.1
Table 6.2 A comparison of the incidence of adverse events 
during paediatric sedation/ anaesthesia with propofol and 
dexmedetomidine
Adverse events
Number of events
Dexmedetomidine
Propofol
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
0
2/ 49,836
Pulmonary aspiration
0
4/ 49,836
Oxygen desaturation <90%
57/ 13,072
(43.6/ 10,000)
154/ 10,000
Central apnoea / airway 
obstruction
35/ 13,072
(26.8/ 10,000)
575/ 10,000
Unexpected admission
5/ 13,072
(= 3.8/ 10,000)
7.1/ 10,000
 
 
67
Pharmacology of sedative agents
also published a similar report on dexmedetomidine sedation in 
>13,000 children.5 Comparing propofol with dexmedetomidine 
sedation for paediatric sedation, the incidence of adverse respira-
tory events was higher when using propofol. Although these are 
only retrospective reports and it is difficult to make a direct com-
parison, large numbers of children were included. These reports 
reflect the relative safety margin of the two sedative agents on re-
spiratory adverse events. Thus, the practitioner who uses propofol 
for sedation should be trained and proficient in airway manage-
ment of the unconscious patient and they should be competent to 
rescue the patient from the deep sedation that can be produced with 
propofol.
The economic and morbidity burden of sedation- related adverse 
events is significant, but is also underreported. The online reporting 
tool (http:// www.aese dati onre port ing.com) was set up in 2012 by the 
World Society of Intravenous Anaesthesia with the aim of collecting 
and evaluating sedation data and the incidence of adverse events.6 
The ASA also proposed a common language for describing and re-
porting adverse events. Additionally, the International Committee 
for the Advancement of Procedural Sedation (ICAPS) set up their 
own version of an online adverse event reporting tool (Tracking 
and Reporting Outcomes of Procedural Sedation: TROOPS) in 
2018.7 This anonymized tool aimed to track the adverse events, 
interventions, and outcomes for all types of sedation, delivered by 
all types of sedationists, for all procedures and patients. Continuous 
quality improvement relies on documenting these events and their 
outcomes, yet this is a voluntary online tool relying on individuals 
to self- report their experiences.
Complications of sedation can be minimized by good preopera-
tive assessment and patient selection, appropriate technique, and 
safe conduct of sedation. However, the sedationist should be pre-
pared for potentially life- threatening events, and be appropriately 
trained in their management. Oxygen desaturation is frequently 
the commonest adverse event in studies, and should be promptly 
detected by the mandatory use of pulse oximetry. It may be due to 
hypoventilation, apnoea, or upper airway obstruction. Patients with 
obstructive sleep apnoea (common in oromaxillofacial surgery) are 
particularly at risk, being highly sensitive to opioids. The sequence 
of partial airway obstruction, coughing, oversedation, complete 
airway obstruction, and then hypoxia should be avoided where pos-
sible, but promptly managed if it does occur.
The ideal sedative agent
The ideal sedative agent, like the ideal anaesthetic agent, does not 
yet exist (or remains elusive). Only one new sedative drug has 
been released and gained clinical utility in the last 20 years, namely 
dexmedetomidine. Other new drugs are in development, with trials 
of prodrugs of current agents and different formulations of inhal-
ation agents (e.g. remimazolam is undergoing phase III clinical 
trials. Preliminary studies reveal a quicker onset time and much 
shorter duration of action compared to midazolam). The ideal seda-
tive agent should have the following pharmacological properties:
Pharmacodynamics (effects):
 • Anxiolytic.
 • Analgesic.
 • Amnesic.
 • Maintain respiratory drive.
 • Maintain laryngeal reflexes.
 • Minimal haemodynamic changes.
 • No side effects.
 • Wide therapeutic window— increased margin of safety.
Pharmacokinetics (absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination):
 • Multi- route.
 • Good parenteral bioavailability.
 • Quick onset and offset (conferring a wider margin of safety).
 • Easily titratable.
 • Inactive metabolites.
 • Predictable (short) duration of action.
 • Context- insensitive half- life.
 • Dose- dependent effects.
 • Specific antagonist available.
A comparison of commonly used agents with the ideal agent is pre-
sented in Table 6.3.
Pharmacology of sedative agents
Midazolam
Midazolam has been a World Health Organization essential drug 
since the 1970s. In common with other drugs from the large benzo-
diazepine family, midazolam potentiates the effects of gamma- 
aminobutyric acid (GABA) on GABAA receptors by binding to 
closely located benzodiazepine binding sites throughout the brain 
and spinal cord. This results in increasing neural inhibition, thus re-
ducing the number of neural impulses reaching higher centres of 
the brain. Its effects include anxiolysis, sedation, anterograde am-
nesia, muscle relaxation, and anticonvulsant properties. It is shorter 
acting than lorazepam or diazepam, with an elimination half- life of 
1.5– 2.5 hours, which makes it more suitable for procedural sedation. 
Its availability in three different concentrations (1 mg/ mL, 2 mg/ mL, 
and 5 mg/ mL) has prompted the National Patient Safety Agency to 
issue an alert on the use of midazolam— it advises that in the settings 
where procedural sedation is performed, only the 5 mg in 5 mL am-
poules should be made available, to help avoid accidental overdose.
Midazolam has been regarded as the gold standard for pre-
medication in paediatric anaesthesia and it is the most commonly 
used preoperative sedative.8 It is associated with significant antero-
grade amnesia9 and this is frequently put forward as a specific ad-
vantage. Although midazolam causes explicit memory loss, it has 
been shown in both adults10 and children11 that implicit memory 
is unaffected. Although implicit memories are not intentionally or 
consciously retrievable, these memories may have an effect on pa-
tients’ subsequent emotion and behaviour on similar future encoun-
ters.12 Midazolam sedation may be associated with learning without 
awareness, or having experience of the event without recall.
Midazolam is painless when injected intravenously. It is water 
soluble in its ampoule, and more lipid soluble at physiological pH, 
contributing to uptake at its effect site. Onset of action is 2 min-
utes and peak effect is reached in about 5– 10 minutes. The intra-
venous injection of midazolam should be given slowly at a rate of 
68
Sedation
approximately 1 mg over 30 seconds. This misconception of onset 
time and injection rate has led to many problems with midazolam in 
inexperienced hands.13
It can usefully be given via several routes: nasal, buccal, oral, 
intravenous, and intramuscular. Oral bioavailability is 50%, so rela-
tively higher doses are required for this route (e.g. 0.5 mg/ kg, max-
imum dose is 20 mg in children). Different flavoured syrups have 
been formulated for children to aid compliance. Active metabol-
ites are generated by liver metabolism, but are not clinically sig-
nificant. Midazolam only produces modest cardiovascular effects. 
Allergies are rare. It is used throughout the hospital by anaesthetist 
and non- anaesthetist alike, especially in endoscopy. Midazolam is 
inexpensive in its intravenous formulation, unlike the flavoured oral 
solutions.
Disadvantages
The disadvantages of midazolam should warrant particular care 
when used in certain situations, most notably the elderly and 
those with significant comorbidities where even small doses 
(0.5– 1 mg) can have an exaggerated effect. Midazolam affords no 
appreciable analgesia, and therefore is likely to be co- administered 
with an opioid for a painful procedure. This combination greatly 
increases the likelihood of respiratory depression. Respiratory de-
pression and airway obstruction is possible even in healthy adults 
after quick intravenous injection or a large dose. Unpredictable 
paradoxical effects or disinhibited behaviours are a feature (more 
often seen in children), and can clearly be counterproductive to 
the procedure.
Antagonism
A benzodiazepine overdose (either relative or absolute) can be re-
versed by the antagonist flumazenil, which should be reserved for 
emergencies. The patient must undergo continued monitoring and 
observation, because this reversal agent has a shorter duration of 
action than midazolam, and it is possible for the patient to become 
re- sedated once the effects wear off. Incremental dosing is recom-
mended to reduce the total dose needed as flumazenil has a number 
of undesirable side effects, so routine use should be avoided. Dry 
mouth, diplopia, headache, hypotension, arrhythmias, and seizures 
have all been reported.
Propofol
Propofol, 2,6- diisopropylphenol, is a synthetic phenol derivative 
that is commonly used for the intravenous induction and mainten-
ance of anaesthesia. It was introduced in the 1980s, and has since 
largely replaced the use of barbiturates. Propofol is administered 
with a predetermined mg/ kg bolus dose, titrated to effect or by a 
target- controlled infusion (TCI). This hypnotic agent is thought to 
exert its effects through the potentiation of GABAergic inhibitory 
neurotransmission, though exactly how remains unclear. Its use can 
be modified to produce different levels of sedation without reaching 
a state of general anaesthesia. With smaller intravenous boluses or 
a lower TCI rate, any desired level of sedation can be achieved. The 
challenge is to keep the patient at the intended level of sedation for 
the duration of the procedure, and TCI is ideal for this. Other co- 
administered depressant drugs (opioids, benzodiazepines, keta-
mine) will have additive or even synergistic effects.
Table 6.3 A comparison of the properties of commonly used sedative agents compared with the ideal sedative agent
Ideal agent
Midazolam
Propofol
Dexmedetomidine
Ketamine
Nitrous oxide
Fentanyl
Anxiolytic
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Analgesic
N
N
(Y)
Y
Y
Y
Amnesic
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Maintains respiratory drive
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Maintains laryngeal reflexes
N
N
Y
(Y)
Y
N
Cardiovascular effects
Cardiostable
Decreased
Biphasic
Increased
Cardiostable
Cardiostable
Wide therapeutic window
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Side effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Contraindications
Digoxin
Multi- route
Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
Quick onset
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Quick offset
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Inactive metabolites
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Predictable duration of action
Mins/ hrs
Mins
Mins/ hrs
Mins
Secs
Mins
Dose- dependent effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Antagonist
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Elderly
Reduce
Reduce
Reduce
Reduce
Reduce
Liver disease
Reduce
Renal disease
Normal
Caution
N, no; Y, yes.
 
 
 
 
69
Pharmacology of sedative agents
Propofol is ideally suited to achieving the desired level of sed-
ation due to its favourable pharmacokinetic profile, with a quick 
onset (15– 30 seconds) and rapid recovery (5– 10 minutes), and short 
context- sensitive half- life. The short clinical effect is due to rapid re-
distribution from central compartments to peripheral tissue com-
partments, though its elimination half- life can exceed 24 hours. 
Propofol is versatile in that it can be used for very short procedures 
or prolonged periods, be given as a bolus, simple infusion, or TCI to 
produce sedation, or at higher levels general anaesthesia. With dose- 
dependent anxiolytic, amnesic, and sedative effects, propofol can be 
titrated carefully to produce the desired endpoint. Hence, it remains 
the most common sedative drug in current use by anaesthetists. It 
has potent antiemetic effects which also makes it particularly suit-
able for day case procedures (especially oromaxillofacial).
Disadvantages
The lipid emulsion in which propofol is formulated can produce pain 
on injection— although this can be attenuated by slower injection, 
using a larger vein, diluting with saline, or mixing with lidocaine. 
This seemingly minor side effect should not be dismissed, because 
it can make the patient unnecessarily agitated or uncooperative. It 
is seldom seen with the medium- or long- chain triglyceride formu-
lations. Propofol has a particularly narrow therapeutic window and 
therefore a reduced margin of safety, so there is a very real risk of 
unintended general anaesthesia or at least a deeper- than- intended 
level of sedation. Dose- dependent respiratory depression, hypoven-
tilation, hypoxia, upper airway obstruction, depressed protective 
airway reflexes, cardiovascular instability, hypotension, reduced 
systemic vascular resistance, reduced cardiac output, reduced con-
tractility, and reduced myocardial blood flow are effects that warrant 
close monitoring and vigilance to allow prompt treatment that will 
prevent harm to the patient. Hence caution is required, especially 
in the elderly and patients with extensive comorbidities. High dos-
ages in ICU sedation have been associated with propofol infusion 
syndrome that manifests as a collection of metabolic derangements 
and organ failure, and may cause death. Metabolic acidosis, rhabdo-
myolysis, renal failure, hyperlipidaemia, arrhythmias, and cardiac 
failure are all features of the syndrome.13
Opioids
Opioids are not particularly sedative and they should not be used 
as such. They can have a role as adjuncts to sedatives in providing 
analgesia for more painful procedures, where local anaesthesia will 
not suffice. The synthetic opioid, fentanyl is commonly used, as well 
as alfentanil, sufentanil (not licensed in the UK), and in some cases 
remifentanil as an infusion. These are very potent intravenous an-
algesics, notable for producing respiratory depression and airway 
obstruction.
Disadvantages
Potential undesirable effects of opioids include respiratory depres-
sion, suppression of airway reflexes, bradycardia and hypotension, 
nausea and vomiting, itching, constipation, and urinary retention.
Antagonism
Naloxone can be used to manage opioid overdose, as it is a non- 
selective and competitive opioid receptor antagonist. When given 
intravenously, naloxone works within 2 minutes, and within 5 
minutes if given intramuscularly. It may also be sprayed into the 
nose. The effects of naloxone last about 30 minutes to an hour. 
Multiple doses may be required, as the duration of action of most 
opioids is greater than that of naloxone. Administration to opioid- 
dependent individuals may cause symptoms of opioid withdrawal, 
including restlessness, agitation, nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, and 
sweating.
Ketamine
Ketamine is a phencyclidine derivative presented in a variety of con-
centrations. It is manufactured in 10 mg/ mL, 50 mg/ mL, and 100 
mg/ mL solutions on account of its use in veterinary medicine as well 
as in humans. Used intravenously or intramuscularly, ketamine has 
analgesic, sedative, and anaesthetic effects (when used in increasing 
doses), exerted via N- methyl- d- aspartate (NMDA) receptors. These 
favourable properties mean it can theoretically be used as the sole 
sedative agent for a procedure— often the case in the developing 
world. It has quick onset and a moderate duration of action— a 2 mg/ 
kg dose injected intravenously produces dissociative anaesthesia in 
about 30 seconds, with the effects lasting from 5 to 15 minutes. It 
is very popular in emergency anaesthesia, especially in prehospital 
care. Lower doses are required for analgesia and sedation, 0.5– 1 mg/ 
kg when given intravenously.
In contrast to other anaesthetic agents, ketamine causes stimula-
tion of the sympathetic nervous system resulting in increased sys-
tolic blood pressure and heart rate, and should therefore be used 
with caution in the elderly and those with ischaemic heart disease. 
However, these undesirable sympathomimetic effects are not seen 
with subanaesthetic doses (up to 0.5 mg/ kg), while the potent an-
algesic effects are, making it well suited to sedation for brief painful 
procedures.14 Ketamine is therefore often used in combination with 
other sedatives, employed at lower subanaesthetic doses, exploiting 
its analgesic properties and avoiding its sympathetic stimulation.
Disadvantages
Emergence delirium and unpleasant hallucinations can be a feature 
(if not attenuated by a benzodiazepine). Nausea and vomiting can 
also complicate its use, and prophylactic antiemetics should be con-
sidered when ketamine is used for procedural sedation.15 As such, 
it is not often the first- line agent for sedation for oromaxillofacial 
procedures, compared to propofol. Nevertheless, respiratory rate is 
often increased and airway reflexes are better preserved than with 
propofol. Increased salivation may preclude its use in dental surgery, 
potentially precipitating coughing and bronchospasm. No specific 
antagonist is available, though it is considered to have a good margin 
of safety.
Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine was first approved for use in 1999 in the US, 
and in 2001 in the UK for the sedation of patients in ICUs. Since 
then, its use has expanded, as an anaesthetic- sparing agent, a pre-
medication, and an analgesia adjunct (though not yet licensed for 
procedural sedation). A potent α2- adrenoreceptor agonist, it pro-
vides anxiolysis, sedation, and analgesia. It is eight times more se-
lective for α2 than clonidine, and about five times more potent.16 
Dexmedetomidine exerts its clinical effects via activation of central 
adrenoreceptors in the locus coeruleus in the brainstem resulting 
in dose- dependent inhibition of excitatory neurotransmission. The 
70
Sedation
resulting sedation more closely resembles natural physiological sleep 
than the GABAergic- induced sedation with propofol or midazolam. 
Studies have demonstrated electroencephalograms (EEG) resem-
bling normal phase II non- rapid eye movement sleep. In this state, it 
is possible to rouse the patient, while they still remain calm and able 
to follow simple commands. This quality of sedation is in contrast 
to that of midazolam or propofol, which is more likely to lead to 
disorientation and movement if the patient is disturbed from sleep.
Effects of dexmedetomidine include:
 • Sedation and anxiolysis.
 • Analgesia.
 • Hypotension/ hypertension.
 • Bradycardia.
 • Decongestant.
 • Antisialagogue.
 • Diuresis.
The cardiovascular effects are biphasic and the initial response 
following the loading dose is mediated by the α2B receptors in the 
vascular smooth muscle, causing hypertension. This is followed by 
centrally mediated inhibition of sympathetic outflow, which leads to 
hypotension and bradycardia. Respiration and airway patency are 
preserved even at high (over)doses, but concomitant use with other 
sedatives or opioids may enhance their action causing a degree of 
respiratory depression and/ or airway obstruction, due to reduction 
in muscle tone.
Dexmedetomidine is not sufficient to be the sole analgesic for 
painful procedures, but should be considered more analgesic or 
opioid sparing. Where additional analgesia will likely be required, a 
reduced starting dose may be considered. Dexmedetomidine is a vi-
able alternative to midazolam for procedural sedation for unilateral 
third molar surgery in conjunction with local anaesthesia.17
In the ICU, a loading dose is not warranted, mitigating the un-
wanted haemodynamic effects in critically ill patients, who invari-
ably have received other sedatives. An infusion can be started at a 
rate of 0.7 mcg/ kg/ hr, and then adjusted accordingly (in the range 
0.2— 1.4 mcg/ kg/ hr). A steady state may take an hour to achieve after 
dose alteration, and it is not recommended to be bolused, as can 
easily be done with propofol.13
A 200 mcg ampoule can be diluted with 0.9% sodium chloride 
solution to achieve a concentration of 4 mcg/ mL in a volume of 50 
mL. For procedural sedation, a loading dose of 1 mcg/ kg can be 
given over at least 10 minutes, before starting at a rate of 0.6 mcg/ 
kg/ hr, then titrated to the desired effect (within the range of 0.2– 1.0 
mcg/ kg/ hr). Care must be taken not to confuse mcg/ kg/ hr and mcg/ 
kg/ min, which would result in an overdose 60 times the intended 
dose. For stimulating procedures, a rate of at least 0.7 mcg/ kg/ hr 
may be required. For the elderly and those who will not tolerate 
the haemodynamic changes, the loading dose can be reduced (e.g. 
50%). This induction of sedation process can therefore take more 
time to achieve a clinically useful endpoint compared to propofol. 
Anecdotally, intermittent low- dose boluses have been given to speed 
up the process, but this is not recommended by the manufacturer.13
The nasal administration of dexmedetomidine is a particularly 
useful alternative to nasal midazolam. This has been used success-
fully in adults and children for dental surgery.18 Non- intravenous 
routes of administration have the disadvantage of slower onset and 
limited ability to titrate to the desired effect. A bolus of 1– 2 mcg/ kg 
delivered onto the nasal mucosa can be used as a premedication or 
as part of procedural sedation.
Dexmedetomidine has a longer duration of action than propofol, 
such that patients often remain sleepy post procedure. They can be 
easily roused, but will fall back to sleep when left undisturbed. This 
could cause problems for day case procedures, with patients failing 
to meet discharge criteria. Dexmedetomidine is contraindicated in 
patients taking digoxin due to an increased risk of severe brady-
cardia and cardiac arrest. No specific reversal agent is available.
Nitrous oxide
Inhaled nitrous oxide (N2O) has the longest history of use in the 
field of sedation, being first used in 1844. Its use remains widespread 
in dental practice today for anxiolysis, and for minimal sedation in 
children and adults.19,20 It can be safely used in community dental 
practice as well as the pre- hospital and hospital environment.21 Also 
referred to as relative analgesia, N2O is generally delivered in con-
centrations of 20– 50% (though up to 70% can be delivered) in a 
mixture with oxygen. The concentration of N2O can be titrated to 
effect in increments of 5– 10%, with the patient remaining respon-
sive throughout. It requires cooperation with the patient to tolerate 
the nasal mask, mouthpiece, or face mask. For procedures in the 
oral cavity, a nasal mask is required. For single- agent use of N2O 
in dentistry, an operator- sedationist technique can be used, in con-
junction with a trained assistant to help monitor the patient. Nausea 
and vomiting is a common side effect,19,22 especially when used in 
combination with fentanyl.23 Consideration of gas scavenging is 
important— N2O is an environmental hazard as it depletes the ozone 
layer. SEDARA® (Linde Gas, North America, LLC) is a relatively 
new portable inhalation device for delivering a fixed 50% N2O and 
50% oxygen mixture, adding to the more historical MDM (Matrx 
Medical Inc., Orchard Park, NY, USA) and McKesson relative an-
algesia machines (both of which allow titration of the inspired con-
centration of N2O).
Sevoﬂurane
Sevoflurane is included here for completeness, as subanaesthetic 
doses can produce sedation, which can be titrated with the in-
spired concentration. Compared to the other volatile agents, it is the 
most pleasant smelling and non- irritant. An agent- specific vapor-
izer, breathing circuit, and scavenging are required. Routine use is 
limited by the equipment required, cost, and its emetogenic effects.
Synergy of agents
Some combinations of agents produce profound synergism that can 
be both beneficial and problematic. Opioids and propofol work syn-
ergistically to produce desirable conditions for both surgeon/ oper-
ator and patient. However, opioids in the presence of propofol or 
benzodiazepines are several times more likely to produce respira-
tory depression, increasing the risk of adverse events.
If fentanyl is to be given with midazolam, it should be given first, 
and its relatively slow onset of action observed for 2– 4 minutes prior 
to titration of midazolam. Further dosing with fentanyl should be 
restricted to those who are trained and experienced in dealing with 
deeper- than- intended sedation.
 
 
 
71
Conduct of sedation
Remifentanil and propofol are ideal partners for total intravenous 
anaesthesia, but at lower effect site target concentrations of both 
agents, sedation can be achieved (minimal, moderate, and deep 
depths). The plasma concentration of remifentanil rises at different 
rates according to its use as a fixed- rate infusion (mcg/ kg/ min) or 
TCI, with the effects evident sooner with TCI and delayed with fixed 
rate infusion.
Ketofol is a 50:50 mixture of 1% propofol and 1% ketamine that 
is sometimes used in emergency departments for painful proced-
ures that require both sedation and analgesia. It is combined to take 
advantage of their complementary effects, with the undesirable ef-
fects of one drug compensated by the beneficial effects of the other. 
Generally, lower doses equate to fewer side effects, and given that 
both drugs cause sedation, this effect will still be achieved at lower 
doses. In practice, only those experienced with the pharmacology 
of these drugs should be administering such a combination. Studies 
have yet to determine the most efficacious ratio of propofol to keta-
mine, and in which setting it is most beneficial.
Though not currently available, it is logical to combine keta-
mine with dexmedetomidine as the advantages and disadvan-
tages of both drugs complement each other (Table 6.4).24 While 
dexmedetomidine is a sedative with minimal analgesic properties, 
the addition of ketamine would allow brief painful procedures to 
be performed. Dexmedetomidine may decrease the tachycardia, 
hypertension, salivation, and emergence phenomena from keta-
mine, while ketamine may prevent the bradycardia and hypoten-
sion from dexmedetomidine. The disadvantage of this combination 
would be a slightly prolonged recovery after the procedure.
Conduct of sedation
Depth of sedation may change during the course of the pro-
cedure because of the methods of delivery, pharmacogenetic and 
interpatient variability, anxiety state, level of surgical stimulation, 
and the patient’s concurrent medication. Achieving a steady state 
can be difficult.
Risk of oversedation is more likely with bolus drug delivery, due 
to potentially higher peak plasma concentrations than with TCI. The 
effect of each bolus should be observed within the appropriate time 
frame, before delivering the next dose. Otherwise, dose stacking 
can occur, where further boluses are delivered before the peak ef-
fect of the previous dose, leading to a higher- than- necessary plasma 
concentration and potential for oversedation. Titration of doses 
is advocated by the dental faculties of both the Royal College of 
Surgeons and the Royal College of Anaesthetists,25 especially in light 
of the National Patient Safety Agency report of adverse events with 
midazolam. Extremes of age and weight, and genetic polymorphism, 
are some of the factors responsible for interpatient variability, and 
careful titration of sedation and analgesia helps to mitigate some 
of the risk. Titration is paramount for providing effective and safe 
sedation for each patient, whatever the technique or combination of 
agents. Whether using a bolus technique or TCI, one must also be 
very patient when sedating elderly patients, allowing more time for 
slow circulation and the time to reach equilibrium.
TCI techniques free up the anaesthetist to monitor the depth of 
sedation and maintain communication with the patient and sur-
geon. Adjusting the target concentration is easy, and there is often 
a display to demonstrate how quickly the new steady state will take 
to achieve (albeit an estimate). TCI pumps improve titration of the 
drug’s plasma concentration and effect, according to the pharma-
cokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of the agents (propofol 
or remifentanil). The Minto model, used in effect site mode, is the 
preferred remifentanil TCI model, which can be started at an ef-
fect site target concentration of 1 ng/ mL and titrated in increments 
of 0.5 ng/ mL. The rate of remifentanil should be titrated to the re-
spiratory rate and effort, to avoid significant hypoventilation and 
apnoea. Since remifentanil is a very potent opioid with a high risk 
of respiratory depression, monitoring of ventilation should include 
continuous waveform capnography. The onset of respiratory depres-
sion occurs after the onset of sedation,26 therefore it is necessary to 
wait and observe the effects on ventilation before increasing the in-
fusion rate.27 The Marsh model, in effect site mode, is the preferred 
propofol TCI model in adults, which can be started at an effect site 
target concentration of 0.5 mcg/ mL and titrated in 0.2 mcg/ mL in-
crements according to clinical effect. TCIs tend to perform better 
than manual infusions, and benefit from fewer episodes of apnoea, 
better cardiovascular stability, better patient and surgeon satisfac-
tion, and quicker patient recovery.28
For procedures where fentanyl is used for analgesia, the fentanyl 
can be diluted to enable administration of smaller aliquots (e.g. 10– 
25 mcg). Fentanyl is better suited to short procedures, which do not 
require continued repeated boluses (therefore avoiding a higher cu-
mulative dose and the associated risks).
Patient- controlled sedation, analogous to patient- controlled an-
algesia, provides a bolus of sedation on demand at the push of a 
button, with a set lockout time before a further dose is permitted. 
Propofol, midazolam, and remifentanil have all been trialled, but 
propofol has the better pharmacokinetic profile for this method. 
Patient- controlled sedation gives autonomy back to the patient and 
some studies demonstrate better patient satisfaction and quicker re-
covery.29 Lower- technology alternatives, such as when a patient sig-
nals to the sedationist that they require more sedation by squeezing 
a squeaky toy or pressing a buzzer can easily be introduced into rou-
tine practice. A TCI version of patient- controlled sedation, as op-
posed to bolus delivery, is currently being developed. In this case, 
the sedationist sets a target concentration, which the patient can 
then titrate themselves to their desired level of sedation. The TCI 
device relies upon inputs from the patient to continue at the higher 
target concentration, otherwise it will revert to a lower infusion 
rate until the patient is alert enough to press the button to demand 
more. Closed- loop delivery systems that use inputs from monitors 
(e.g. BIS™, Medtronic Limited, Watford, UK) to help determine in-
fusion rates for individual patients have been studied. These devices 
Table 6.4 Properties of dexmedetomidine and ketamine
Dexmedetomidine
Ketamine
Sedative
Mild sedation
Weak analgesic
Strong analgesic
Bradycardia
Tachycardia
Hypotension
Hypertension
Antisialagogue
Salivation
Reduce emergence agitation
Emergence phenomena
 
72
Sedation
will have to prove their benefit and superiority over established 
techniques, before they are accepted into routine clinical practice. 
SEDASYS® (Ethicon Endo- Surgery, Inc.) was one such device, but 
was discontinued in 2016 due to poor uptake. The CONCERT- 
CL® closed- loop infusion system (VERYARK™, Nanning, China) is 
currently marketed for clinical use,30 but the system is not readily 
available.
Conduct of surgery
During oromaxillofacial procedures, direct access to the patient’s 
head and airway is limited, and therefore it is important that com-
munication is maintained with the surgeon so they may report any 
deteriorating situation to the sedationist before it even becomes ap-
parent on the monitors. Infusions can then be titrated accordingly or 
airway interventions performed in a timely manner.
Injecting local anaesthetic can be particularly painful, especially 
if injected quickly. Some dentists use topical benzocaine (or other 
topically applied local anaesthetics) to numb the injection site prior 
to insertion of the needle. A slow injection of local anaesthetic is also 
much more comfortable for the patient.
Oral surgical techniques often require irrigation, and along with 
any blood, debris, or even dental prostheses, these have the poten-
tial to cause aspiration in a sedated patient.31 Under general anaes-
thesia, a throat pack can be used to prevent soiling of the airway, 
but this practice is not directly transferable to procedures performed 
under sedation. Methods that can be employed include high- volume 
suction, restricted irrigation, and bite blocks with integrated light 
source, suction, and fluid capture. Fluid capture using absorbent 
sponges or barriers such as a rubber dental dam can help limit the 
fluid and debris reaching the oropharynx (Fig. 6.1).
During oromaxillofacial procedures performed under sedation, 
airway obstruction can easily be caused by poor positioning, the 
dentist leaning on the jaw, or applying force when working on the 
mandible. Good knowledge of the surgical procedures can help the 
sedationist to anticipate changes in sedation and analgesia require-
ments and to titrate appropriately, and pre- emptively (Fig. 6.2).
Safety and guidelines
There have been numerous new guidelines and updates in the last 
decade, issued from national and specialist societies in the UK, the 
US, and Europe, that cover procedural sedation across many different 
specialties. In the recent past, there have been conflicting recom-
mendations from leading anaesthetic societies and non- anaesthetic 
societies regarding the use of propofol by non- anaesthetists. The 
latest guidelines from the ASA represent a collaboration with dental 
anaesthesiologists, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and radiolo-
gists, and state that the use of sedatives (propofol and ketamine) for 
moderate sedation must be provided with the care consistent with 
that required for general anaesthesia (including the requirement 
that practitioners are competent at identifying and rescuing pa-
tients from deep sedation or general anaesthesia). There is also now 
good consensus from the various European societies of anaesthesia 
Fig. 6.1 Rubber dam used by dentists to contain and stop water/ blood draining into the airway.
 
 
73
Preoperative assessment and preparation
that practitioners delivering the sedation should be appropriately 
trained, meet an accepted standard, and be objectively assessed. 
Anaesthesia- led training courses have now been developed for 
non- anaesthetists.
In the past, anaesthesia societies discouraged the non- anaesthetist 
use of sedative agents that have the potential to produce general 
anaesthesia, potentially denying patients a safe and effective drug 
when used appropriately. However, this has not stopped other spe-
cialties building up vast experience with propofol— for example, 
US gastroenterologists conduct >14,000,000 endoscopies annually, 
many of which require sedation.32 An Australian study of 28,000 
cases reported the incidence of adverse events during proced-
ural sedation for endoscopy delivered by non- anaesthetists to be 
similar to the rate when sedation was delivered by anaesthetists.33 
It remains the interest, duty, and skillset of anaesthetists to help de-
velop and set standards for all practitioners of sedation, in order to 
meet the increasing demand, and to ensure patient safety. In the UK, 
oromaxillofacial surgery procedures that do not require a general 
anaesthetic, but necessitate sedation, are attended by an anaesthetist. 
Conversely, in the US, surgeons and dentists are more often involved 
in the sedation and anaesthesia of their patients. In the UK, dental 
chair anaesthesia (delivered by a dentist) has not been permitted 
since 2001, following a series of fatal incidents. Dental chair sedation 
in community dental practice is, however, delivered by dentists in 
the UK— usually with N2O or midazolam. A survey across six acute 
National Health Service hospitals demonstrated the heterogeneity 
of sedation practice in the UK, with ten different agents in use (in-
cluding opioids). The survey revealed 360 episodes of procedural 
sedation across all specialties over 2 days, with 71% being conducted 
by non- anaesthetists (only three episodes involved oromaxillofacial 
procedures). The total number of procedures performed under sed-
ation in the UK remains unknown, and the incidence of adverse 
events is also unknown. This study was a proof- of- concept study 
that will hopefully lead on to a nationwide collaborative to help de-
termine the total number of sedation episodes and the incidence of 
adverse events in order to help promote safety.34
Preoperative assessment and preparation
Preoperative assessment for sedation should be as thorough as it 
would be for a general anaesthetic, irrespective of the type of sed-
ation and procedure that is being scheduled. Only by gaining vital 
information from the patient can one propose a safe and appropriate 
plan for sedation. A systemic enquiry with the main focus on cardio-
respiratory and airway assessment informs the clinician, and helps 
determine the patient’s physiological/ cardiorespiratory reserve and 
their ASA classification. Other medical specialists should be con-
sulted for advice on patient optimization, as indicated.
The airway assessment is crucial, given that oromaxillofacial pro-
cedures inevitably require a shared approach to airway manage-
ment. The shared airway limits access and there is a risk of soiling 
with debris and irrigation fluid. The clinician must consider the fol-
lowing: will they be able to ventilate the patient? How will the pro-
cedure restrict them from performing airway rescue manoeuvres? 
And, what airway equipment might be needed in an emergency?
Discussion with the patient should include information on the 
procedure, the type and depth of intended sedation, the risks and 
benefits, and the alternative options. Only then can informed con-
sent be obtained. Patients’ concerns and expectations should be 
sought and addressed, indicating whether any psychological prep-
aration or behavioural techniques can be employed to smooth each 
patient’s journey. Total lack of awareness under sedation should 
not be guaranteed, as patients may well be aware of things going on 
around them at certain points during the procedure. Some drugs 
cause amnesia (particularly midazolam), which should be com-
municated to the patient. Amnesia may or may not be desirable for 
some patients. Some will find memory loss disconcerting and dis-
orientating, whereas others will be glad to have no recollection of a 
potentially unpleasant experience.
Fasting prior to sedation remains relatively contentious, but 
in view of the potential risk of life- threatening pulmonary aspir-
ation, it is generally safer to err on the side of caution. The risk 
of aspiration during sedation may well be lower than for general 
anaesthesia— there is less exposure to emetogenic drugs (especially 
volatile agents), and the target sedation level is usually moderate, 
such that airway reflexes are largely preserved. For simplicity and 
safety, adopting the same fasting regimen as for general anaesthesia 
is recommended for all elective procedures requiring sedation.25,35– 
37 Exceptions might be made in the emergency department for very 
minor procedures, and when only minimal sedation is intended.3 
Those decisions should be justifiable, and determined on an indi-
vidual patient basis.
Effect of
sedation/
analgesia
*
*
(a)
Effect of
sedation/
analgesia
*
(b)
Effect of
sedation/
analgesia
(c)
*
Surgical stimulation
Inadequate sedation/analgesia
Fig. 6.2 The importance of timing the peak effects of sedation/ analgesia 
to coincide with peaks in surgical stimulation. (a) Insufficient sedation/ 
analgesia delivered for two episodes (*) of peak surgical stimulus, with 
the rest of the procedure adequately covered. (b) Sufficient titration 
of sedation/ analgesia delivered for the start of the procedure, but not 
sufficient for the following peak (*) of surgical stimulation. (c) Sufficient 
titration of sedation/ analgesia throughout the procedure.
 
74
Sedation
Monitoring
The Association of Anaesthetists established recommendations for 
standards of monitoring during anaesthesia and recovery (updated 
in 2021), and these monitoring modalities (non- invasive blood pres-
sure, electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, and capnography) can be 
considered the same minimal monitoring standards that should be 
employed for procedural sedation— in addition to assessing the level 
of sedation. Monitors are not surrogates for vigilance or situational 
awareness, and their output must be observed and acted upon. 
Monitor alarms should be set to appropriate ranges and should be 
easily audible.
Level of sedation
Although the ASA’s continuum of sedation helps define the level of 
sedation,1 it does not necessarily help the clinician assess the patient’s 
level of sedation during a procedure. Evoking a response with verbal 
or tactile stimulation may interrupt the procedure as the patient 
rouses. Obviously, to prevent or manage adverse events it may be 
necessary to halt surgery from time to time, and this will no doubt 
be reflected in the surgeon’s satisfaction with the sedation technique. 
The OAA/ S scale, Ramsay Sedation Scale, and their modified de-
rivatives can also be used to clinically assess the patient periodic-
ally throughout the procedure. Alternative options include the use 
of processed EEG (pEEG) monitoring, such as BIS™ or SedLine® 
(Masimo Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA), though in practice these 
devices are not routinely used for procedural sedation. The index 
values lack discrimination, and studies have shown poor correlation 
between sedation states based on pEEG values and clinical scoring 
systems.38 The Anesthesia Responsiveness Monitor (ARM; Scott 
Laboratories Inc., Lubbock, TX, USA) is a device that can be used 
to objectively measure the patient’s level of sedation, based on the 
reaction times of the patient to instruction (to push a button on a 
handset). Failure to respond correlates with a sedation level deeper 
than moderate. Integration into a closed- loop sedation delivery de-
vice has been achieved with the ARM.
Adequacy of respiration
The monitoring modalities of pulse oximetry and capnography are 
invaluable tools, but respiratory pattern and rate, sound of breathing, 
magnitude of chest excursion, and skin colour are all vital clinical 
signs that should also be observed— though clinical observation 
without monitors is insufficient and unreliable.
There are a number of devices on the market specifically designed 
to measure expired carbon dioxide during sedation, and some that 
can be adapted from common equipment supplies. The capnogram 
trace or graphic display must be interpreted carefully, as it will not 
exactly resemble that of a patient whose trachea has been intubated. 
It is also sensitive to the flow rate of oxygen being administered and 
whether the patient is breathing through their nose or their mouth. 
Nevertheless, despite a poor trace, capnography has been shown to 
detect many more episodes of apnoea than pulse oximetry alone. 
The recently developed Rainbow Acoustic Monitor® (Masimo 
Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA) uses a non- invasive skin transducer 
applied to the neck which measures turbulent airflow in the larynx 
in order to detect respiratory rate and apnoea— though the studies 
to prove its effect remain in their infancy.
Adequacy of circulation
Haemodynamic changes can be expected with deeper levels of 
sedation, especially in the elderly, and in patients with multiple 
comorbidities or dehydration. Continuous electrocardiography and 
non- invasive blood pressure measurement (set to cycle regularly) 
are therefore essential components of the minimum standards of 
monitoring for sedation.
Equipment availability
Essential equipment for the safe practice of sedation includes:
 • Oxygen supply and delivery devices.
 • Emergency drugs (including appropriate antagonists).
 • Emergency rescue equipment (airway equipment, means of 
delivering positive pressure ventilation).
 • Emergency alarm (or established means of getting help in an 
emergency).
Supplemental oxygen is advocated for any sedation depth exceeding 
minimal sedation. This can be provided by simple nasal cannulae, 
with a comfortable flow rate of 2– 4 L/ min (rates higher than this 
tend to be poorly tolerated by patients due to the drying effect of the 
gas). The use of Optiflow™ (Fisher & Paykel Healthcare, Auckland, 
New Zealand) could be considered in moderate or deep sedation, 
particularly if there are concerns about ventilatory insufficiency due 
to unfavourable body habitus or extensive comorbidities. This de-
vice provides high- flow humidified nasal oxygen (HFNO) at flow 
rates up to 70 L/ min. The high flows produce continuous positive 
airway pressure that helps splint the airways open, and also aids ven-
tilation by gaseous exchange through flow- dependent dead space 
flushing during spontaneous breathing or apnoea.39 In practice, 
HFNO is not always compatible with oromaxillofacial procedures, 
but it has been used successfully in dental surgery. Newer models 
(AIRVO™ 2, Fisher & Paykel Healthcare, Auckland, New Zealand) 
allow the user to set the flow rate (10– 60 L/ min), temperature (31– 
37°C), and oxygen concentration (21– 100%), whereas the earlier 
models only allow adjustment of the flow rate (0– 70 L/ min) with 
a fixed concentration (100%) of oxygen. On account of the high 
flow rates, consideration must be given to the availability and size 
of the oxygen cylinder (unless piped wall oxygen is used). Crucially, 
a patent airway must be maintained to benefit from HFNO, so if a 
jaw thrust or other airway manoeuvre is required to manage upper 
airway obstruction, the patient is probably over- sedated. It should 
also be noted that standard capnography is not feasible when HFNO 
is utilized, due to the high gas flows. In one study of apnoeic patients 
with flow rates of 70 L/ min, the rate of rise of carbon dioxide was 
0.15 kPa/ min, and the mean PaCO2 was 7.8 kPa after 14 minutes39— 
thus, in the spontaneously breathing moderately sedated patient, the 
rate of rise of carbon dioxide should therefore be considerably less 
than 0.15 kPa/ min.
Training and personnel
The ability to provide safe procedural sedation need not be defined 
by specialty training alone, but rather by the practitioner having the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
Conclusion
requisite knowledge, skills, and competencies to manage sedation 
for individual patients and procedures. As discussed earlier, this 
must include being able to rescue the patient from a deeper- than- 
intended level of sedation. A minimum of two trained professionals 
must be present during any procedure performed under sedation, 
so that one person’s sole responsibility is to monitor the condition 
of the patient at all times throughout the procedure, while the other 
performs the procedure itself.
Recovery and discharge
Close monitoring and observation of the patient post procedure 
must be continued for at least 1 hour afterwards, in an appropri-
ately equipped recovery facility, staffed with trained recovery per-
sonnel. Vital signs should return to their normal baseline values. 
Importantly, the patient should return to their baseline level of con-
sciousness, and there must be no risk of further reduction in con-
sciousness. Any pain, or nausea and vomiting, must be adequately 
controlled. In the day case setting, the patient (and/ or carer) should 
be given information on any potential problems to look out for, and 
how to contact help following discharge.
Conclusion
All sedative agents deserve respect, given their capacity to cause 
harm through misuse. Inadequate preoperative assessment or 
failure to monitor the patient’s condition adequately can lead to ser-
ious harm. Knowledge of each drug’s time to onset of action, peak ef-
fect, and duration of action is essential in delivering sedation safely. 
The simplest regimen is often the safest. The heterogeneity among 
international guidelines governing sedation and local hospital prac-
tices is a cause for major concern. Greater safety in sedation can be 
achieved with better training for all sedation providers, and by appli-
cation of agreed guidelines. Future agents and devices will hopefully 
confer a safety advantage, but better application of existing know-
ledge and skills would confer an enormous safety benefit.
REFERENCES
 1. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of depth of 
sedation: definition of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/ 
analgesia. 13 October 1999. Last amended 23 October 2019. 
https:// www.asahq.org/ standa rds- and- gui deli nes/ contin uum- of- 
depth- of- sedat ion- defi nit ion- of- gene ral- ane sthe sia- and- lev els- of- 
sedati onan alge sia
 2. Cote CJ. ‘Conscious sedation’: time for this oxymoron to go away! J 
Pediatr. 2001;139(1):15– 17.
 3. Sury M, Bullock I, Rabar S, DeMott KJB. Sedation for 
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in children and young 
people: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2010;341:c6819.
 4. Cravero JP, Beach ML, Blike GT, Gallagher SM, Hertzog JH. The 
incidence and nature of adverse events during pediatric sedation/ 
anesthesia with propofol for procedures outside the operating 
room: a report from the Pediatric Sedation Research Consortium. 
Anesth Anal. 2009;108(3):795– 804.
 5. Sulton C, McCracken C, Simon HK, Hebbar K, Reynolds 
J, Cravero J, et al. Pediatric procedural sedation using 
dexmedetomidine: a report from the Pediatric Sedation Research 
Consortium. Hosp Pediatr. 2016;6(9):536– 544.
 6. Mason K, Green SM, Piacevoli Q; International Sedation Task 
Force. Adverse event reporting tool to standardize the reporting 
and tracking of adverse events during procedural sedation: a 
consensus document from the World SIVA International Sedation 
Task Force. Br J Anaesth. 2012;108(1):13– 20.
 7. Roback MG, Green SM, Andolfatto G, Leroy PL, Mason KP. 
Tracking and Reporting Outcomes Of Procedural Sedation 
(TROOPS): standardized quality improvement and research 
tools from the International Committee for the Advancement of 
Procedural Sedation. Br J Anaesth. 2018;120(1):164– 172.
 8. Kain ZN, Caldwell- Andrews AA, Krivutza DM, Weinberg ME, 
Wang SM, Gaal D. Trends in the practice of parental presence 
during induction of anesthesia and the use of preoperative 
sedative premedication in the United States, 1995– 2002: results of 
a follow- up national survey. Anesth Anal. 2004;98(5):1252– 1259.
 9. Kain ZN, Hofstadter MB, Mayes LC, Krivutza DM, Alexander 
G, Wang SM, et al. Midazolam: effects on amnesia and anxiety in 
children. Anesthesiology. 2000;93(3):676– 684.
 10. Polster MR, McCarthy RA, O’Sullivan G, Gray PA, Park GR. 
Midazolam- induced amnesia: implications for the implicit/ 
explicit memory distinction. Brain Cogn. 1993;22(2):244– 265.
 11. Stewart SH, Buffett- Jerrott SE, Finley GA, Wright KD, Valois 
Gomez T. Effects of midazolam on explicit vs implicit memory 
in a pediatric surgery setting. Psychopharmacol (Berl). 
2006;188(4):489– 497.
 12. Chen E, Zeltzer LK, Craske MG, Katz ER. Children’s memories 
for painful cancer treatment procedures: implications for distress. 
Child Dev. 2000;71(1):933– 947.
 13. Electronic Medicines Compendium. Midazolam. 2019. https:// 
www.medici nes.org.uk/ 
 14. Agarwal A, Sinha PK, Pandey CM, Gaur A, Pandey CK, Kaushik 
S. Effect of a subanesthetic dose of intravenous ketamine and/ or 
local anesthetic infiltration on hemodynamic responses to skull- 
pin placement: a prospective, placebo- controlled, randomized, 
double- blind study. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2001;13(3):189– 194.
 15. Langston WT, Wathen JE, Roback MG, Bajaj L. Effect of 
ondansetron on the incidence of vomiting associated with 
ketamine sedation in children: a double- blind, randomized, 
placebo- controlled trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2008;52(1):30– 34.
 16. Cheung CW, Ng KF, Liu J, Yuen MY, Ho MH, Irwin MG. 
Analgesic and sedative effects of intranasal dexmedetomidine 
in third molar surgery under local anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 
2011;107(3):430– 437.
 17. Cheung CW, Ying CL, Chiu WK, Wong GT, Ng KF, Irwin MG. 
A comparison of dexmedetomidine and midazolam for sedation 
in third molar surgery. Anaesthesia. 2007;62(11):1132– 1138.
 18. Yuen VM, Hui TW, Irwin MG, Yuen MK. A comparison 
of intranasal dexmedetomidine and oral midazolam for 
premedication in pediatric anesthesia: a double- blinded 
randomized controlled trial. Anesth Anal. 2008;106(6):1715– 1721.
 19. Hallonsten AL, Koch G, Schröder U. Nitrous oxide- oxygen 
sedation in dental care. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 
1983;11(6):347– 355.
 20. Faulks D, Hennequin M, Albecker- Grappe S, Manière MC, 
Tardieu C, Berthet A, et al. Sedation with 50% nitrous oxide/ 
oxygen for outpatient dental treatment in individuals with 
intellectual disability. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007;49(8):621– 625.
 
 
 
76
Sedation
 21. Zier JL, Liu M. Safety of high- concentration nitrous oxide by 
nasal mask for pediatric procedural sedation: experience with 
7802 cases. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2011;27(12):1107– 1112.
 22. Burnweit C, Diana- Zerpa JA, Nahmad MH, Lankau CA, 
Weinberger M, Malvezzi L, et al. Nitrous oxide analgesia for 
minor pediatric surgical procedures: an effective alternative to 
conscious sedation? J Pediatr Surg. 2004;39(3):495– 499.
 23. Seith RW, Theophilos T, Babl FE. Intranasal fentanyl and high- 
concentration inhaled nitrous oxide for procedural sedation: a 
prospective observational pilot study of adverse events and depth 
of sedation. Acad Emerg Med. 2012;19(1):31– 36.
 24. Tobias JD. Dexmedetomidine and ketamine: an effective 
alternative for procedural sedation? Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2012;13(4):423– 427.
 25. Dental Faculties of the Royal Colleges of Surgeons and the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists. Standards for conscious sedation in the 
provision of dental care: report of the Intercollegiate Advisory 
Committee for Sedation in Dentistry. 2015. https:// www.rcs eng.
ac.uk/ den tal- facult ies/ fds/ publi cati ons- gui deli nes/ standa rds- for- 
consci ous- sedat ion- in- the- provis ion- of- den tal- care- and- accred 
itat ion/ 
 26. Babenco HD, Conard PF, Gross JB. The pharmacodynamic effect 
of a remifentanil bolus on ventilatory control. Anesthesiology. 
2000;92(2):393– 398.
 27. Barker N, Lim J, Amari E, Malherbe S, Ansermino JM. 
Relationship between age and spontaneous ventilation 
during intravenous anesthesia in children. Pediatr Anesth. 
2007;17(10):948– 955.
 28. Hinkelbein J, Lamperti M, Akeson J, Santos J, Costa J, De Robertis 
E, et al. European Society of Anaesthesiology and European 
Board of Anaesthesiology guidelines for procedural sedation and 
analgesia in adults. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2018;35(1):6– 24.
 29. Ng J- M, Kong C- F, Nyam D. Patient- controlled sedation with 
propofol for colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54(1):8– 13.
 30. Liu Y, Li M, Yang D, Zhang X, Wu A, Yao S, et al. Closed- loop 
control better than open- loop control of profofol TCI guided 
by BIS: a randomized, controlled, multicenter clinical trial to 
evaluate the CONCERT- CL closed- loop system. PLoS One. 
2015;10(4):e0123862.
 31. Adewumi A, Kays DW. Stainless steel crown aspiration during 
sedation in pediatric dentistry. J Pediatr Dent. 2008;30(1):59– 62.
 32. Seeff LC, Richards TB, Shapiro JA, Nadel MR, Manninen DL, 
Given LS, et al. How many endoscopies are performed for 
colorectal cancer screening? Results from CDC’s survey of 
endoscopic capacity. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(6):1670– 1677.
 33. Clarke AC, Chiragakis L, Hillman LC, Kaye GL. Sedation for 
endoscopy: the safe use of propofol by general practitioner 
sedationists. Med J Aust. 2002;176(4):159– 161.
 34. South West Anaesthetic Research Matrix (SWARM). Sedation 
practice in six acute hospitals— a snapshot survey. Anaesthesia. 
2015;70(4):407– 415.
 35. Sury M, Bullock I, Rabar S, DeMott KJB. Sedation for 
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in children and young 
people: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2010;341:c6819.
 36. Disma N, Thomas M, Afshari A, Veyckemans F, De Hert S. 
Clear fluids fasting for elective paediatric anaesthesia: the 
European Society of Anaesthesiology consensus statement. Eur J 
Anaesthesiol. 2019;36(3):173– 174.
 37. Practice guidelines for moderate procedural sedation 
and analgesia 2018: a report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Moderate Procedural 
Sedation and Analgesia, the American Association of Oral 
and Maxillofacial Surgeons, American College of Radiology, 
American Dental Association, American Society of Dentist 
Anesthesiologists, and Society of Interventional Radiology. 
Anesthesiology. 2018;128(3):437– 479.
 38. Sheahan C, Mathews D. Monitoring and delivery of sedation. Br J 
Anaesth. 2014;113 Suppl 2:ii37– ii47.
 39. Patel A, Nouraei S. Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation 
ventilatory exchange (THRIVE): a physiological method 
of increasing apnoea time in patients with difficult airways. 
Anaesthesia. 2015;70(3):323– 329.
7
Hypotensive anaesthesia
Kimberley Hodge, Patrick A. Ward, and Michael G. Irwin
Introduction
The intentional lowering of a patient’s blood pressure under anaes-
thesia is a technique known as ‘hypotensive anaesthesia’, or con-
trolled or deliberate hypotension. It can be utilized for:
 • Improving visualization of the surgical field and surgical accuracy 
(better identification of pathological tissue, enabling greater pre-
cision of tumour or infective foci excision).
 • Reducing blood loss and blood transfusion requirements.
 • Decreasing surgical time (reducing the negative sequelae associ-
ated with prolonged procedures).
 • Reducing reactionary bleeding, postoperative bleeding and 
haematoma formation.
Lowering the systemic blood pressure may cause organ ischaemia 
if there is inadequate blood flow, therefore deliberate hypotension 
should only be employed when absolutely necessary, for the min-
imum duration possible, and appropriate patient selection is crucial.
Background
Despite the concept of deliberate hypotension for surgery being pro-
posed by Cushing in 1917,1 the first documented use of the technique 
was in the 1940s. Benign olfactory groove meningiomas were noted 
to be difficult to resect due to the tumours’ relative inaccessibility and 
high vascularity, with blood vessels located within the base of the 
skull, inferior to the tumour. It was observed by Gardner that during 
the first hour or so of the procedure, resection was painstakingly 
tedious and taxing. Once the patient had lost a substantial amount 
of blood and became hypotensive, the surgery became much easier, 
and faster to complete. He hypothesized that preoperative blood- 
letting via arteriotomy may be of use, optimizing surgical conditions 
at the onset of the operation, rather than waiting for haemorrhage 
to result in hypotension.2 As the physiological response to blood- 
letting involves profound vasoconstriction, a brachial plexus block 
was performed first to prevent radial artery constriction, and the 
blood was then returned to the patient postoperatively.3 Blood- 
letting was abandoned shortly afterwards when the patients were 
noted to suffer from complications such as hypoxaemia, acidosis, 
irreversible shock, and excessive heparinization.1
During a similar epoch, total spinal anaesthesia, with resultant 
peripheral vasodilatation (and redistribution of blood volume), 
was also utilized to reduce blood loss in the operative field.3 This 
technique was abandoned after a brief period, with the introduc-
tion of newer pharmacological agents (halothane, nitrous oxide, and 
vasodilatory drugs). The profound hypotensive effects of halothane 
were difficult to reverse quickly and so safer, more titratable alter-
natives were sought. Sodium nitroprusside and glyceryl trinitrate 
were found to be effective and remained the most popular pharma-
cological choices for many years.
Physiology
Autoregulation
Blood pressure varies naturally throughout the day and it is essential 
that flow to an organ is maintained despite these pressure fluctu-
ations. The intrinsic ability of an organ (independent of neuronal 
or humoral control) to maintain flow despite changes in perfusion 
pressure is known as autoregulation. There is a window within which 
autoregulatory mechanisms operate effectively, thought to exist 
within a mean arterial pressure (MAP) range of 50– 150 mmHg, but 
there is a huge degree of individual variability (affected by age, sex, 
and pre- existing disease such as hypertension, wherein the MAP 
will be higher). The efficacy of autoregulation depends upon the spe-
cific organ— the heart, brain, spinal cord, and kidneys are particu-
larly proficient autoregulators, whereas skeletal muscle circulations 
are moderately effective, and cutaneous and splanchnic circulations 
have barely any autoregulatory capacity.4 There are two main in-
trinsic autoregulatory mechanisms:
 • Myogenic autoregulation: as arteriolar pressure increases, it causes 
more stretch within the vascular wall. A compensatory contrac-
tion occurs, which increases vascular resistance and produces a 
localized reduction in blood flow.
 • Metabolic autoregulation: increased metabolic activity leads to an 
increased release of vasodilatory mediators such as adenosine, 
 
 
 
 
 
78
Hypotensive anaesthesia
nitric oxide, and hydrogen ions. This causes local arteriolar vaso-
dilatation and therefore increased flow.5
Blood pressure regulation is complex and depends upon factors 
such as cardiac output, peripheral resistance, renal function, venous 
return, and blood volume.6 Autoregulatory mechanisms are inef-
fective at low blood pressures (such as those that may be obtained 
under hypotensive anaesthesia) which may result in myocardial and 
cerebral ischaemia, renal injury, or death. When operating at blood 
pressures outside of those controlled by autoregulatory mechan-
isms, flow is dependent solely upon the perfusion pressure. If a pa-
tient is undergoing hypotensive anaesthesia, with the MAP outside 
the autoregulatory range, then flow may be insufficient for adequate 
organ perfusion. Currently, it is not possible to predict an individual 
patient’s unique autoregulatory range, so it is better to err on the side 
of caution.
It is known that organ injury severity depends upon both the 
magnitude of perioperative hypotension and its duration.7 While 
there is no conclusive evidence of an absolute systolic blood pres-
sure value below which the risks become unacceptably high, there 
is evidence that <80 mmHg for >10 minutes puts the patient at in-
creased risk of organ injury.8 This threshold value will be higher in 
those with pre- existing cardiovascular disease. Recent observational 
studies suggest that MAP <55– 65 mmHg for a prolonged period is 
particularly dangerous. The deeper and longer the patient’s exposure 
to hypotension, the risk of myocardial injury after non- cardiac sur-
gery and acute kidney injury increases exponentially.9,10
Indications
Potential benefits of hypotensive anaesthesia such as optimization of 
the surgical field, reduction in allogeneic transfusion requirements, 
and a possible reduction in operating time must be carefully weighed 
against the above- mentioned potentially devastating complications. 
Better knowledge of these adverse effects has made it harder to jus-
tify induction of significant hypotension in oromaxillofacial surgery, 
although bleeding in certain procedures can be challenging to con-
trol. This is not only related to high vascularity, but because bleeding 
points tend to be from intrabony capillaries which are more difficult 
to stop surgically than from more accessible bleeding sites.11 The Le 
Fort I maxillary osteotomy, in particular, exemplifies these issues. 
Bleeding occurs when osteotomy cuts are made in the maxilla, and 
when the maxilla is down- fractured as this is especially stimulating. 
Bleeding cannot be controlled surgically until the down- fracture 
is completed. If systemic blood pressure is not reduced, significant 
bleeding can occur from branches of the maxillary artery, pterygoid, 
and greater palatine veins.
There is no consensus as to what degree of hypotension consti-
tutes hypotensive anaesthesia. Definitions include reducing the sys-
tolic blood pressure to 80– 90 mmHg, the MAP to 50– 65 mmHg, or 
a 30% reduction in baseline MAP.12
Contraindications
Hypotensive anaesthesia, while providing potential benefit sur-
gically, is most commonly a non- essential technique which does 
have the potential to cause serious harm to the patient. It is crit-
ical, therefore, that the patient undergoes a thorough preoperative 
physiological assessment to determine applicability and risk of com-
plications. This is even more pertinent when faced with the older 
patient and those with comorbidities.
Relative contraindications include:
 • Coronary and carotid atherosclerosis.
 • Hypovolaemia.
 • Renal impairment.
 • Uncontrolled hypertension.
 • Hepatic impairment.
 • Severe anaemia and haemoglobinopathies (while there is little 
evidence for what constitutes a ‘safe’ haemoglobin to perform 
hypotensive anaesthesia, it would be prudent for the patient to 
have a haemoglobin concentration of at least 90 g/ L, and higher 
than this if they have comorbidities).
Historically, it was felt that the risk of harm with hypotensive anaes-
thetic techniques, while possible, was slight. However, there is now 
a considerable body of research evidence which demonstrates more 
clearly that this is simply not the case. It is now apparent that hypo-
tension during anaesthesia can detrimentally affect patients’ postop-
erative outcome, so it follows that deliberate hypotensive anaesthesia 
must be used sparingly. Wesselink et al undertook a systematic re-
view examining adverse postoperative outcomes after non- cardiac 
surgery in patients who had experienced unintended hypotension 
under anaesthesia— even if this was for a short duration (<1 mi-
nute).8 As the authors themselves attested, there were several limi-
tations in the review: the studies included disparate population 
groups, there was no consensus on how to determine the blood 
pressure value that constituted hypotension, and there were incon-
sistent definitions of what represented an adverse postoperative 
outcome. Nevertheless, they concluded that a MAP <80 mmHg for 
≥10 minutes could result in organ injury. Potential organ dysfunc-
tion included acute kidney injury, myocardial injury or infarction, 
stroke, and delirium. The Perioperative Quality Initiative, in 2019, 
released a consensus statement about perioperative hypotension in 
adults. The key message when considering hypotensive anaesthesia 
was as follows: ‘Intraoperative mean arterial blood pressures below 
60– 70 mmHg are associated with myocardial injury, acute kidney 
injury, and death. Systolic arterial pressures below 100 mmHg are 
associated with myocardial injury and death. Injury is a function of 
hypotension severity and duration.’7 This statement has important 
clinical and medicolegal implications.
Deliberate or controlled hypotension implies that a lowering 
of the blood pressure is the only haemodynamic parameter being 
manipulated, with all other variables remaining constant. This, of 
course, is not the case. All the pharmacological agents and all the 
non- pharmacological methods, which will be discussed in detail 
later (controlled ventilation, positive end expiratory pressure, head- 
up tilt, etc.), have other physiological effects aside from lowering 
systemic blood pressure— many of which are difficult or impossible 
to directly measure. Systemic blood pressure is readily measurable 
(invasively or non- invasively), and, therefore, remains the principal 
monitoring tool (and target for adjustment), but it must be remem-
bered that this does not fully reflect the myriad of other physiological 
changes and effects that may be occurring in various organ systems.
 
 
79
Pharmacological techniques for hypotensive anaesthesia
It is also worth noting that while the evidence supporting main-
tenance of ‘normotension’ in anaesthetic literature is ever increasing, 
there is relatively little published evidence supporting the technique 
of deliberate hypotension in the surgical literature (most publica-
tions advocating the technique are from anaesthetic journals). One 
might expect more vociferous support from surgeons for a tech-
nique specifically intended to improve surgical operating condi-
tions and outcome. In many cases, surgeons may feel that there is 
not the necessity for deliberate hypotension. In other cases, rather 
than hypotensive anaesthesia, avoiding uncontrolled hypertension 
during critical phases of surgery may be more in accordance with 
their requirements.
Conduct of deliberate hypotensive anaesthesia
The practice of hypotensive anaesthesia should never be considered 
routine. The decision to employ such a technique must be discussed 
between the anaesthetist and surgeon preoperatively for every indi-
vidual patient, and it must be their shared opinion that the patient 
will derive significant benefit to warrant the technique for that par-
ticular operation. The surgeon must be sufficiently experienced to 
take advantage of the improved operating conditions, the anaesthe-
tist should be familiar with the technique, and all parties, including 
the patient, should be fully aware of the safety issues. The ultimate 
decision for the appropriateness of the technique lies with the an-
aesthetist, although mutual appreciation of each other’s roles and 
priorities should engender collaborative decision- making. This co-
operation and understanding is also necessary when the technique 
must be abandoned if there is evidence of compromised organ per-
fusion (e.g. electrocardiogram changes). In order to deliver hypo-
tensive anaesthesia as safely and effectively as possible, there are 
several concepts to contemplate and some general principles that 
should be followed:
Firstly, the question of what constitutes a safe level of blood pres-
sure must be considered. Aside from stating that the blood pressure 
must be sufficient to maintain organ perfusion (without being able to 
actually determine this), and understanding the pathophysiological 
changes that occur in different organ systems at low perfusion pres-
sures (as described earlier), it is important to acknowledge that there 
is no fixed blood pressure value that can be considered safe for all 
patients— thus, every patient must be treated individually. The tech-
nique should only be considered for procedures where the potential 
benefits are most apparent— for example, maxillary osteotomy or 
temporomandibular joint replacement, where blood loss can be sub-
stantial and may significantly impair the operative field. Awareness 
of the patient’s age, pre- existing comorbidities (especially coronary, 
renal, and cerebrovascular), and their preoperative, ‘normal’ blood 
pressure is important. There remains considerable debate as to how 
this baseline blood pressure should be determined— whether this 
should occur in the community over a defined period of time, at the 
preoperative assessment clinic, preoperatively on the ward, or im-
mediately prior to induction of anaesthesia, and how many measure-
ments are necessary to determine a baseline value with any degree 
of reliability are contentious issues. Patients with ischaemic heart 
disease, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, renal dysfunction, 
or diabetes are generally considered not suitable for hypotensive 
anaesthesia, although a modest reduction in blood pressure is likely 
to be safe.
Secondly, the question of what level of hypotension is necessary to 
control bleeding must be considered. Very commonly, an insignifi-
cant or ineffective reduction in systemic blood pressure is described 
as hypotensive anaesthesia, without causing any noticeable effects 
on capillary or arteriolar bleeding. The surgeon has an unrivalled 
view of the operative field, and can detect changes in blood pres-
sure before it is reflected by the intermittent non- invasive reading, 
so they must provide constant feedback to assist the anaesthetist in 
achieving a clinically meaningful effect from blood pressure reduc-
tion (within predefined safe limits). Given the associated potential 
morbidity already discussed, only a moderate degree of controlled 
hypotension can be advocated, and this should be restricted to dis-
creet periods of maximal blood loss and surgical stimulus only. Thus, 
the surgeon must also give sufficient warning prior to undertaking 
stages of the surgical procedure associated with high bleeding risk 
(e.g. maxillary down- fracture).
Careful patient monitoring is critical. Electrocardiography, with 
ST- segment analysis, is mandatory, and arterial blood pressure 
monitoring should be considered— this not only can facilitate im-
mediate titration of blood pressure but can also enable arterial blood 
gas monitoring to track lactate and base excess levels, as surrogates 
of end- organ perfusion. Temperature monitoring is important as 
vasodilator hypotensive agents will facilitate greater intraoperative 
heat loss. Fluid balance and blood loss must be carefully monitored, 
as many of the drugs utilized for hypotensive anaesthesia will im-
pair the normal physiological responses to bleeding. Meticulous 
care should be taken with patient positioning, as pressure areas are 
at particular risk during hypotensive anaesthesia. This includes the 
positioning of temperature probes, oxygen saturation probes and, 
in particular, the passive positioning of the nasotracheal tube at the 
nares (high risk for tissue necrosis).
It is crucial that hypotensive anaesthesia is discontinued well be-
fore completion of surgery, otherwise haemostasis cannot be reliably 
achieved. The surgeon must also be fastidious with coagulating any 
bleeding points prior to wound closure, as what may appear as just 
capillary ooze during a period of hypotensive anaesthesia may in 
fact represent bleeding from a larger blood vessel, that may bleed 
significantly on restoration of normotension.
Finally, when undertaking anaesthesia where deliberate hypo-
tension is planned, anaesthetists should specifically inform 
patients preoperatively. Patients should be made aware of the in-
dications, potential risks, benefits, and alternatives in accordance 
with the 2015 Montgomery Ruling, given that a reasonable patient 
is likely to attach material significance to the risks associated with 
the technique.
Pharmacological techniques for hypotensive 
anaesthesia
There are a number of drugs that can be utilized to induce hypo-
tension. Historically, sodium nitroprusside, glyceryl trinitrate, 
and beta- and alpha- blockers were the preferred agents but newer 
agents may confer greater ease of delivery and a more favourable 
side effect profile.
 
 
 
80
Hypotensive anaesthesia
Beta- blockers
Beta- adrenergic blocking agents lower blood pressure through 
negative inotropic and chronotropic actions. There are three 
beta receptors— β1, β2, and β3. β1 receptors are found in the heart 
and kidneys, β2 in vascular smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, and 
the lungs, whereas β3 are in adipose tissue. This is relevant when 
considering which beta- blocker to select to deliver hypotensive 
anaesthesia.
Labetalol is a non- selective beta- blocker, which also selectively 
antagonizes α1- adrenergic receptors, with the beta- blocking ef-
fects being seven times more pronounced than the effects on α1- 
adrenergic receptors. The α1- adrenoreceptor antagonism leads to 
vasodilatation and decreased vascular resistance. It is inexpensive 
and can be administered as an intravenous bolus or infusion, up to 
approximately 160 mg/ hr. Time of onset of activity varies between 
5 and 30 minutes, effects can be unpredictable, and its mean dur-
ation of action of 50 minutes can make titration difficult. It has a 
slower onset and longer duration of action than other intravenous 
beta- blockers. Side effects include bronchoconstriction and heart 
failure in high doses.
Esmolol is reasonably cardioselective for β1 receptors, has a quick 
onset of action (approximately 1 minute), and is metabolized by 
plasma esterases so has a short duration of action (approximately 10 
minutes) making it easy to titrate. It is more expensive than labetalol 
and requires a syringe driver for administration (infusion rates be-
tween 50 and 200 mcg/ kg/ min). A risk of bronchoconstriction only 
occurs at high doses.
Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine is a potent centrally acting, highly selective α2- 
adrenoceptor agonist which has sedative, analgesic, and anxiolytic 
properties. While not commonly used in the UK (due to its expense 
and lack of availability), it has been widely adopted throughout the 
rest of Europe, Asia, and the US, particularly in the critical care set-
ting as a second- line sedative agent. It is typically administered with 
a 1 mcg/ kg loading dose, and then infused at a rate of 0.2– 0.7 mcg/ 
kg/ hr. The reduction in sympathetic activity may confer improved 
surgical field conditions when compared with agents such as so-
dium nitroprusside.13 Its sedative and analgesic properties allow a 
reduction in co- administered anaesthetic agents (by 20– 50%) and 
opioids, and it can facilitate a smooth tracheal extubation and emer-
gence without respiratory depression— of particular benefit in the 
oromaxillofacial surgical patient. There is, however, the potential for 
patients to also be unduly sedated at emergence and the infusion 
should be stopped 30– 60 minutes before emergence when patients 
have a difficult airway.
Magnesium
Magnesium is an incredibly versatile ion, impacting many physio-
logical systems. It has direct effects upon the myocardium and vas-
cular smooth muscle, directly blocks catecholamine receptors, and 
inhibits catecholamine release from the adrenal medulla among 
many other effects.14 When utilized for the purposes of hypotensive 
anaesthesia, a bolus of approximately 40 mg/ kg is administered, fol-
lowed by a continuous infusion of 15 mg/ kg/ hr.15 Onset of action can 
be slow, and the effects can be difficult to titrate; however, it provides 
the additional benefits of being a reliable analgesic (N- methyl- d- 
aspartate (NMDA) antagonism), reducing anaesthetic requirements 
and reducing postoperative nausea and vomiting and shivering. 
While magnesium is generally safe, hypermagnesaemia can result 
in complications such as nausea and vomiting, but also potentially 
life- threatening effects, including cardiorespiratory arrest with very 
high serum concentrations. Rather more commonly, it potentiates 
non- depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, and quantitative 
neuromuscular monitoring is important.
Remifentanil
Analgesia for oromaxillofacial surgery presents a unique pharma-
cological challenge as it needs to be titrated according to rapidly 
changing surgical stimuli. Remifentanil specifically addresses 
this issue, being fast acting, potent, and with a short half- life. It 
is a mu opioid agonist that reaches peak effect within 1– 3 min-
utes,16 and has a context insensitive half- time of 3– 5 minutes as it 
undergoes rapid ester hydrolysis by non- specific plasma and tissue 
esterases, making it easy to titrate irrespective of organ function. 
Remifentanil is generally administered as an intravenous infusion, 
usually at a rate of 0.1– 0.35 mcg/ kg/ min or 3– 7 ng/ mL using target- 
controlled infusion, with a predictable onset and offset. Opioids 
are not negatively inotropic but can depress the vasomotor centre 
causing bradycardia and hypotension. High doses can induce chest 
wall rigidity, tolerance, and (rarely) hyperalgesia. Remifentanil is 
undoubtedly well suited to oromaxillofacial surgery as a rapidly 
titratable analgesic, conferring haemodynamic stability despite in-
tense surgical stimulus.
Propofol
Propofol is an easily titrated intravenous anaesthetic agent. It is a 
phenol derivative metabolized in the liver which is extensively 
and rapidly redistributed making it suitable for infusion. Propofol 
can induce hypotension without a compensatory increase in heart 
rate, by causing vasodilatation and via a negative inotropic effect. 
However, it is not safe or appropriate to use excessive doses of an 
anaesthetic agent to induce hypotension.
Inhalational anaesthetic agents
All inhalational agents lower blood pressure in a dose- dependent 
manner by reducing the systemic vascular resistance (with some 
additional effects on myocardial contractility and cardiac output 
with some agents). However, as with propofol, it is not safe or appro-
priate to use excessive doses of an anaesthetic agent for the purposes 
of deliberate hypotension and, while commonly used in the past, 
this cannot be condoned nowadays.
Other pharmacological agents
While the above- discussed drugs are those commonly used in 
modern anaesthetic practice, there are other agents utilized to in-
duce intraoperative hypotension (Table 7.1), particularly where re-
sources may be scarce.
Other, very rarely used drugs include adenosine, and ganglion- 
blocking agents such as trimetaphan. Premedication with oral 
angiotensin- converting enzyme inhibitors has also been tried, but 
this is unconventional, impractical, and unpredictable.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81
Pharmacological techniques for hypotensive anaesthesia
Table 7.1 Properties of pharmacological agents less commonly used to induce intraoperative hypotension
Drug
Advantage
Disadvantage
Dose
Oral clonidine
Resource sparing
Analgesic
Opioid sparing
Not easily titratable
Postoperative sedation
300 mcg 1.5 hr preoperatively 
(adults)
Intravenous clonidine
Resource sparing
Analgesic
Opioid sparing
Less titratable
Rebound hypertension
Postoperative sedation
3 mcg/ kg 30 min preoperatively
Calcium channel antagonists
Titratable, with short half- life
Bolus or infusion
Reflex tachycardia
IV nicardipine 1– 4 mcg/ kg/ min
Glyceryl trinitrate infusion
Rapid onset
Not as effective at lowering blood pressure as 
sodium nitroprusside
Tachyphylaxis
10– 400 mcg/ min
Sodium nitroprusside
Rapid onset
Very potent
Titratable
Rate- dependent cyanide toxicity
Needs protection from sunlight
Metabolic acidosis
Tachyphylaxis
Reflex tachycardia, often requires small dose of 
beta- blocker
Rebound hypertension
Requires arterial line and hourly blood gas 
measurement for cyanide toxicity (acidosis)
0.5– 0.6 mcg/ kg/ min
(with normal renal function)
Table 7.2 Non- pharmacological techniques to minimize blood loss
Method
Rationale
Disadvantages
Coagulation optimization
Ensure patient’s intrinsic ability to clot is not impaired:
• Avoid acidosis
• Maintain normothermia
• Ensure normocalcaemia
• Judicious fluid administration to avoid dilutional 
coagulopathy
Nil
Haemostatic sealants
Varied modes of action— mechanical, flowable, fibrin/ 
synthetic sealants, and thrombins17
Useful for difficult- to- access areas
Availability, cost
Harmonic scalpel
Ultrasonic device that coagulates while cutting through 
tissues. Utilizes the principle of thermal generation
Only coagulates as it cuts
Head- up positioning
(reverse Trendelenburg)
Decreases venous congestion by 2 mmHg for each 2.5 cm 
of vertical height above the heart
Risk of air embolus (especially if hypotensive)
Laser surgery
‘Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.’ 
Coagulates blood vessels, sterilizes the target area, and 
eliminates postoperative sutures
Potential for iatrogenic damage due to lack of tactile feedback
Regional nerve blocks, such as 
trigeminal
Decreases physiological stress response to surgery
Familiarity with technique is essential as regional blocks for 
oromaxillofacial surgery are challenging
Risk of generic block complications— including local 
anaesthetic toxicity
Surgical draping
Loosely secure the drapes, to prevent venous congestion if 
applied too tightly
Nil
Tranexamic acid (intravenous  
and topical)
Antifibrinolytic agent
Consider for all surgeries where blood loss >500 mL
Use intravenously with caution in thromboembolic disease
Transoral robotic surgery
Causes reduction in tissue trauma, and increased surgical 
accuracy
Familiarity with the equipment is essential; limited to specialist 
centres. Access to the airway in event of an emergency is 
severely compromised
Vasoconstrictors (local 
application)
Dilute adrenaline applied topically or in combination with 
local anaesthetics
Caution must be taken not to exceed the maximum dose of 
adrenaline
Systemic absorption of adrenaline can precipitate unwanted 
cardiovascular sequelae in patients with pre- existing cardiac 
disease, or the associated rise in blood pressure and heart 
rate can be misinterpreted as a light plane of anaesthesia
Ventilatory strategies
Controlled positive pressure ventilation, maintain 
normocapnia
If long inspiratory times are used, or excessive positive end- 
expiratory pressure, intrathoracic pressure may rise impeding 
venous return
82
Hypotensive anaesthesia
Non- pharmacological techniques to minimize 
blood loss
While hypotensive anaesthesia is one way to minimize blood loss for 
oromaxillofacial surgery, there are extremely important techniques 
that should be used first or in conjunction with these (Table 7.2).
Conclusion
The role of hypotensive anaesthesia in oromaxillofacial surgery is 
controversial. While effectively delivered hypotension may help im-
prove operative field conditions, minimize blood loss (and transfu-
sion requirements), and reduce operating time, in doing so, perfusion 
may be compromised to important organ systems, resulting in sig-
nificant morbidity. The anaesthetist, surgeon, and patient must fully 
understand the implications. Patient selection is key, along with ad-
equate monitoring and constant vigilance. Hypotensive anaesthesia 
should never be considered or conducted as routine practice, and 
the potential risks and benefits specific to each individual patient 
should be fully contemplated and discussed before employing this 
technique.
REFERENCES
 1. Corber Z, Salem R, Crystal G, Fahmy R. Deliberate hypotension: a 
historical perspective. In: Proceedings of the 2010 Annual Meeting 
of the American Society Anesthesiologists, San Diego, 2010. 
Abstract A568.
 2. Gardner WJ. The control of bleeding during operation by induced 
hypotension. J Am Med Assoc. 1946;132(10):572– 574.
 3. Adams AP. Techniques of vascular control for deliberate 
hypotension during anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 1975;47(7):777– 792.
 4. Meng L, Wang Y, Zhang L, McDonagh DL. Heterogeneity and 
variability in pressure autoregulation of organ blood flow: lessons 
learned over 100+ years. Crit Care Med. 2019;47(3):436– 448.
 5. Barrett K, Barman S, Boitano S, Heddwen B. Cardiovascular 
regulatory mechanisms. In: Ganong’s Review of Medical Physiology, 
23rd ed., p. 563. New York: McGraw- Hill; 2010.
 6. El- Ghazali SK, Pandit JJ. Pre- incision hypotension and the 
association with postoperative acute kidney injury— an 
opportunity to improve peri- operative outcomes? Anaesthesia. 
2019;74(12):1611– 1614.
 7. Sessler DI, Bloomstone JA, Aronson S, Berry C, Gan TJ, Kellum 
JA, et al. Perioperative Quality Initiative consensus statement 
on intraoperative blood pressure, risk and outcomes for elective 
surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2019;122(5):563– 574.
 8. Wesselink EM, Kappen TH, Torn HM, Slooter AJC, van Klei WA. 
Intraoperative hypotension and the risk of postoperative adverse 
outcomes: a systematic review. Br J Anaesth. 2018;121(4):706– 721.
 9. Salmasi V, Maheshwari K, Yang D, Mascha EJ, Singh A, Sessler 
DI, et al. Relationship between intraoperative hypotension, 
defined by either reduction from baseline or absolute thresholds, 
and acute kidney and myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery. 
Anesthesiology. 2017;126(1):47– 62.
 10. Monk TG, Bronsert MR, Henderson WG, Mangione 
MP, Sum- Ping ST, Bentt DR, et al. Association between 
intraoperative hypotension and hypertension and 30- day 
postoperative mortality in noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology. 
2015;123(2):307– 319.
 11. Praveen K, Narayanan V, Muthusekhar MR, Baig MF. 
Hypotensive anaesthesia and blood loss in orthognathic 
surgery: a clinical study. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2001;39(2):138– 140.
 12. Degoute C- S. Controlled hypotension. Drugs. 
2007;67(7):1053– 1076.
 13. El- Kalla RS, El Mourad MB. Deliberate hypotensive anesthesia 
during maxillofacial surgery: a comparative study between 
dexmedetomidine and sodium nitroprusside. Ain- Shams J 
Anaesthesiol. 2016;9(2):201.
 14. Watson VF, Vaughan RS. Magnesium and the anaesthetist. Cont 
Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2001;1(1):16– 20.
 15. Elsharnouby N, Elsharnouby M. Magnesium sulphate 
as a technique of hypotensive anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 
2006;96(6):727– 731.
 16. Scarth E, Smith S. Remifentanil. In: Drugs in Anaesthesia and 
Intensive Care, 5th ed., pp. 338– 341 Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; 2016.
 17. Forcillo J, Perrault LP. Armentarium of topical hemostatic 
products in cardiovascular surgery: an update. Transfus Apher 
Sci. 2014;50(1):26– 31.
8
Dental anaesthesia
Jennifer Gosling and John Myatt
Introduction
Dental anaesthesia is a challenging area of anaesthetic practice. 
The majority of dental surgery is carried out under local anaes-
thesia, with or without sedation. Patients who require general an-
aesthesia to facilitate their dental surgery often have additional 
requirements, including paediatric or adult patients presenting 
with learning difficulties, medical comorbidities, or severe anxiety. 
Operations involve a ‘shared airway’, and are predominantly day 
case procedures, with a high turnover of cases. Dental anaesthesia 
continues to evolve as a subspecialty, with several key develop-
ments in recent years.
Background and history
Once delivered mainly in the community, dental anaesthesia is now 
carried out exclusively in the hospital environment in the UK. These 
restrictions are intended to improve patient safety.
Dentistry and anaesthesia are inextricably linked, with the first 
recorded inhalational general anaesthetic using nitrous oxide being 
undertaken for a dental extraction.1 After an initial early reliance 
upon nitrous oxide, different combinations of hypnotics and seda-
tives were gradually introduced. By the late twentieth century, dental 
anaesthesia was provided in both community dental surgeries and 
hospitals. The skills and experience of those providing anaesthesia 
varied widely and many dentists acted as both operator and anaes-
thetist. Provision of monitoring and resuscitation equipment was 
similarly variable, particularly in the community setting. During the 
1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, a number of deaths occurred as a result of 
unsafe anaesthesia or excessive sedation, leading to a series of re-
commendations for the conduct of dental anaesthesia.2– 4 Since 2002, 
it has been illegal in England for general anaesthesia to be carried 
out for dental surgery, unless in a hospital setting, administered by 
an appropriately trained anaesthetist.5 Nevertheless, sedation is still 
permitted in dental surgeries, including inhalational sedation with 
nitrous oxide, as well as intravenous sedation with benzodiazepines, 
opioids, and, increasingly, propofol. Multidisciplinary standards in-
form the administration of sedation for dentistry, as well as the re-
sources and training that underpin its practice.6,7 Concepts and the 
practice of sedation are discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
Current activity
Substantial numbers of anaesthetics are given for dental procedures, 
for a variety of indications, with many patients having repeat attend-
ances. Poor oral health remains a significant public health issue, 
even in well- developed countries. In 2015– 2016, 40% of children 
in England had no dental check- up despite being entitled to free 
treatment,8 and in 2017– 2018, dental caries was the most common 
reason for hospital admission in children aged 5– 9 years.9 Dental 
decay is associated with significant complications, including peri-
odontitis, abscess formation, and uncommonly systemic sepsis, as 
well as contributing to poor feeding and weight gain. Data from the 
Royal College of Anaesthetists fifth National Audit Project reported 
an annual anaesthetic caseload of 110,600 dental cases10; of these, 
60% were children (<16 years), 38.5% adults (16– 65 years), and 1.5% 
the elderly (>65 years) with the overwhelming majority of patients 
undergoing general anaesthesia as a day case procedure.10 In Wales, 
1 in 86 children undergo general anaesthesia for dental work.11 Of 
those children presenting for general anaesthesia, approximately 3% 
will have repeated anaesthetics, a third of whom have learning diffi-
culties or physical comorbidities.12
Indications for general anaesthesia for dental surgery include:
 • Children.
 • Patients with learning difficulties.
 • Patients with needle phobia.
 • Complex reconstructive procedures.
 • Dental extractions to facilitate surgical access for complex 
oromaxillofacial procedures.
The contribution of anaesthetists in facilitating dental procedures 
in these patients is now reflected by the specific references to dental 
anaesthesia in competency- based anaesthetic curricula, with con-
siderable overlap in the training competencies required for sedation, 
paediatrics, and day surgery.13,14
The future
There is a projected decline in the numbers of registered dental prac-
titioners specializing in ‘special care dentistry’,15 which may result 
in increased referrals to secondary care for adult patients with add-
itional needs. There may also be increasing numbers of older patients 
with cognitive impairment requiring anaesthetic input for dentistry 
84
Dental anaesthesia
in the future. While some of the patients presenting for dental sur-
gery may have complex needs, syndromes, or difficult airways, by far 
the majority of dental surgery requiring general anaesthesia will be 
undertaken electively, such that thorough preoperative assessment, 
optimization of any medical conditions, and patient consent should 
all be undertaken during the lead time. Personalized and patient- 
centred care is paramount in managing these patient groups, par-
ticularly given the high number of re- attendances.11,16
Preoperative assessment
Patients requiring anaesthesia for dental surgery should receive the 
same standard of preoperative assessment as other patients, recog-
nizing that the reasons they require general anaesthesia may also 
make preoperative assessment challenging.29
History
Patients may find it difficult to give a comprehensive history, ei-
ther because of cognitive problems or communication difficulties. 
Collateral history can be obtained from parents or carers, patient 
notes, general practitioners (GPs), or community paediatricians. 
Electronic record- keeping may assist with this, and any previous an-
aesthetic charts should be reviewed. The reason for referral should 
be determined, together with the source of the referral. A full anaes-
thetic history should be taken, including details of comorbidities, 
previous anaesthetics, allergies, and current medication.
Rare unifying syndromes may be encountered and, if necessary, 
specific review of the possible complications should be carried out. 
Many syndromes are well recognized for their association with po-
tentially difficult airway management, including Down syndrome, 
the Pierre Robin sequence, and Treacher Collins syndrome.
Screening questions should determine the presence and severity 
of obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome, any cardiac disease, or epi-
lepsy. Timings of any regular medication should be noted, with the 
plan to maintain the normal regimen as far as possible.
Patients with learning difficulties or mental health issues may be 
taking psychotropic medications that have the potential to interact 
with anaesthetic drugs. Noradrenaline selective reuptake inhibitors 
and monoamine oxidase inhibitors limit the use of indirect sym-
pathomimetics, and anticonvulsant medications which interact with 
cytochrome P450 enzymes.
If necessary, a medication switch or washout may be appropriate. 
This should be a joint decision in conjunction with the patient, 
dental surgeon, GP, and psychiatrist.
Examination and investigations
Extensive examination may not be possible if patients are unco-
operative, but as far as possible should include examination of the 
airway and assessment for signs of uncontrolled cardiorespiratory 
disease. There is a relatively high incidence of undiagnosed car-
diac disease in paediatric dental patients, which may be revealed by 
examination.17
The patient’s weight should be noted, as with any paediatric case. 
Dental caries is associated with a diet rich in sugary foods and 
drinks, which also predisposes to obesity18,19 and type 2 diabetes, 
with all of the attendant risks. Diabetics also have an increased risk 
of developing caries.20
Preoperative investigations depend upon the presence of 
comorbidities and also upon the likelihood of the particular tests 
being feasible in that particular patient— simple exodontia in an 
otherwise well child should not require investigation.
Information provided
The preoperative assessment visit should be used as an opportunity 
to provide patients and carers with appropriate information about 
their child’s dental anaesthetic. The Royal College of Anaesthetists 
publishes a range of information leaflets targeted at different age 
groups (available from their website).21 Patients with additional 
needs, including autism, may benefit from a multidisciplinary ap-
proach, involving play therapists, use of social stories, and specific 
visual aids (Fig. 8.1) to prepare them for the experience of surgery 
and anaesthesia.22 Patients with generalized or specific anxieties (e.g. 
needle phobia) may benefit from cognitive behavioural therapy pre-
operatively.23 Psychological interventions are increasingly available 
in self- guided computerized formats, even if face- to- face services 
are not readily accessible.24
Fasting guidance
Detailed fasting guidelines are produced locally by institutions. 
Most are based upon the principles of the European Society of 
Anaesthetists guidelines,25 allowing solid food up to 6 hours before 
the time of surgery. Clear, non- carbonated fluids are encouraged 
up until 2 hours before surgery, as this is associated with increased 
gastric emptying and less acidity of the remaining gastric contents. 
More recently, several institutions have trialled permitting clear 
fluids right up until surgery, with no evidence of an increase in 
aspiration rates. Furthermore, dental patients may have additional 
needs that make it difficult for them to adhere to fasting guide-
lines and it is good practice to consider in advance how to pro-
ceed if faced with an unfasted patient on the day of surgery. Rapid 
sequence induction provides a technique for rapid control of the 
airway, minimizing the risk of aspiration, but is not feasible unless 
intravenous access is possible, and may be undesirable in the set-
ting of anticipated difficult airway management. Cancelling or de-
laying a case because the patient is inadequately fasted is an option. 
One factor influencing the decision to postpone surgery is whether 
or not better adherence to fasting guidelines is likely in the future. 
If it is not, it may be more appropriate to proceed with surgery, ac-
cepting the additional risks.
Consent
Consent for treatment should be obtained from the patient where 
they have capacity. If the patient is not competent to give consent, a 
decision may be made by the parents (in the case of children) or in 
the patient’s best interests (for adults).
General considerations
It is important to recognize that the law relating to consent differs 
between legal systems and differs even within the UK. Most sys-
tems have some provision for those unable to give informed consent 
themselves. Detailed information on consent is available from the 
General Medical Council.25 In England, a person over the age of 18 
can consent for themselves, if they have capacity to do so. Under the 
85
Consent
Mental Capacity Act 2005,26 capacity is specific to the decision being 
made. It requires the ability to:
 • Understand information.
 • Retain information.
 • Use information for decision- making.
 • Communicate the decision made.
It is recognized that capacity may fluctuate.26 Every attempt pos-
sible should be made to enable people with capacity to make deci-
sions for themselves. This might require the use of communication 
aids, different formats for information provision, and allowing 
sufficient time to be set aside, in an environment that facilitates 
decision- making. Independent mental capacity advocates should 
be appointed to petition on behalf of the patient and assist with 
decision- making when a patient lacks capacity. Advance directives 
refusing particular treatments are legally binding even if the patient 
subsequently lacks capacity. In practice, most advance directives re-
late to end of life care and dental work is not within their scope. If an 
adult does not have capacity to make a decision about their health-
care needs, a decision can be made for them to proceed with treat-
ment if it is deemed in his or her ‘best interests’ by the professionals 
involved. This decision must be carefully documented, and an ap-
propriate consent form completed by the appropriate personnel if 
applicable. Note that one adult cannot give consent on behalf of an-
other, even if the patient lacks capacity to consent. If this is the case, 
the path of ‘best interests’ should be followed. Legal systems contain 
provisions for consent in minors. Parents may consent on behalf of 
a child but cannot refuse treatment to which a competent young 
person has consented. From 16 years of age, a young person is pre-
sumed competent to make decisions to accept treatment. Younger 
No food
water
nurse
wristband
weigh
anaesthetist
magic cream
wait
play
anaesthetic room
hospital trolley
face mask
breathe deeply
cannula
medicine
sleep
monitor
wake up
drink
eat
home
Fig. 8.1 Visual aids utilized for anaesthesia for children with special educational needs and disabilities.
Short J, Calder A. Anaesthesia for children with special needs, including autistic spectrum disorder. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2013;13(4):107– 112.
86
Dental anaesthesia
children may also be competent, and this should be assessed on a 
case- by- case basis.
Speciﬁc considerations for dental anaesthesia
While consent is normally specific to procedures, in this context, 
preoperative examination may not be feasible, and the exact nature 
and extent of the treatment required might not be apparent until 
the patient is anaesthetized. The consent must include all possible 
procedures, including dental X- rays to inform future procedures. In 
patients with multiple medical problems, liaison with lead clinicians 
(e.g. GP or community paediatrician) should occur to enable coord-
ination of investigations and procedures. It may be possible, for ex-
ample, to take blood tests while under anaesthesia. This should also 
be included in the consent. In addition to the risks associated with 
surgery, relatively common anaesthetic risks should be discussed, 
including dental damage, sore throat, pain, drowsiness, and post-
operative nausea and vomiting. Consent for analgesic suppositories 
should be specifically obtained.
It may be difficult to communicate risks appropriately and effect-
ively in the setting of anxiety, particularly the rare but serious risks 
of anaesthesia (e.g. hypoxia, anaphylaxis, and death). Non- medical 
examples may help to give context, for example, the Association of 
Paediatric Anaesthetists, UK, states that in an otherwise well child 
for a minor procedure, ‘the risk of a life- threatening problem is about 
1 in 400,000. This risk is considerably less than that of your child 
being seriously injured in a road accident’.27 Patients should also be 
given advice about return to work or normal activity, or school in the 
case of children.22
Anaesthesia
There are many considerations regarding the conduct of anaesthesia 
for dental surgery28 and consensus guidelines exist to promote con-
sistently high standards (e.g. the Royal College of Anaesthetists con-
sensus guidelines for the management of children referred for dental 
extractions under general anaesthesia, published in 2011).29 Dental 
surgery has a high rate of repeat attendance, and this should be re-
membered with each anaesthetic plan. The first experience of anaes-
thesia may ‘set the tone’ for subsequent attendances.
Premedication
Non- pharmacological methods
Distraction by parents or anaesthetic assistants can be invaluable 
in facilitating induction of anaesthesia. Most centres keep a range 
of appropriate distraction aids in anaesthetic rooms (e.g. ‘hide and 
seek’ books, bubbles, and sensory toys). Formal play therapy tech-
niques may be helpful in calming patients, particularly children in 
the immediate preoperative period.
Hypnosis has not been shown to be of benefit in managing 
children’s behaviour for dental interventions without general 
anaesthesia30— it is unclear if these findings can be extrapolated to 
the induction phase of anaesthesia. Interactive technologies (e.g. 
RELAX Anaesthetics™; Fig. 8.2) can be used to reduce anxiety31 and 
potentially facilitate induction of anaesthesia, and these methods are 
likely to develop in the future with increased understanding of the 
nuances of digital distraction techniques.
Topical premedication
The Royal College of Anaesthetists advise that intravenous access 
‘should be considered for all children undergoing dental anaes-
thesia’.30 Intravenous access should also be considered for all adult 
patients, where possible. Topically applied local anaesthetics can be 
used to facilitate intravenous access and therefore induction. EMLA™ 
(Eutectic Mixture of Local Anaesthetic, containing lidocaine and 
prilocaine) and Ametop™ (containing tetracaine) are the most com-
monly used. Topical local anaesthetic creams should be applied far 
enough in advance of intravenous cannulation attempts for them to 
reach full efficacy— approximately 40 minutes for Ametop™ and 1 
hour for EMLA™. Ametop™ has the theoretical advantage of causing 
vasodilatation of underlying blood vessels, improving the target for 
cannulation.32,33 While topical anaesthesia may be associated with 
Fig. 8.2 RELAX Anaesthetics™, an NHS Innovation Challenge Acorn award- winning tablet- based app, which helps distract and calm children down 
before an operation.
87
Anaesthesia
reduced pain on venous cannulation, it has not consistently trans-
lated to improved success in paediatric practice.34 Unlike EMLA™, 
Ametop™ is free of prilocaine and safe to use in patients susceptible 
to methaemoglobinaemia. Ethyl chloride spray provides immediate 
short- lived localized anaesthesia and may be an alternative to facili-
tate cannulation in nervous but cooperative and motivated patients.
Systemic premedication
Oral midazolam (0.25– 0.75 mg/ kg) may improve cooperation 
in children undergoing dental treatments,35 although the patient 
must be able to comply with swallowing the medication, and it can 
sometimes result in paradoxical disinhibition.36 The amnesic ef-
fect of midazolam may be beneficial in patients likely to undergo 
frequent procedures. Ketamine may be given orally (5– 10 mg/ kg), 
intranasally (3– 5 mg/ kg), or intramuscularly (5 mg/ kg) and can 
be used to provide sedation in otherwise uncooperative patients. 
Side effects include excessive salivation, which may complicate 
the dental procedure, and sympathetic stimulation. There is no 
clear boundary between the sedation and the dissociative anaes-
thesia produced by higher doses of ketamine, such that its effects 
in an individual may be relatively unpredictable for a given dose. 
Full anaesthetic monitoring should be applied as soon as possible 
after administration.37 Clonidine (oral) and dexmedetomidine 
(oral or intranasal) can also be used for premedication for dental 
procedures.
Induction of anaesthesia
Full anaesthetic monitoring is desirable prior to induction of anaes-
thesia, but often a pragmatic approach is necessary. If little moni-
toring is tolerated, pulse oximetry is probably the most desirable as 
this provides information about oxygenation and pulse rate, and the 
waveform can act as a surrogate for tissue perfusion. Intravenous 
induction is preferable, with propofol now the most frequently used 
agent. Total intravenous anaesthesia, utilizing target- controlled in-
fusions of propofol and remifentanil, is becoming more common-
place due to reduced postoperative nausea and vomiting, faster 
emergence and recovery, and reduced incidence of postoperative 
delirium. Inhalational induction is an alternative, using oxygen, 
nitrous oxide, and up to 8% sevoflurane. Induction of anaesthesia 
with ketamine is possible via the intramuscular route (5– 10 mg/ kg), 
providing an alternative technique in particularly uncooperative 
patients.
Airway management
The choice of airway management technique and equipment 
depends upon surgical factors and patient factors (Table 8.1). 
Children are more likely to be undergoing primary exodontia 
procedures, which are usually quicker and less invasive than the 
complex reconstructive procedures potentially required in other 
patient groups.
Nasal masks (Fig. 8.3) are still used by some practitioners, although 
they are rapidly becoming obsolete. In their place, supraglottic airway 
devices (laryngeal mask airways) have become the mainstay for the 
majority of simple dental extractions in patients without risk fac-
tors for aspiration, or who have no significant anatomical or respira-
tory conditions that would make insertion or ventilation difficult. 
Laryngeal mask airways are associated with shorter insertion and re-
covery times compared to nasal intubation for dental anaesthesia.38
Reinforced or ‘flexible’ laryngeal mask airways enable manipula-
tion of the position of the stem of the airway device to maximize 
surgical access.
If tracheal intubation is required, the technique for achieving 
optimum intubating conditions must to be balanced against the 
likely length of the surgical procedure. A multidisciplinary discus-
sion with the operating surgeon about preferred choice of tracheal 
tube is most helpful. For short procedures, options for facilitating 
tracheal intubation include utilizing short- acting neuromuscular 
blocking agents (e.g. suxamethonium, mivacurium, and low- dose 
atracurium), rocuronium with subsequent sugammadex reversal, 
short- acting potent opioids (e.g. alfentanil), propofol boluses, or 
a deep plane of inhalational anaesthesia. The most important de-
termining factors are patient comorbidities and the experience of 
the anaesthetist with a given technique. Nasal north- facing Ring– 
Adair– Elwyn (RAE) tracheal tubes provide maximum surgical ac-
cess but may be contraindicated in patients with bleeding tendencies 
or adenoidal hypertrophy. South- facing RAE tubes and reinforced 
tracheal tubes are alternatives.
Table 8.1 Factors inﬂuencing choice of airway
Surgical factors
Patient factors
Predicted surgical time
Number of dental extractions
Additional procedures
Area of oral cavity requiring access
Surgeon experience/ preference
Known or predicted difficult airway 
management
History of gastro- oesophageal reflux
Respiratory disease
Anatomical abnormalities
Bleeding/ coagulation disorders
Starvation status
Fig. 8.3 Nasal anaesthetic mask, previously used for dental anaesthesia.
Reproduced with permission from Shaw et al, The Oxford textbook of anaesthesia for 
oral and maxillofacial surgery, First Edition, 2010, Oxford University Press, UK.
 
 
 
88
Dental anaesthesia
Throat packs
Historically, anaesthesia for dental surgery has routinely involved 
the anaesthetist inserting a throat pack, with the aim of limiting 
airway soiling from blood, excessive saliva, and surgical detritus. 
Debris in the airway may cause laryngospasm on emergence, while 
blood entering the stomach is potentially associated with increased 
postoperative nausea and vomiting. Throat packs may limit airway 
soiling but are potentially hazardous if accidentally retained. At least 
one visual and one documentary procedure should be undertaken to 
ensure safe removal39 (Table 8.2).
Throat packs can be inserted using Magill’s forceps or the 
anaesthetist’s fingers. Care should be taken to avoid dental or soft 
tissue trauma from instruments, and that the final position of the 
tongue is not likely to cause swelling. While a throat pack may sta-
bilize and improve the seal of an imperfectly fitting airway device, 
dental procedures involve a ‘shared airway’ and restricted access to 
the airway and any airway device once surgery is underway. Doubts 
about the integrity of the airway device are better resolved by chan-
ging the device before surgery is commenced, rather than by at-
tempting to compensate with a throat pack. Following a number of 
incidents of potential or actual harm to patients as a result of re-
tained throat packs, the National Patient Safety Agency, UK, issued 
guidance on reducing the risk of retained throat packs after surgery 
in 2009.39 The key recommendations were:
 • The decision to use a throat pack should be justified by the an-
aesthetist or surgeon for each patient as appropriate. This person 
should assume responsibility for ensuring the chosen safety pro-
cedures are undertaken.
 • At least one visually based and one documentary- based pro-
cedure is applied whenever a throat pack is deemed necessary.
 • All staff are fully informed on the locally chosen procedures.
The final recommendation is particularly important because mem-
bers of the surgical team may be familiar with community dentistry, 
involving awake patients, and therefore less attuned to the risks 
posed by throat packs in anaesthetized patients. The prevailing evi-
dence, controversies, and current guidance regarding throat packs 
are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 10.
Analgesia and antiemesis
Provision of adequate analgesia and prophylactic antiemetic admin-
istration is crucial in dental patients. The majority of these patients 
undergo day case procedures where unplanned admissions would 
have a significant impact upon their care needs. Assessment of pain 
in these patients can often be more challenging due to their young 
age or learning difficulties, which may also make requests for add-
itional analgesia more difficult, if not impossible. Liberal use of 
simple analgesics is therefore advised. In adults, ibuprofen alone 
provides better pain relief than paracetamol alone after wisdom 
tooth extraction, and the combination is superior to either agent 
alone at 6 hours postoperatively.40
Paracetamol is given in a dose of 15 mg/ kg intravenously (7.5 mg/ kg 
if <10 kg) or 20 mg/ kg orally. Intravenous paracetamol has been 
associated with deaths in underweight adults and guidelines for its 
use are available from the Association of Anaesthetists.41 Ibuprofen 
doses are in the range of 5– 10 mg/ kg (maximum 30 mg/ kg/ day in 
three or four divided doses), but also depend upon age. Codeine 
is no longer permitted in the UK for children <12 years old, ex-
cept in acute moderate pain uncontrollable by simple analgesics. 
It is contraindicated after tonsillectomy/ adenoidectomy in pa-
tients with obstructive sleep apnoea or in any child at risk of re-
spiratory depression.42 Many dental patients will fall into this group 
as a result of their comorbidities and opioid analgesia should be 
used with caution. Local anaesthetics are frequently infiltrated by 
the dental surgeons. While, intuitively, this should reduce postop-
erative pain, heterogeneity in patient trials means that there is no 
conclusive evidence to this effect.43 If local anaesthetic is used, it 
is important to inform patients and/ or carers of their likely dur-
ation. In a minority of cases an insensate mouth, lips, or tongue 
may be problematic— for example, where repetitive behaviours 
like lip- smacking or tongue biting are a pre- existing issue— and in 
these situations, local anaesthetic may be best avoided, or at least 
used judiciously. Antiemetics such as ondansetron and cyclizine 
can be used for postoperative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis for 
the vast majority of patients. Dexamethasone has the dual benefit 
of antiemetic and anti- inflammatory activity.44,45 However, it is as-
sociated with increased blood glucose levels in both diabetics and 
non- diabetics,46 therefore patients requiring insulin or oral hypo-
glycaemic agents may require dose adjustment for a short time 
postoperatively.
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Historically, structural cardiac disease was considered a risk factor 
for infective endocarditis after dental procedures. This included pa-
tients with unrepaired septal defects (aside from an isolated atrial 
septal defect), hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, acquired 
valvular heart disease, prosthetic valves, and those with a previous 
history of infective endocarditis. Dental procedures were believed to 
result in significant translocation of oral commensal organisms into 
the blood, causing a bacteraemia and leading to vegetative bacterial 
growth on structurally abnormal cardiac tissue. Given the serious-
ness of infective endocarditis, the risk:benefit balance was thought to 
favour antibiotic prophylaxis.47 In 2008, a review of the existing evi-
dence suggested that dental procedures can result in a bacteraemia, 
but there is no causal link between dental procedures and infective 
endocarditis, even in high- risk patients.48 Routine administration 
of antibiotics is not without risk, both on an individual basis (e.g. 
anaphylaxis) and on a wider population level, through the propaga-
tion of resistant organisms.49 Consequently, current guidance from 
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), UK, 
Table 8.2 Procedures undertaken to reduce accidental retention 
of throat packs
Procedures involving visual checks
Procedures involving 
documented evidence
Putting a label or mark on the patient. (The 
label is an adherent sticker that is put on either 
the patient’s head or, exceptionally, on another 
visible part of the body. In either situation the 
label or mark must be removed at the same 
time as the pack is removed)
Formalized, recorded 
‘two- person’ check of 
insertion and removal of 
a throat pack
Putting a label on the artificial airway device 
(e.g. tracheal tube or supraglottic airway   
device)
Recording insertion and 
removal of throat pack 
on swab count board
Leaving part of the throat pack protruding 
externally
Source: NPSA ‘Reducing the risks of retained throat packs’ 2009. 
89
Sedation
risk for the development of infective endocarditis, but that anti-
microbial prophylaxis (including chlorhexidine mouthwash) is not 
routinely recommended for dental procedures, even in high- risk pa-
tients. A 2014 analysis of infective endocarditis incidence before and 
after the changes in antibiotic prophylaxis guidance demonstrated 
an increased incidence in reported cases in parallel with the reduced 
use of antibiotics after the introduction of the NICE guidelines, but 
did not demonstrate causality.50 NICE reviewed its guidance in 2015 
taking into account these findings, and other evidence arising since 
2008, but concluded that there was no case for reverting to routine 
antibiotic prophylaxis for dentistry at present.50
Maintenance of anaesthesia
Inhalational agents are most commonly used in the UK for main-
tenance of anaesthesia, with air or nitrous oxide supplementing 
oxygen as carrier gases. Sevoflurane has a faster onset and offset 
than isoflurane, but is associated with higher rates of emergence de-
lirium in children.51 As mentioned earlier, total intravenous anaes-
thesia may be of particular benefit in day case dental procedures, 
with reduced incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting, faster 
emergence, and reduced cognitive deficits. Experience of target- 
controlled infusions in children is accumulating as models de-
velop,52 and its use is becoming more widespread.
Emergence from anaesthesia
Deep extubation of the trachea can be employed if there are no con-
cerns about maintenance of the airway or the risk of pulmonary as-
piration. A common technique for deep extubation is as follows:
 • Position the patient in the left lateral position with slight head- 
down tilt.
 • Reverse any residual neuromuscular blocking agents.
 • Preoxygenate.
 • Remove any throat pack, under direct vision.
 • Suction the airway under direct vision, including behind the 
uvula (seeking the ‘coroner’s clot’).
 • Establish regular breathing pattern.
 • Increase the depth of anaesthetic.
 • Deflate the tracheal tube cuff slowly, ensuring no coughing or 
breath- holding.
 • Extubate the trachea, removing the tracheal tube gently.
If there are concerns about potentially difficult airway management 
or the risk of aspiration, an awake tracheal extubation technique 
should be employed, as the safer option. Laryngeal mask airways can 
be removed as the patient wakes, having already established spon-
taneous ventilation.
Postoperative complications and follow- up
The most common postoperative complications are pain and nausea 
and vomiting, which should usually be avoided by prophylactic 
administration of adequate analgesia and antiemetic medications. 
Airway swelling, laryngospasm, bleeding, and pulmonary aspir-
ation are also possible, and it is important that patients receive ap-
propriate postanaesthetic care, even for simple cases. While dental 
surgery per se is unlikely to require high levels of postoperative care, 
patients’ pre- existing comorbidities may warrant admission to ei-
ther a general ward or critical care unit postoperatively. Oral intake 
should be established early, particularly in patients who require 
regular medication for chronic conditions. Patients and/ or parents/ 
carers should be provided with emergency contact details on dis-
charge, should any unexpected postoperative complications arise at 
home/ at the care facility.
As patients will often undergo multiple anaesthetics for dental 
procedures, meticulous records should be kept on the anaesthetic 
chart and in- patient notes as these will often inform future anaes-
thetic plans. It can be very helpful to hold a debrief with patients 
and carers to determine which aspects of the anaesthetic and surgery 
were perceived to have gone well, as this may also be useful for repeat 
attendances. Communication with the patient’s GP or community 
paediatrician is also imperative.
Sedation
Although general anaesthesia in the community setting is now 
prohibited, sedation is still permitted.5– 7 Both the Royal College of 
Anaesthetists and the General Dental Council are clear that general 
anaesthesia should be a last resort for patients who are unable to 
tolerate procedures with local anaesthesia and/ or sedation. A staged 
transition from general anaesthesia to sedation is desirable for pa-
tients undergoing repeated dental surgery.
Anaesthetists may become involved in forward planning for tran-
sitions from general anaesthesia to sedation for individual patients, 
as well as developing protocols for non- anaesthetic delivered sed-
ation services. Sedation is also discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
General considerations
Guidelines have been developed to improve the safety of sed-
ation.7,52,53 Sedation should take place in settings that have access to 
full anaesthetic monitoring and resuscitation equipment, and should 
only be administered by professionals competent in both sedation 
practice and life support. In 2015, the Society for the Advancement 
of Anaesthesia in Dentistry published a ‘Safe Sedation Practice 
Scheme’, covering all aspects of sedation specific to dentistry.54 The 
Academy of Royal Medical Colleges define ‘levels’ of sedation and 
emphasize the need for practitioners to be able to ‘rescue’ a level of 
sedation deeper than that intended.55 For dental surgery, ‘conscious 
sedation’ (according to the American Society of Anesthesiology 
depth of sedation continuum; Table 8.3) is the goal, although, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 6, this term is rather confusing.
Most recently, in 2020, a multidisciplinary consensus state-
ment has been produced with guidance on fasting and prevention 
of aspiration before sedation in adults and children (on behalf of 
the International Committee for the Advancement of Procedural 
Sedation).56
Sedative and analgesic agents
Sedation has most commonly been provided using inhaled nitrous 
oxide, benzodiazepines, propofol, or ketamine. Potent short- acting 
opioids have also been used (in combination with sedatives, or as 
the sole agent) to provide adequate analgesic conditions for minor 
procedures. There is no conclusive evidence that one agent is sig-
nificantly better or safer than another, such that the choice is largely 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90
Dental anaesthesia
dependent upon local protocols and the experience and prefer-
ence of the sedation practitioner. General principles to increase the 
margin of safety include:
 • Single- agent sedation.
 • Incremental doses— ‘start low, go slow’.
 • When an opioid– benzodiazepine combination is utilized (e.g. 
fentanyl and midazolam), the opioid should be given first and al-
lowed to reach peak effect before the benzodiazepine is given.52
More recently, there has been particular interest in dexmedetomidine, 
a highly selective α2- adrenergic receptor agonist, which can be 
given both intravenously and intranasally. In adults, intranasal 
dexmedetomidine with dental local anaesthetic has been shown 
to provide adequate sedation and superior postoperative anal-
gesia for third molar extractions, when compared with local anaes-
thetic alone.57 Several trials have also demonstrated its efficacy for 
paediatric dental sedation.58,59 The relative preservation of cardio-
respiratory stability and its additional analgesic action mean that 
dexmedetomidine is likely to gain popularity when it becomes more 
widely available.
Conclusion
Dental anaesthesia is a rewarding field, due to the demanding patient 
population, the additional consideration of the ‘shared airway’, and 
the high- turnover day case nature of the subspecialty. These chal-
lenges can be met by applying meticulous attention to detail and by 
providing genuinely individualized, patient- centred care. The anaes-
thetic workload for dental procedures is unlikely to reduce signifi-
cantly in the near future, making it a key element of oromaxillofacial 
anaesthesia.
REFERENCES
 1. Lyman HM. History of anaesthesia. In: Artificial Anaesthesia and 
Anaesthetics, p. 6. New York: William Wood and Company; 1881.
 2. Poswillo D. General Anaesthesia, Sedation and Resuscitation in 
Dentistry. Report of an Expert Working Party for the Standing 
Dental Advisory Committee. London: Department of Health; 1990.
 3. General Dental Council. Maintaining Standards: Guidance to 
Dentists on Professional and Personal Conduct. London: General 
Dental Council; 1998.
 4. Royal College of Anaesthetists. Standards and Guidelines for 
General Anaesthesia for Dentistry. London: Royal College of 
Anaesthetists; 1999.
 5. Department of Health. A Conscious Decision: Report of an 
Expert Group Chaired by the Chief Medical and Dental Officer. 
London: Department of Health; 2000.
 6. Intercollegiate Advisory Committee for Sedation in Dentistry. 
Standards for Conscious Sedation in the Provision of Dental Care. 
London: Royal College of Anaesthetists; 2015.
 7. Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme. Conscious 
Sedation in Dentistry: Dental Clinical Guidance, 2nd ed. 
Dundee: Scottish Clinical Dental Effectiveness Programme; 2012.
 8. NHS Digital. NHS dental statistics 2015– 16. 2016. http:// cont ent.
digi tal.nhs.uk/ catalo gue/ PUB21 701/ nhs- dent- stat- eng- 15- 16- 
rep.pdf
 9. NHS Digital. NHS dental statistics 2017– 18. 2018. https:// digi tal.
nhs.uk/ data- and- info rmat ion/ publi cati ons/ sta isti cal/ nhs- den tal- 
sta tist ics/ 2017- 18- ann ual - report
 10. Sury MR, Palmer JH, Cook TM, Pandit JJ. The state of UK dental 
anaesthesia: results from the NAP5 activity survey. A national 
survey by the 5th National Audit Project of the Royal College 
of Anaesthetists and the Association of Anaesthetists of Great 
Britain and Ireland. SAAD Dig. 2016;32:34– 36.
 11. Dental Public Health Team. Child Dental General Anaesthetics in 
Wales. Cardiff: Public Health Wales; 2015.
 12. Jogezai U, Ackuaku N, Dowson E, Nguyen E, Townsend D. 
Repeat paediatric dental general anaesthetics: a study of two 
regions. J Dent Oral Health. 2016;3:1– 6.
 13. Royal College of Anaesthetists. Curriculum for a CCT in 
Anaesthetics. London: Royal College of Anaesthetists; 2010.
 14. Australia & New Zealand College of Anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 
Training Program Curriculum. Melbourne: Australia & New 
Zealand College of Anaesthesia; 2016.
 15. NHS England. Guides for Commissioning Dental Specialties— 
Special Care Dentistry. London: NHS England; 2015.
 16. Albadri SS, Jarad FD, Lee GT, Mackie IC. The frequency of repeat 
general anaesthesia for teeth extractions in children. Int J Paediatr 
Dent. 2006;16(1):45– 48.
 17. Rutherford J, Stevenson R. Careful physical examination 
is essential in the preoperative assessment of children for 
dental extractions under general anesthesia. Pediatr Anesth. 
2004;14(11):920– 923.
 18. Gerdin EW, Angbratt M, Aronsson K, Eriksson E, Johansson 
I. Dental caries and body mass index by socio- economic 
status in Swedish children. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 
2008;36(5):459– 465.
Table 8.3 Continuum of depth of sedation: deﬁnition of general anaesthesia and levels of sedation/ analgesia
Minimal sedation/ anxiolysis
Moderate sedation/ analgesia 
(‘conscious sedation’)
Deep sedation/ analgesia
Responsiveness
Normal response to verbal 
stimulation
Purposefula response to verbal 
tactile stimulation
Purposefula response following repeated 
or painful stimulation
Airway
Unaffected
No intervention required
Intervention may be required
Spontaneous ventilation
Unaffected
Adequate
May be inadequate
Cardiovascular function
Unaffected
Usually maintained
Usually maintained
Escalation of required competencies
α Reflex withdrawal from a painful stimulus is not considered a purposeful response.
Source: Excerpted from Continuum of Depth of Sedation. Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/ Analgesia of the American Society of Anaesthesiology. 
October 2009. 
91
Conclusion
 19. Alm A, Fåhraeus C, Wendt LK, Koch G, Andersson- Gäre B, 
Birkhed D. Body adiposity status in teenagers and snacking habits 
in early childhood in relation to approximal caries at 15 years of 
age. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2008;18(3):189– 196.
 20. Johnston L, Vieira AR. Caries experience and overall health 
status. Oral Health Prev Dent. 2014;12(2):163– 170.
 21. Royal College of Anaesthetists. Information for Children and 
Parents. 2022. http:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ childr ensi nfo
 22. Short J, Calder A. Anaesthesia for children with special needs, 
including autistic spectrum disorder. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit 
Care Pain. 2013;13(4):107– 112.
 23. Jenkins K. Needle- phobia: a psychological perspective. Br J 
Anaesth. 2014;113(1):4– 6.
 24. NHS Self- help therapies. 2022. https:// www.nhs.uk/ men tal- hea 
lth/ talk ing- therap ies- medic ine- tre atme nts/ talk ing- therpa ies- 
and- coun sell ing/ self- help- therap ies/ 
 25. General Medical Council. Consent: Patients and Doctors 
Making Decisions Together. London: General Medical 
Council; 2008.
 26. Legislation.gov.uk. Mental Capacity Act 2005. 2005. https:// www.
legi slat ion.gov.uk/ ukpga/ 2005/ 9/ conte nts
 27. Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain & 
Ireland. Your Child’s General Anaesthetic for Dental Treatment. 
London: Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain 
& Ireland; 2009.
 28. Cantlay K, Williamson S, Hawkings J. Anaesthesia for dental 
surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2005;5(3):71– 75.
 29. Royal College of Anaesthetists. Consensus Guidelines for 
the Management of Children Referred for Dental Extractions 
Under General Anaesthesia. London: Royal College of 
Anaesthetists; 2011.
 30. Al- Harasi S, Ashley PF, Moles DR, Parekh S, Walters V. Hypnosis 
for children undergoing dental treatment. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2010;8:CD007154.
 31. Fancourt D, Lee C, Baltzer Nielsen S, Capps S, Brooks P. Abstract 
PR230. Relax anaesthetics: the effect of a bespoke distraction app 
on anxiety levels in children undergoing induction of anaesthesia. 
Anesth Anal. 2016;123(3S):298– 299.
 32. Browne J, Awad I, Plant R, McAdoo J, Shorten G. Topical 
amethocaine (Ametop) is superior to EMLA for intravenous 
cannulation. Eutectic mixture of local anesthetics. Can J Anaesth. 
1999;46(11):1014– 1018.
 33. Arrowsmith J, Campbell C. A comparison of local anaesthetics 
for venepuncture. Arch Dis Child. 2000;82(4):309– 310.
 34. Newbury C, Herd DW. Amethocaine versus EMLA for 
successful intravenous cannulation in a children’s emergency 
department: a randomised controlled study. Emerg Med J. 
2009;26(7):487– 491.
 35. Lourenço- Matharu L, Ashley PF, Furness S. Sedation of children 
undergoing dental treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;3:CD003877.
 36. Allen Finley G, Stewart S, Buffett- Jerrott S, Wright K, 
Millington D. High levels of impulsivity may contraindicate 
midazolam premedication in children. Can J Anesth. 
2006;53(1):73– 78.
 37. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland. 
Recommendations for Standards of Monitoring During Anaesthesia 
and Recovery. London: Association of Anaesthetists of Great 
Britain & Ireland; 2016.
 38. Zhao N, Deng F, Yu C. Anesthesia for pediatric day- case 
dental surgery: a study comparing the classic laryngeal 
mask airway with nasal trachea intubation. J Craniofac Surg. 
2014;25(3):e245– e248.
 39. National Patient Safety Agency. Reducing the Risk of Retained 
Throat Packs: Supporting Information. London: National Patient 
Safety Agency; 2009.
 40. Bailey E, Worthington HV, van Wijk A, Yates JM, Coulthard P, 
Afzal Z. Ibuprofen and/ or paracetamol (acetaminophen) for pain 
relief after surgical removal of lower wisdom teeth. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2013;12:CD004624.
 41. Safe Anaesthesia Liaison Group. Intravenous Paracetamol. 
London: Royal College of Anaesthetists Safe Anaesthesia Liaison 
Group; 2013.
 42. Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Authority. Codeine 
for Analgesia: Restricted Use in Children Because of Reports 
of Morphine Toxicity. London: Medicines and Healthcare 
Regulatory Authority; 2013.
 43. Parekh S, Gardener C, Ashley PF, Walsh T. Intraoperative local 
anaesthesia for reduction of postoperative pain following general 
anaesthesia for dental treatment in children and adolescents. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;12:CD009742.
 44. Laureano Filho JR, Maurette PE, Allais M, Cotinho M, Fernandes 
C. Clinical comparative study of the effectiveness of two dosages 
of dexamethasone to control postoperative swelling, trismus and 
pain after the surgical extraction of mandibular impacted third 
molars. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2008;13(2):129– 132.
 45. Markiewicz MR, Brady MF, Ding EL, Dodson TB. 
Corticosteroids reduce postoperative morbidity after third molar 
surgery: a systematic review and meta- analysis. J Oral Maxillofac 
Surg. 2008;66(9):1881– 1894.
 46. Tien M, Gan TJ, Dhakal I, White WD, Olufolabi AJ, Fink R, 
et al. The effect of anti- emetic doses of dexamethasone on 
postoperative blood glucose levels in non- diabetic and diabetic 
patients: a prospective randomised controlled study. Anaesthesia. 
2016;71(9):1037– 1043.
 47. Gould IM, Buckingham JK. Cost effectiveness of prophylaxis 
in dental practice to prevent infective endocarditis. Br Heart J. 
1993;70(1):79– 83.
 48. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Prophylaxis Against 
Infective Endocarditis. Clinical Guideline 64. London: National 
Institute for Clinical Excellence; 2008.
 49. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Prophylaxis Against 
Infective Endocarditis. Clinical Guideline 64.1. London: National 
Institute for Clinical Excellence; 2015.
 50. Dayer MJ, Jones S, Prendergast B, Baddour LM, Lockhart PB, 
Thornhill MH. Incidence of infective endocarditis in England, 
2000– 13: a secular trend, interrupted time- series analysis. Lancet. 
2015;385(9974):1219– 1228.
 51. Costi D, Cyna AM, Ahmed S, Stephens K, Strickland P, Ellwood 
J, et al. Effects of sevoflurane versus other general anaesthesia on 
emergence agitation in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014;12(9):CD007084.
 52. Sepúlveda P, Cortínez LI, Sáez C, Penna A, Solari S, Guerra I, 
Absalom AR. Performance evaluation of paediatric propofol 
pharmacokinetic models in healthy young children. Br J Anaesth. 
2011;107(4):593– 600.
 53. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Sedation in Children 
and Young People. London: National Institute for Clinical 
Excellence; 2010.
 54. Society for the Advancement of Anaesthesia in Dentistry. 
A Quality Assurance Programme for Implementing National 
Standards in Conscious Sedation for Dentistry in the UK. 
92
Dental anaesthesia
London: Society for the Advancement of Anaesthesia in 
Dentistry; 2015.
 55. Academy of Royal Medical Colleges. Safe Sedation Practice for 
Healthcare Procedures. London: Academy of Royal Medical 
Colleges; 2013.
 56. Green SM, Leroy PL, Roback MG, Irwin MG, Andolfatto G, Babl 
FE, et al. An international multidisciplinary consensus statement 
on fasting before procedural sedation in adults and children. 
Anaesthesia. 2020;75(3):374– 385.
 57. Cheung CW, Ng KF, Liu J, Yuen MY, Ho MH, Irwin MG. 
Analgesic and sedative effects of intranasal dexmedetomidine 
in third molar surgery under local anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 
2011;107(3):430– 437.
 58. Malhotra PU, Thakur S, Singhal P, Chauhan D, Jayam C, 
Sood R, et al. Comparative evaluation of dexmedetomidine 
and midazolam- ketamine combination as sedative agents in 
pediatric dentistry: a double- blinded randomized controlled 
trial Contemp Clin Dent. 2016;7(2):186– 192.
 59. Kim HS, Kim JW, Jang KT, Lee SH, Kim CC, Shin TJ.  
Initial experience with dexmedetomidine for dental  
sedation in children. J Clin Pediatr Dent. 2013;38(1):  
79– 81.
9
Aesthetic surgery
Corina Lee
Introduction
The title ‘aesthetic surgery’ can be ambiguous, with the terms ‘aes-
thetic’, ‘cosmetic’, ‘plastic’, and ‘reconstructive’ often being used 
interchangeably, such that the layperson may perceive plastic and 
reconstructive as meaning purely cosmetic or aesthetic surgery. 
Ultimately, an element of crossover exists— procedures that are pri-
marily functional or reconstructive in nature may be performed with 
excellent aesthetic results. Indeed, almost all operations have an aes-
thetic component to a varying degree, and the terms ‘aesthetic’ and 
‘cosmetic’ are widely accepted as transposable. The Royal College 
of Surgeons defines cosmetic surgery as ‘the choice to undergo an 
operation, or invasive medical procedure, to alter one’s physical ap-
pearance for aesthetic rather than medical reasons’.1 Conversely, 
reconstructive surgery is that which is performed to improve the 
function of structures that are abnormal, due to congenital, trauma, 
or acquired causes, in an attempt to make them as near ‘normal’ as 
possible. Any aesthetic component is inextricably linked with the 
restoration of function in reconstructive surgery. This chapter fo-
cuses on purely aesthetic procedures for primary cosmetic gain.
Orofacial aesthetic surgery
Aesthetic surgery on the mouth and face may be broadly divided 
into two categories: firstly, where the shape or size of a feature is 
changed because the patient dislikes it; and, secondly, involving 
facial rejuvenation or anti- ageing surgery in patients who were 
previously content with their features but are now seeking a more 
youthful appearance. The procedures can be classified as surgical or 
non- surgical. Surgical options for those seeking a change in a dis-
liked facial feature include rhinoplasty, otoplasty, insertion of facial 
implants, or genioplasty. Anti- ageing options including face lift, 
brow lift, and blepharoplasty. Non- surgical treatments include laser, 
botulinum toxin type A (commonly referred to as ‘Botox’), or filler 
injections. Orthognathic surgery can be functional, or have a largely 
cosmetic component, and is discussed in Chapter 10. Genioplasty 
may be performed at the time of orthognathic surgery or independ-
ently. In adults, non- surgical procedures are often performed with 
local or topical anaesthesia; however, in children, general anaesthesia 
(GA) or sedation may be required for laser or Botox (non- aesthetic) 
treatments. Surgical procedures vary from minor to major, such that 
local anaesthesia (LA) alone may suffice, or may be used in conjunc-
tion with sedation or GA.
Aesthetic surgery was, until recently, one of the fastest growing 
medical practices in the UK. However, following a ‘peak’ in 2015, a 
decline of 8% was seen in the total number of patients undergoing 
cosmetic surgery in the UK by 2017.2 Potential explanations for this 
downturn include the widespread availability of less invasive treat-
ments and, perhaps, an increased acceptance of ‘real’ bodies through 
the influence of social media, shifting from the previously desired 
‘model’ image. A British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery 
audit highlighted that gender differences may also exist, with men 
being more accepting of their bodies, tending to opt for brow lift 
and blepharoplasty surgery, with women more focused upon body 
rather than facial surgery.
Due to the nature of cosmetic surgery, there is a paucity of clinical 
trials, such that some of the anaesthesia techniques utilized are less 
evidence based and more centred upon what works well with a par-
ticular surgeon, complemented by practices translated from non- 
aesthetic surgeries. Many of the publications in aesthetic surgery are 
from the US, where this type of surgery is largely undertaken in an 
office- based setting, contrasting with the more hospital- based prac-
tice in the UK. It is the assumption that all procedures requiring GA 
or sedation in the UK take place in fully equipped hospital facil-
ities, with monitoring, equipment, and trained staff complying with 
the Association of Anaesthetists standards of monitoring for anaes-
thesia and recovery.3 These principles cannot necessarily be univer-
sally applied to international practice of aesthetic surgery, therefore 
this chapter describes the anaesthesia considerations and techniques 
based upon common collective practice, supported by research evi-
dence where possible.
Preoperative assessment
Patient considerations
Preoperative assessment of patients for cosmetic surgery has some 
special considerations, precisely because they are a self- selecting 
group. Although this cohort of patients is usually physically well, 
 
 
 
 
 
94
Aesthetic surgery
a thorough preoperative assessment remains essential, particularly 
on account of specific surgical requirements. Patients’ psychological 
status and expectations should also be addressed, given their will-
ingness to undergo aesthetic surgery and its inherent risks. Indeed, 
it is the recommendation of the Royal College of Surgeons that pa-
tients’ psychological status is assessed alongside medical fitness 
prior to surgery.1
Medical assessment
Patients undergoing cosmetic surgery are generally well. However, 
there is a subgroup of patients, particularly those undergoing 
anti- ageing procedures, who may have concomitant disease. It is 
prudent to keep in mind the elective nature of aesthetic surgery. 
Surgery is requested only because of the patient’s desire to change 
their physical appearance or an aspect of their features, which 
may be functionally and structurally normal. The balance of risk 
versus benefit must be carefully considered. The patient’s physio-
logical status should ideally be classified as American Society of 
Anesthesiologists4 (ASA) 1 or 2 (healthy or mild systemic disease) 
to justify proceeding, minimizing the risk of anaesthesia and sur-
gery. Patients who are ASA 3 must be carefully assessed, with the 
risk:benefit ratio fully considered and discussed between the sur-
geon, anaesthetist, and patient.
A comprehensive medical history should be undertaken, focusing 
specifically on the presence of hypertension, ischaemic heart dis-
ease, obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome, cerebrovascular disease, 
smoking, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Adequate control of hypertension should be sought preopera-
tively. The Association of Anaesthetists guideline for the preopera-
tive management of hypertension (2016) recommended that if 
‘in- hospital’ systolic blood pressures are <180 mmHg and diastolic 
<110 mmHg (systolic <160 mmHg and diastolic <100 mmHg at 
time of referral from primary care), elective surgery may proceed.5 
However, there is evidence that patients with a preoperative systolic 
pressure >150 mmHg undergoing face lift surgery are at an increased 
risk of postoperative haematoma, therefore adequate assessment 
and tighter preoperative control of hypertension may be necessary.6 
For similar reasons, intraoperative locally infiltrated adrenaline may 
require greater dilution in select patients.7,8
Medication such as anticoagulants and antiplatelets should ideally 
be stopped prior to surgery to reduce the risk of intraoperative 
bleeding and haematoma formation. It is also important to consider 
antidepressants such as tricyclic agents and monoamine oxidase in-
hibitors due to the high doses of adrenaline used during LA infiltra-
tion (discussed in detail in Chapter 10).8,9
Psychological assessment
A review of complications of breast implant procedures in the UK 
(2014) identified certain psychosocial factors associated with poor 
patient outcome. Underlying reasons motivating patients to undergo 
surgery included dissatisfaction with body image, appearance- 
related self- consciousness, social anxiety, and life stressors. Changes 
in their physical appearance alone may fail to fulfil patients’ needs 
and expectations, and may even lead to deterioration in their psy-
chological status and significant distress.10 Consequently, the Royal 
College of Surgeons ‘Professional Standards for Cosmetic Surgery’ 
(2016) recommended that surgeons should be prepared to defer or 
avoid surgery pending psychological health assessment in vulner-
able patients. This includes patients with unrealistic expectations of 
surgery not resolved during the consultation process, a history of 
repeated cosmetic procedures (particularly in one anatomical area), 
and coexisting psychological disorders.1
Anaesthesia for orofacial aesthetic procedures
General principles
The overall aim of anaesthesia for these procedures is to provide a 
safe, dry operating surgical field, in a patient who is stationary during 
surgery, wakes up smoothly at emergence without coughing, and is 
ready to be discharged in a timely manner with well- controlled pain 
and the absence of nausea, vomiting, or drowsiness.7 Many other 
aspects of general patient care are covered in more detail in previous 
chapters, therefore only those aspects pertinent to aesthetic surgery 
and the common types of surgery are discussed.
The specific anaesthetic challenges in orofacial aesthetic sur-
gery include potentially prolonged surgery, achieving a dry surgical 
field, minimizing the risk of postoperative haematoma formation, 
ensuring safe airway management (with restricted access), and 
employing safe sedation techniques. The patient’s experience of sur-
gery and its outcome can be influenced by the anaesthetist, particu-
larly in the first 72 hours when oedema and pain are at their maximal 
degree. Good intraoperative communication between surgeon and 
anaesthetist is key to achieving the optimal postoperative outcome.
Often the head of the patient is away from the anaesthetic ma-
chine, therefore particular consideration should be given to the 
length of breathing circuits, monitoring cables, and intravenous 
access lines. Patients should wear anti- venous thromboembolism 
stockings and sequential pneumatic inflatable calf compressors 
should be applied intraoperatively to prevent deep vein thrombosis. 
The use of prophylactic anticoagulants should be considered for pa-
tients undergoing prolonged surgery or where a significant period of 
postoperative immobility is expected; however, this must be specif-
ically discussed with the operating surgeon, given the potential risk 
of haematoma formation. Generally, a single prophylactic dose of a 
broad- spectrum antibiotic is given intravenously at induction of an-
aesthesia in most aesthetic surgical procedures, followed by regular 
oral antibiotics for up to 1 week following surgery involving any im-
plants or grafts (including cartilage)— although local policies should 
be followed. Normothermia should be maintained perioperatively 
using warmed intravenous fluids and active warming blankets as 
necessary, in order to avoid issues relating to hypothermia such as 
altered coagulation and wound healing. Large volume blood loss is 
rare in these procedures, and a relatively restrictive perioperative 
intravenous fluid regimen is advised, to avoid bladder distension 
(causing patient irritability and hypertension) and facial oedema in 
the early postoperative period.
Anaesthesia technique
Most of these surgical procedures require GA or sedation to aug-
ment LA infiltration, though there is some variation depending 
upon the specific procedure and the duration of surgery, further in-
fluenced by the preference of the patient, surgeon, and anaesthetist.
 
 
 
 
 
 
95
Anaesthesia for orofacial aesthetic procedures
Sedation
Sedation is discussed in detail in Chapter 6; however, in the con-
text of orofacial aesthetic surgery, it is best reserved for superficial 
procedures of short duration, in compliant patients. The potential 
advantages include avoidance of invasive airway management and 
emergence phenomena, reduced postoperative nausea and vomiting 
and sore throat, and expedited hospital discharge. Delivery of safe 
and appropriate sedation is a skill that requires practice, and most 
anaesthetists would agree that achieving the desired depth of sed-
ation requires a great deal of skill. It can be challenging to achieve 
the fine balance required, in the face of fluctuating surgical stimuli, 
variable onset/ offset of different pharmacological agents, additive 
and synergistic effects of combinations of agents, and the varied re-
sponse of individual patients to them.7
The ASA defines the continuum of depth of sedation as follows11:
 • Minimal sedation (anxiolysis): a drug- induced state during which 
patients respond normally to verbal commands. Although cogni-
tive function and physical coordination may be impaired, airway 
reflexes, ventilatory functions, and cardiovascular functions are 
unaffected.
 • Moderate sedation/ analgesia (‘conscious sedation’): a drug- 
induced depression of consciousness during which patients 
respond purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or ac-
companied by light tactile stimulation. No interventions are re-
quired to maintain a patent airway, and spontaneous ventilation 
is adequate. Cardiovascular function is usually maintained.
 • Deep sedation/ analgesia: a drug- induced depression of con-
sciousness during which patients cannot be easily aroused but 
respond purposefully following repeated or painful stimulation. 
The ability to independently maintain ventilatory function may 
be impaired. Patients may require assistance in maintaining a 
patent airway, and spontaneous ventilation may be inadequate. 
Cardiovascular function is usually maintained.
 • GA: a drug- induced loss of consciousness during which patients 
are not rousable, even by painful stimulation. The ability to in-
dependently maintain ventilatory function is often impaired. 
Patients often require assistance in maintaining a patent airway 
and positive pressure ventilation may be required because of de-
pressed spontaneous ventilation or drug- induced depression 
of neuromuscular function. Cardiovascular function may be 
impaired.
The greatest risk of sedation is unintended airway obstruction, 
leading to hypoxia. This is particularly pertinent during facial sur-
gery where the unsecured airway may be lost without immediate 
access or easy early detection. Inadequate sedation of the patient 
for a particular phase of surgery may lead to deepening of the level 
of sedation, which in turn may cause the patient to become restless 
and more uncooperative, leading to a further increase in the depth 
of sedation, such that the patient inadvertently drifts into GA and 
subsequent airway obstruction. Immediate detection of airway ob-
struction may be hindered by interference with monitoring systems 
following patient movement, surgical draping, or during surgery 
on the surrounding area.7,12 Nasal cannulae and face masks with 
continuous end- tidal carbon dioxide monitoring are now widely 
available.
Patients often perceive that sedation may be less ‘risky’13 com-
pared with GA, and in some cases this may have influenced their 
overall decision- making and justification to undergo cosmetic sur-
gery. Patients should be fully counselled about the risks of sedation, 
and given no false reassurances. The desired depth of sedation must 
be agreed by the anaesthetist and surgeon, and the potential for GA 
must be prepared for— the patient must be appropriately starved, 
and the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel must be 
available.12– 14
Successful sedation should complement good- quality LA infil-
tration, and relies upon close communication between surgeon 
and anaesthetist. Patient selection is also important, and caution 
should be applied in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea syn-
drome. The ideal sedation technique facilitates rapid onset of sed-
ation, provides additional analgesia, causes minimal respiratory 
or cardiovascular depression, and allows rapid recovery. The key is 
often to ensure provision of adequate analgesia at the time of LA 
injection, whose intense stimulation may provoke a response; there-
after sedation may be titrated to provide patient comfort without 
respiratory impairment. Many different combinations of propofol, 
opioids, benzodiazepines, and ketamine have been described and 
used successfully for sedation, and are discussed in greater detail in 
Chapter 6. Dexmedetomidine has gained popularity more recently, 
and can be used for short, minimally stimulating procedures, such 
as laser treatments. It can be administered as a premedication, orally 
or intranasally, or as a continuous infusion intraoperatively (after an 
initial loading dose of 0.5– 1.0 mcg/ kg bolus over 10 minutes). This 
centrally acting α2- adrenoceptor agonist attenuates sympathetic ac-
tivity7,15 and its properties of sedation, anxiolysis, and mild analgesia, 
with minimal respiratory depression, make it an attractive agent for 
aesthetic facial surgery. In the UK, it is most commonly used as a 
sedative adjunct in critical care, and it is often used in combination 
with other agents due to its mild analgesic properties; however, this 
may potentiate the risk of hypoventilation and airway compromise. 
Intravenous dexmedetomidine has been used in patients under-
going facelift surgery under sedation, demonstrating a reduction 
in opioid and other anxiolytic medications, with fewer episodes of 
intraoperative hypoxaemia requiring supplemental oxygen. Side ef-
fects include hypotension and bradycardia, and intraoperative ad-
ministration of vasopressors may be required more frequently.15– 17
General anaesthesia
The choice of airway device should reflect the potential for head 
and neck movement intraoperatively, surgical access require-
ments, and the type of surgery. As there is a risk of displacement 
of the airway, particularly during application of surgical drapes 
and during head turning, the device must be safely secured. South- 
facing Ring– Adair– Elwyn (RAE) tubes, reinforced tracheal tubes, 
and nasotracheal tubes are commonly used as well as flexible laryn-
geal mask airways (recommended airway devices for specific sur-
gical procedures are described later in the chapter). The advantage 
of the laryngeal mask airway is the ability to insert and remove it in a 
smooth manner, minimizing sympathetic and airway reflex stimula-
tion. The obvious disadvantage is its easier dislodgement from head 
movement during surgery, therefore it is prudent to check the pos-
ition and seal after insertion and before commencing surgery, and to 
secure it thoroughly. Tracheal tubes provide greater security, being 
 
 
96
Aesthetic surgery
less easily displaced during head movement, and they can be opti-
mally positioned away from the surgical site; however, they are more 
likely to invoke coughing and a sympathetic response at tracheal 
extubation. The eyes should be protected during all facial surgery, as 
they are at particular risk of desiccation from the heat of the oper-
ating lights. Regular and liberal eye lubrication, eye taping, and cor-
neal shields should be used where appropriate, and especially during 
prolonged surgery.7,9,18 The use of throat packs is discussed in detail 
in Chapter 10, but should no longer be considered routine practice, 
and evidence is lacking for their efficacy.19,20
Propofol is used most commonly for induction of anaesthesia 
for orofacial aesthetic surgery, and maintenance of anaesthesia 
may be either inhalational or total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA). 
Commonly used inhalational agents include desflurane (for its rapid 
emergence properties) and sevoflurane (for its smooth emergence 
properties). Intraoperative analgesia is most commonly provided 
by remifentanil, via a target- controlled infusion that allows titra-
tion to the level of surgical stimuli, supplemented with either fen-
tanyl or morphine for postoperative analgesia. Recent guidelines 
have been published by the Association of Anaesthetists for the safe 
practice of TIVA.21 Processed electroencephalography is recom-
mended for patients at high risk of awareness (e.g. when neuromus-
cular blocking agents are required) and if surgical access permits its 
use. The intravenous cannula should be directly visible when using 
TIVA. Intraoperative monitoring standards should comply with 
Association of Anaesthetists guidance.3
Local anaesthesia
LA is often administered in the form of a regional anaesthetic block, 
or by tumescent anaesthesia. The former allows small targeted LA 
doses to be delivered, with minimal tissue distortion. The latter de-
livers large volumes of LA diluted in 0.9% sodium chloride solution 
(often with additives), and allows tissue hydrodissection, anaes-
thesia, and haemostasis. An initial dose of LA administered at the 
start of the procedure attenuates the stress response to surgery, and 
reduces intraoperative analgesic requirements. Various dilutions, 
additives, and LA agents can be used, therefore the surgeon and an-
aesthetist must agree the maximum safe dose to avoid LA toxicity. 
As there is a rich blood supply to the face, LA may be absorbed easily, 
so the risk should be minimized by using dilute concentrations of 
LA, adding adrenaline, and fractionating the dosing over prescribed 
time intervals.8
Adrenaline
The addition of this vasoconstrictor to LA is well established. 
Advantages include prolonging the effect of the LA by decreasing its 
systemic absorption, minimizing the risk of systemic toxicity, and 
providing haemostasis. The addition of 5 mcg of adrenaline to 1 mL 
of LA agent produces a 1:200,000 concentration22 (preprepared vials 
also exist). Larger doses of LA are permitted if adrenaline is added. 
It requires several minutes following injection in order to take effect. 
Caution should be observed in patients susceptible to the haemo-
dynamic effects of systemic absorption of adrenaline.8
Hyaluronidase
By catalysing the hydrolysis of hyaluronic acid, a major constituent 
of the interstitial barrier, hyaluronidase lowers the viscosity of 
hyaluronic acid, thereby enhancing permeation of the LA, and also 
potentially reducing tissue distortion. The dose is usually 1500 IU, 
added to the LA solution.
Sodium bicarbonate
Commonly used amide LA agents are poorly soluble in water.22 They 
are prepared as hydrochloride salts with an acidic pH (in the range 
of 4– 6) to improve water solubility and increase shelf life. The add-
ition of sodium bicarbonate as a buffer will raise the pH to nearer 
physiological values, which can decrease pain on injection. This 
alkalinization can also increase the rate of onset by raising the pro-
portion of lipid- soluble uncharged base, which readily penetrates 
neural tissue. The main limitation is the amount of sodium bicar-
bonate that may be added, before precipitation of the LA.
Steroids
As well as being given intravenously, dexamethasone may be added 
to LA agents to prolong their duration of action. There is limited evi-
dence of its efficacy in LA infiltration and it is probably more effective 
as an adjunct in regional anaesthetic nerve blocks.23 Alternatively, 
triamcinolone acetonide (Kenalog®) is sometimes used to minimize 
postoperative swelling.
Regional anaesthesia
Regional anaesthesia is the deposition of low doses of LA around 
or near a specific nerve or nerve bundle, aiming to block the nerve 
territory. This technique minimizes tissue distension at the surgical 
site and can cover a large area. It may be used as a sole technique 
depending on the type of surgery, or used in combination with sed-
ation or GA. The sensory supply of the face is complex, and is dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter 4. The relevant nerve blocks for specific 
orofacial aesthetic surgical procedures are described later in this 
chapter.
Surgical requirements for orofacial aesthetic 
procedures
Dry surgical ﬁeld
A dry surgical field provides optimal operating conditions for sur-
gery, as well as reducing blood transfusion requirements. There are 
several methods of providing these conditions (discussed in greater 
detail in Chapters 7 and 10):
 • Head- up tilt: 20– 30° to improve venous drainage.24
 • Tranexamic acid: the highly vascular orofacial region is at risk 
of bleeding, and a single intravenous dose of this antifibrinolytic 
agent may reduce intraoperative blood loss in orthognathic sur-
gery.25,26 A meta- analysis of 10,000 patients undergoing a range 
of surgical procedures found the probability of requiring blood 
transfusion reduced by approximately a third. The effects on 
thromboembolic events and mortality remain uncertain, how-
ever.27 The translation to aesthetic facial surgery depends upon 
the specific procedure and associated risk of blood loss, and it 
should be considered on a case- by- case basis.
 • Controlled hypotension: its use in reducing intraoperative 
blood loss in major orthognathic surgery is well documented28– 31; 
97
Considerations for speciﬁc orofacial surgical procedures
however, there is a paucity of evidence for this technique in aes-
thetic facial surgery. Generally, a moderate degree of hypotension 
for major surgery where the bleeding risk is relatively high is ac-
cepted practice, with profound hypotension or prolonged periods 
avoided. There is no clear blood pressure target that will minimize 
blood loss and protect the patient from postoperative organ in-
jury; however, prolonged duration at low blood pressures should 
be avoided.32,33
 • Local vasoconstrictor: adrenaline, at varying concentrations, may 
be used locally to achieve haemostasis.
Identiﬁcation of bleeding points
Identification of potential bleeding blood vessels is paramount in 
minimizing the risk of postoperative haematoma formation. Several 
strategies may be employed for this purpose. Firstly, ‘normal’ (or even 
supra- normal) blood pressure should be restored towards the end of 
surgery, to ensure that any bleeding points are found and haemo-
stasis achieved. Secondly, surgeons may request head- down tilt or a 
Valsalva manoeuvre in order to raise venous pressure. Additionally, 
some surgeons advocate avoidance of a vasoconstrictor in the LA 
in order to avoid rebound vasodilatation. Crucially, surgeons must 
dissect accurately in the correct plane to avoid bleeding, rather than 
potentially masking bleeding by suboptimal dissection.
Emergence and tracheal extubation
Due to the nature of the surgery and inherent risk of bleeding, the aim 
is to perform a smooth wake- up with no coughing, laryngospasm, 
or airway obstruction. This can be achieved either with the patient 
awake or in a deep plane of anaesthesia. Each patient must be evalu-
ated individually as to whether they represent a ‘high’ or ‘low’ risk for 
deep tracheal extubation and managed accordingly.34 Deep tracheal 
extubation requires experience, skill, and often requires insertion of 
an oropharyngeal airway and/ or jaw thrust— manoeuvres that may 
not always be feasible or desirable in patients undergoing facial sur-
gery. Tracheal extubation in the awake patient minimizes the risk of 
airway obstruction and laryngospasm, but is associated with sympa-
thetic stimulation and potential risk of coughing, causing bleeding 
at the operative site. These responses may be attenuated to some ex-
tent with opioids, and a continued infusion of remifentanil during 
this period can assist due to its antitussive properties. Achieving 
the desired level to suppress coughing without causing apnoea re-
quires experience and attention to detail.34 Alternatively, well- timed 
administration of an alternative opioid or propofol bolus just pre-
ceding tracheal extubation may be utilized.
Laryngeal mask airways tend to cause less adverse stimulation 
on removal. For this reason, the Bailey manoeuvre35 may be em-
ployed in carefully selected patients, where the tracheal tube is ex-
changed for a laryngeal mask airway at the end of surgery. This is 
performed in a deep plane of anaesthesia, with 100% oxygen and 
follows meticulous oropharyngeal suctioning. The laryngeal mask 
airway is inserted and inflated behind the tracheal tube, which in 
turn is deflated and removed. The laryngeal mask may then be re-
moved in recovery ensuring minimal interference or stimulation. 
This should be undertaken with the patient placed in an upright 
position, and a bite block may be inserted to minimize airway 
obstruction.34
Postoperative priorities for orofacial 
aesthetic surgery
The aim is to achieve an awake, comfortable patient who has a clear 
protected airway, is normotensive, and has no nausea or vomiting. 
This optimizes patient experience, and reduces haematoma forma-
tion. Where possible, the patient should be nursed in an upright pos-
ition to promote venous drainage and minimize facial oedema.
Blood pressure management
Systemic blood pressure may elevate on emergence from anaesthesia, 
and may require active treatment to minimize haematoma forma-
tion, particularly following face lift or blepharoplasty surgery. Pain 
and postoperative nausea and vomiting should be treated promptly 
to avoid the associated sympathetic response. Hypertension may be 
addressed with increments of intravenous labetalol or hydralazine 
(if not contraindicated), depending on the patient’s heart rate. 
Alternatives include sublingual nifedipine or intravenous clonidine, 
the latter having additional analgesic properties.
Nausea and vomiting
Prophylaxis should be the tenet of care for these patients. TIVA, 
avoidance of nitrous oxide, and administration of ondansetron 
4– 8 mg and cyclizine 50 mg contributes to minimizing the post-
operative risk of nausea and vomiting. Dexamethasone 3.3– 6.6 mg 
is also useful given its dual effect on reducing oedema as well as 
antiemesis.
Cooling masks
Hilotherapy delivers cooled, temperature- regulated water through a 
contoured, anatomically designed face mask. While there is no high- 
quality evidence for its use currently, systematic reviews suggest that 
it is well tolerated by patients and that it reduces oedema and pain in 
the immediate postoperative recovery period.36,37
Analgesia
Generally, orofacial aesthetic procedures are not particularly 
painful, being largely superficial surgery, where good- quality local 
or regional anaesthesia has also been used. Nevertheless, intra-
venous opioids may still be required in the immediate recovery 
period. At discharge, a balanced approach to analgesia should be 
employed, with regular paracetamol, supplemented by codeine, 
dihydrocodeine, or tramadol. Non- steroidal anti- inflammatories 
may also be utilized, reducing opioid requirements (and the asso-
ciated risk of nausea and vomiting). Cyclooxygenase- 2 (COX- 2) 
inhibitors may be preferable due to the lesser effect on platelet func-
tion; however, the potential increased risk of cardiovascular compli-
cations must also be considered.
Considerations for speciﬁc orofacial surgical 
procedures
Common orofacial aesthetic procedures and the principal anaes-
thetic considerations are summarized in Table 9.1 and discussed in 
more detail below.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98
Aesthetic surgery
Blepharoplasty
Blepharoplasty may be performed on the upper or lower eyelids 
and is the third most frequently undertaken aesthetic procedure 
in the UK.2 Upper blepharoplasty, to correct hooding of the eyes, 
is the most common of the two, and may be performed for both 
functional and aesthetic reasons. It is sometimes also combined 
with a brow lift. Lower lid blepharoplasty may be performed either 
via transconjunctival or transcutaneous approaches, and aims to 
achieve a youthful appearance and a smooth continuum of the lower 
lid and midface, and it may be combined with midface surgery. 
Isolated blepharoplasty can be performed under LA with sedation 
or GA. Skin markings are performed in the sitting and lying pos-
ition prior to anaesthesia. Proxymetacaine eye drops are first admin-
istered topically. Tetracaine drops, which are more potent, are also 
used but should be administered after the proxymetacaine as they 
cause considerable discomfort. A rubber corneal shield, generously 
Table 9.1 Common orofacial aesthetic procedures and considerations for anaesthesia
Site
Procedure
Duration
Pain
Anaesthetic 
modality
Airway 
management
Anaesthetic 
considerations
Other
Upper
face
Blepharoplasty 
(upper)
60– 90 
minutes
Minimal, with 
appropriate local 
anaesthesia (LA) 
intraoperatively; 
use of longer- 
acting bupivacaine 
for post- procedure 
reduction in pain
LA + / − sedation, or 
general anaesthesia 
(GA)
If GA, usually 
supraglottic airway 
device (SAD) unless 
contraindicated
Requires stationary 
patient under 
sedation
Intense stimulation 
on LA infiltration, 
followed by minimal 
surgical stimulus
May require 
eye opening 
intraoperatively if 
ptosis surgery
Postoperative 
haematoma risk— 
ensure adequate 
analgesia, prevention 
of nausea and 
vomiting, and good 
blood pressure 
control
Ensure patient aware 
of eye padding on 
emergence
Blepharoplasty 
(lower)
60– 120 
minutes
Moderate
LA + / − sedation, GA
SAD unless 
contraindicated
LA may not cover all 
areas
Good blood pressure 
control
Brow lift
30– 90 
minutes
Minimal if direct 
or local approach; 
moderate if 
endoscopic 
approach
LA + sedation; 
GA if endoscopic 
approach or if 
combined with 
blepharoplasty
SAD or tracheal 
tube (SAD may 
dislodge with head 
movement)
Dry surgical field
May be combined with 
blepharoplasty
Middle
face
Face lift 
(rhytidectomy)
2– 5 hours
Mild– moderate
LA + / − sedation 
possible if 
superficial;
GA if deeper 
dissection or if 
combined with 
other procedures
SAD or tracheal 
tube (SAD may 
dislodge with 
head movement. 
Tracheal tube best 
for longer cases).
May be difficult to 
secure tracheal 
tube
Identify potential 
bleeding points 
intraoperatively
May require 
tranexamic acid
Postoperative 
haematoma risk— 
ensure adequate 
analgesia, prevention 
of nausea and 
vomiting, and good 
blood pressure control
Rhinoplasty
1– 4 hours
May be minimal; 
moderate if 
osteotomies or if 
rib graft used
GA
Flexible SAD or 
reinforced tracheal 
tube
Dry surgical field; nasal 
decongestant; avoid 
distortion of upper lip 
when securing airway 
device
May require 
tranexamic acid to 
minimize bleeding  
+ / − dexamethasone  
to reduce oedema
Otoplasty
60– 90 
minutes
Minimal
LA or GA (usually 
children)
If GA, SAD unless 
contraindicated
Head movement on 
changing sides
Lower
face
Genioplasty
30– 90 
minutes
Minimal if implant 
used; moderate if 
sliding genioplasty
LA + / − sedation 
or GA
SAD; nasotracheal 
tube if intermaxillary 
fixation
Avoid pressure on the 
chin postoperatively
Liposuction
30– 90 
minutes
Mild
LA + / − sedation if 
sole procedure
Nasal cannulae 
oxygen with end- 
tidal carbon dioxide 
monitoring
Large doses of LA— 
ensure care with 
maximum doses
Other
Laser superficial 
lesions
Varies 
depending 
on site and 
size
Mild– moderate
Usually LA/ regional; 
may require GA for 
children;
oral sedation may 
suffice
SAD for GA unless 
contraindicated
Laser fire hazard— 
use lowest oxygen 
concentration and 
protective safety 
measures
Ensure laser safety 
protection for patient 
and staff
Insertion of on- 
lay implants for 
augmentation
60– 90 
minutes
Mild
LA + / − sedation or 
GA (depends on 
surgical site)
SAD unless 
contraindicated
Commonly cheek, jaw, 
chin implants
Autologous fat 
transfer
60– 120 
minutes
Mild
LA + / − sedation, GA
Large doses tumescent 
LA— care with 
maximum doses
 
99
Considerations for speciﬁc orofacial surgical procedures
covered with ocular surface lubricant, is used to protect the cornea 
during surgery. LA mixture is injected subcutaneously using a 30 G 
needle. The ‘pinch and roll’ technique separates the orbicularis from 
the skin, creating a subcutaneous, relatively avascular plane for in-
jection38,39 (Fig. 9.1). LA injection is the most stimulating phase of 
the surgery, with speed of injection proportional to patient discom-
fort, and maximal analgesia should pre- empt injection. The medial 
half of both eyelids (at the pretarsal zone, near the eyelashes) and the 
medial canthal region are the most sensitive areas.
Adequate LA renders the operative site insensate during the 
procedure. Once the LA has taken effect, there is very little sur-
gical stimulation for the remainder of the procedure. Addition of 
bupivacaine together with the lidocaine and adrenaline mixture, 
prolongs the duration of the LA. Ocular/ ophthalmic complications 
during blepharoplasty are extremely rare, but may be associated 
with inadvertent patient movement or hypertension. Effective LA 
administration improves patient cooperation, reduces periopera-
tive hypertension, and minimizes unwanted patient movements 
during surgery in this delicate area. For GA, limiting coughing at 
tracheal extubation and treating postoperative nausea and vomiting 
promptly may also reduce any risk.40
Occasionally, patient participation may be required intraoperatively, 
to open and close their eyes, particularly in ptosis surgery— in order 
to gauge lid position. Sedation techniques, such as propofol target- 
controlled infusions, may facilitate this. A single prophylactic dose 
of intravenous antibiotics, meticulous skin preparation (with water- 
based iodine or chlorhexidine), and topical chloramphenicol are 
employed to reduce the risk of infection. Simple oral analgesia is gen-
erally sufficient postoperatively. The eyes are padded for several hours 
after the procedure, and the patient should be prewarned of this to 
reduce anxiety/ disorientation in the recovery room.
Brow lift
Ageing of the brow may cause ptosis due to loss of volume, or can be 
positional relating to laxity of the frontalis muscle.39 There are sev-
eral treatment options:
 • Botox injection may be used to correct brow ptosis in appropri-
ately selected patients, performed as an outpatient, with minimal 
risks associated. Results are temporary and therefore repeated 
treatments are required, and it is not universally successful.
 • Surgical brow lifts can be direct (in the supra- brow region), local 
(pre- trichial, at the forehead and near the lower hairline),38 or 
distant (endoscopic or transcranial). A modification of the direct 
lift is the ‘crenated browlift’, which involves a zigzag incision (to 
disguise the scar) just above the eyebrow, with resection of skin, 
subcutaneous tissue, and muscle. The direct and local approaches 
can be performed with regional anaesthesia, but the distant ap-
proaches often require sedation or GA. The post- trichial endo-
scopic approach allows access to the brow as well as the midfacial 
area.41 GA is preferred since extensive deep dissection, within 
multiple tissue planes, may be required— including detachment of 
the firmly adherent periosteum from the underlying bone, which 
can be extremely uncomfortable. Continuous intraoperative in-
fusion of remifentanil is particularly well suited, titrated to the 
varying magnitude of surgical stimulus. The airway is usually 
away from the site of surgery, and may be secured in the usual 
manner, although care should be taken during head turning, such 
that a tracheal tube may be preferred to a supraglottic airway de-
vice (SAD).
Surgical face lift (rhytidectomy)
Face lift surgery is only the seventh most common aesthetic surgical 
procedure in the UK.2 Less invasive techniques that utilize limited 
incisions and fewer dissection planes (minimizing patient discom-
fort and complications) are more popular. Almost all modern face 
lift surgery is performed using the superficial muscular aponeurotic 
system (SMAS). Cutaneous facelifts are now only performed for se-
lect patients, such as those with skin disorders or the more elderly 
patient, as the skin is not a good vehicle for repositioning descended 
facial tissues. SMAS flaps and lateral SMAS- ectomy are the main 
techniques for facial rejuvenation. SMAS plication may be helpful 
in patients who have undergone multiple surgical procedures to de-
crease the risk to the facial nerve, but results are often short- lived. In 
line with patient demand for more minimally invasive procedures 
and faster recovery, non- surgical procedures such as thread lifts and 
minimal access cranial suspension lifts are becoming increasingly 
popular. These can be performed under LA, though, like SMAS pli-
cation, the results are often not long- lasting. Endoscopic brow lifts 
and SMAS facelifts can often be combined, and produce a more har-
monious rejuvenation. Face lifts may also be combined with other 
rejuvenating surgery such as blepharoplasty, liposuction, or removal 
of submental/ submandibular fat.
Face lift surgery is generally performed under GA. TIVA or 
inhalational anaesthetic techniques may be used, though TIVA is 
generally preferred. Surgery may be prolonged, sometimes taking 
up to 5 hours, therefore maintenance of normothermia, venous 
Fig. 9.1 Infiltration of the upper eyelid using the ‘pinch and roll’ technique.
 
 
100
Aesthetic surgery
thromboembolic prophylaxis, protection of pressure areas and eyes, 
and close attention to optimizing fluid balance are essential. The 
greatest challenge is ensuring that any airway device is not inter-
fering with the surgical field, and that it remains secure during head 
turning. Either a flexible laryngeal mask airway or a tracheal tube 
may be used; however, a RAE tube offers a degree of security while 
also enabling positioning away from the surgical field. The airway 
device may be held in place with either tape or ties if access to the 
lower jaw is permitted, or may be left un- taped, relying upon care 
from the surgeon to not dislodge it. The breathing circuit can be con-
tained within a sterile clear drape such that it can pass through/ over 
the sterile field and enable the surgeon to move the breathing circuit 
in concert with the head13 (Fig. 9.2). Alternatively, a reinforced tra-
cheal tube can be used, sutured to the mandibular dentition.42
Facial nerve monitoring may be used to minimize the risk of 
nerve damage during flap dissection. In such cases, neuromuscular 
blocking agents should be avoided at tracheal intubation. Where 
a judicious dose of neuromuscular blocking agent is necessary to 
facilitate challenging airway management, quantitative neuromus-
cular monitoring is advisable to ensure return of neuromuscular 
function before surgery commences— by the time the patient has 
been positioned, skin preparation performed, and surgical drapes 
applied, pharmacological reversal is rarely required.
Postoperative haematoma formation is the most common and 
serious complication,43,44 with an incidence of 0.2– 8% (depending 
on the definition of haematoma). One of the most important risk 
factors that has been identified is hypertension— either pre- existing 
uncontrolled hypertension, or rebound hypertension following 
surgery.6,44 To minimize the risk of hypertension and haematoma 
formation, care and attention should be paid to the following: avoid-
ance of coughing and straining at time of tracheal extubation; res-
toration of normotension prior to skin closure to identify bleeding 
points; control of postoperative blood pressure; nursing with head 
elevated in the recovery period; prevention and prompt treatment 
of postoperative nausea and vomiting; avoidance of excessive intra-
venous fluids, which may cause bladder distension, discomfort, 
and agitation; and, adequate analgesia. Intraoperative hypotensive 
anaesthesia may contribute to postoperative haematoma forma-
tion if bleeding points are not identified before the end of surgery, 
in addition to the potential associated risk of ‘rebound’ hyperten-
sion.44 Other risk factors include male sex, smoking, and preopera-
tive non- steroidal anti- inflammatories.6 There is little consensus on 
the optimal method for postoperative blood pressure control. The 
key is prompt management after excluding/ treating pain. In pa-
tients without pre- existing hypertension, a systolic blood pressure of 
<140 mmHg is often targeted.13,44,45
Pain is generally mild to moderate following facelift procedures. 
LA infiltration at the time of surgery and simple analgesics such 
as paracetamol, codeine/ dihydrocodeine, or tramadol normally 
suffice.
The surgeon and anaesthetist should ensure that they (or a nom-
inated colleague) are immediately available during the postoperative 
recovery period in case urgent haematoma evacuation is required.
Rhinoplasty
Rhinoplasty surgery involves modifying the shape of the nose for 
aesthetic purposes, and is the fifth most popular cosmetic surgery 
in the UK.2 Possible reasons for rhinoplasty include hump or saddle 
nose, nasal length too short or too long, previous nasal fracture/ 
trauma, or bent/ buckled nose structure. It may also be combined 
with a septoplasty to improve nasal breathing, in which case the pro-
cedure is termed functional septorhinoplasty. There are two main 
rhinoplasty approaches— closed and open— depending upon pa-
tient requirements and surgeon preference.
Closed rhinoplasty corrects the nasal structures via an incision 
inside the nose, and visible scars are avoided. Open rhinoplasty re-
quires a transcolumellar incision in combination with an internal 
incision, allowing elevation of a nasal skin flap, and degloving of the 
lower alar cartilages for direct and wide exposure of the nasal frame. 
The skin of the nose tip is carefully lifted and the nasal cartilages 
and bones are surgically corrected. At the end of the surgery, the 
incisions are closed with fine suture material. The small incisions 
usually heal very well, and in most cases are barely noticeable after a 
few months. There is currently a trend towards more open surgery. 
Postoperative pain is similar whether an open or closed technique is 
used. Although the skin incision is tiny, the operative field is much 
bigger, with dissection from the nasolabial angle to the nasion, ex-
tending to the lateral nasal sidewall. If the Piezo technique is used 
to cut the bone for remodelling, there is even wider undermining, 
almost to the infraorbital nerve. When osteotomies are performed, 
there is increased surgical stimulus regardless of the technique used.
Lidocaine with adrenaline is delivered into the septum by in-
jection into the columella and base of septum— which is covered 
by squamous epithelium, so will not absorb topically applied LA 
(Fig. 9.3a). The long sphenopalatine nerves (from the spheno-
palatine ganglion) innervate the posterior two- thirds of the 
septum and lateral walls, and may be regionally blocked with lido-
caine/ adrenaline. The skin is innervated by the ophthalmic and 
maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve. The infraorbital nerve 
(a branch of the maxillary nerve) innervates the lateral aspect. 
The intertrochlear branches and the anterior ethmoidal branch 
of the nasociliary nerve (both from the ophthalmic division) 
supply the skin from the superior to inferior aspect respectively. 
The infraorbital nerve may be blocked with bupivacaine 0.5% and 
adrenaline 1:200,000 to aid postoperative analgesia (Fig. 9.3b). 
Fig. 9.2 Sterile draping of the breathing circuit within the sterile 
surgical field.
 
101
Considerations for speciﬁc orofacial surgical procedures
Nerve blocks with adrenaline also assist in decreasing bleeding at 
the site of surgery, optimizing the surgical field, so early adminis-
tration ensures maximal efficacy during surgery.46
The nasal mucosa and nasopharynx are highly vascular zones, and 
a topical vasoconstrictor is often administered alongside the LA in-
jected by the surgeon. Gauze soaked in cocaine (4– 5%), a potent 
vasoconstrictor, can be used to pack the nasal cavities to provide 
a relatively avascular field. Similarly, Moffett’s solution, containing 
cocaine, sodium bicarbonate, and adrenaline, may be used (con-
stituent quantities tend to vary between institutions, and do not 
necessarily conform to the traditional description).47 Care must be 
heeded in patients with cardiovascular disease, with particular vigi-
lance for hypertension following surgical co- infiltration of adren-
aline. Ideally, Moffett’s solution is administered with the patient in 
the head- down position to facilitate pooling in the nasopharynx. 
Any excess volume can be absorbed by prior placement of an appro-
priately positioned throat pack (with the throat pack removed before 
commencing surgery) or by careful suctioning of the oropharynx, 
preventing postoperative mucosal injury/ oropharyngeal discom-
fort from the residual solution. A safe approach to the use of throat 
packs (discussed in Chapter 10) must be employed. Alternatively, 
premixed co- phenylcaine spray (lidocaine 5% with phenylephrine 
0.5%) can be used, which ensures a standardized concentration, and 
avoids some of the safety issues surrounding storage and clinical use 
of cocaine. Some surgeons simply use adrenaline- soaked patties, but 
the key to all methods is to allow at least 10– 15 minutes for them to 
be effective.
Rhinoplasty and septorhinoplasty are most commonly performed 
under GA. The standard requirements are a stationary patient, dry 
surgical field, and smooth emergence from anaesthesia. A tracheal 
tube (usually a RAE tube) or a flexible reinforced laryngeal mask 
airway are most commonly used. Care must be taken when securing 
the airway device not to distort the upper lip. Blood contamination 
of the airway is minimized with meticulous surgical technique 
(dissection in the correct tissue plane), moderate controlled hypo-
tension, and head- up positioning. If a throat pack is used, again, 
recommended safety strategies must be applied. Cranial nerves X 
and XII may be vulnerable to injury within the oropharynx, caused 
by compression from the airway device or throat pack, particularly 
during excessive head and neck manipulation. Care must therefore 
be taken to avoid excessive pressure that may result in the extremely 
rare Tapia syndrome— paralysis of the hypoglossal and recurrent la-
ryngeal branch of the vagus nerve.48
TIVA is well suited to the variations in magnitude of surgical 
stimulation, and may also facilitate a smooth emergence. A bolus 
of a longer- acting opioid towards the end of the procedure may also 
facilitate tracheal extubation without coughing or hypertension— 
particularly in combined osteotomy or turbinate surgery where 
there may be increased risk of bleeding. A cast is placed over the 
nose at the end of surgery, and care must be taken not to apply pres-
sure to or alter the shape of this during emergence or postoperative 
recovery. Sometimes internal nasal splints or nasal packs are also 
placed, which may decrease or obstruct the nasal airway temporarily.
If a septal, temporalis fascia, or ear cartilage harvest have been 
required (or there is a concomitant septoplasty), postoperative pain 
is usually kept to a minimum by LA infiltration at the relevant ana-
tomical sites. In ear cartilage harvest, postoperative pain may result 
from the pressure dressing (required for 2– 5 days) applied to pre-
vent conchal bowl haematoma. Rib grafts can be harvested from the 
medial part of the fifth to ninth ribs (generally the sixth or seventh is 
used). As the principal surgeon usually stands on the right- hand side 
of the patient, an assistant may harvest the bone from the left- hand 
side, or sometimes the opposing side to sleeping tendency is chosen. 
A Valsalva manoeuvre assists in detecting iatrogenic pneumothorax, 
in which case a chest drain may be required. Rib harvest may in-
crease analgesic requirements postoperatively, and a continuous LA 
infusion (via a locally placed catheter) may be of benefit for the first 
24 hours.
Otoplasty
Excessively protruding ears is one of the most common facial cos-
metic complaints. It is most likely due to insufficient development of 
the ear cartilage, and/ or incorrect position of the ear in relation to the 
skull. This can sometimes lead to emotional/ psychological distress, 
especially in children, relating to teasing or bullying from peers, 
and surgical cosmetic correction may be offered. Although it can 
be performed at any age, it is preferable to complete the surgery be-
fore starting school if possible. Surgery is performed via an incision 
posterior to the pinna, which is subsequently barely detectable. The 
shape and position of the exterior ear and ear cartilage are altered, 
and once in the desired position, closed with absorbable sutures. In 
adults, this procedure may be performed under LA. In children, GA 
Fig. 9.3 Local anaesthetic injection sites for rhinoplasty surgery: (a) septum and (b) infraorbital nerve.
 
102
Aesthetic surgery
is required alongside LA infiltration, and a laryngeal mask airway 
usually provides sufficient airway protection (anaesthesia manage-
ment of paediatric patients is discussed in detail in Chapter 11). Pain 
following the procedure is minimal, and aside from wearing a pro-
tective headband, no specific aftercare is required.
Facial augmentation
On- lay implants (implants that lie on top of the bone) may be in-
serted through small skin incisions to add volume to the face. 
Amenable areas are the malar region, chin, and mandible. The pro-
cedure can be undertaken under LA alone, LA plus sedation, or GA.
The least complicated method for chin augmentation 
(genioplasty) is to insert a suitably sized horseshoe- shaped sili-
cone or porous high- density polyethylene implant. This shape of 
implant does not produce pressure on underlying bone and cause 
consequent atrophy. It is possible to insert the implant through a 
submental skin incision or an infralabial (labial sulcus) approach 
without visible scars. Genioplasty can also be performed by repo-
sitioning the bone itself. This operation is carried out intraorally, 
so that there are no visible skin scars. An incision through the gum 
on the inside of the lower lip allows access to the mandible, where 
an osteotomy can then be performed and secured with small metal 
plates and screws. A LA nerve block of the mental nerve with a 
long- acting LA and adrenaline reduces intraoperative bleeding 
and postoperative pain.
Liposuction
Liposuction is the aspiration of unwanted fat deposits from under 
the skin using a cannula. The procedure can reduce volume, induce 
skin retraction, and restore a youthful appearance. For facial aes-
thetics, it is usually performed to the neck or for facial contouring, 
and LA will normally suffice, unless it is undertaken as part of an-
other surgical procedure. The tumescent anaesthesia technique of 
subcutaneous infiltration of high volumes of dilute LA (typically 
lidocaine 0.05% or 0.1%, 0.9% sodium chloride solution, and adren-
aline) is used for anaesthesia, and hydrodissection to reduce blood 
loss (care must be taken to calculate the maximum doses to avoid 
toxicity). Only small volumes of fat are aspirated from the neck, such 
that complications associated with large volume liposuction from 
other areas of the body are less likely; however, awareness of the po-
tential for venous thromboembolism, fat embolism, and fluid over-
load must be maintained.
Autologous fat transfer
Lipofilling is used in aesthetic surgery to provide volume or for 
smoothing of areas of the face subject to atrophy (‘hollow’ appear-
ance), such as the cheek, periorbital region, and mandible. The fat is 
removed using targeted ‘mini- liposuction’ in one anatomical area, 
such as the abdomen or upper thigh. The Coleman technique is 
the gold standard method, divided into three stages: lipoaspiration 
under low pressure, centrifugation for 3 minutes at 2500– 3000 
rpm, and reinjection in three dimensions.49 A tumescent anaes-
thesia technique is often used in conjunction with a GA, and the 
fat transfer may be performed alone or in combination with other 
procedures. The potential advantage of autologous fat grafting as 
opposed to synthetic fillers is that it is biocompatible, naturally inte-
grating into tissues (and the local blood supply). The fat also contains 
adipose- derived stem cells, with potential regenerative properties. 
Surgeons may wish for patients to receive 1 week of oral antibiotics 
following surgery.
Considerations for non- surgical facial 
aesthetic procedures
Non- surgical aesthetic procedures, like Botox injection and dermal 
fillers, are very popular, with the number of patients undergoing 
such treatments rising every year. They are most often performed 
under topical anaesthesia, cold packs, or regional LA nerve blocks 
(e.g. infraorbital or mental nerves).
Botox
For Botox treatments of the face, no anaesthetic is necessary, as tiny 
needles (30– 33 G) are used with only a small volume of injectate. 
However, treatments for hyperhidrosis in the hands or feet may re-
quire topical anaesthesia or a regional nerve block as they require 
larger volumes to be injected. Effects are seen within 72 hours and 
typically last 3 months. Complications are rarely seen; however, 
they may include haematoma formation, infection at the injection 
site, injection of the incorrect target muscle, and, extremely rarely, 
anaphylaxis.
Fillers
There are different types of filler, but currently hyaluronic acid 
is the most commonly used. Duration of desired effects depends 
upon the type of filler used. Pain during injection of dermal fillers 
varies with the injection site and the volume injected. One of the 
challenges is to find the best approach for each different patient 
and treatment, ranging from the application of ice packs or cooling 
sprays, to topical application of LA (e.g. lidocaine or prilocaine), to 
short- acting LA infiltration and regional nerve blocks. Localized 
oedema is relatively common, for 2– 3 days post treatment. 
Complications are more common with permanent fillers, in-
cluding tissue necrosis, granuloma formation, and foreign body 
inflammatory reactions.
Laser
The use of lasers in aesthetic practice is increasing. While surgery 
can improve the laxity of skin and shape of a facial feature, lasers may 
improve the tone, texture, pigmentation, and quality of the skin. In 
facial aesthetic practice, lasers are principally used for skin rejuven-
ation, but can be used for a wide variety of indications, including 
treatment of port- wine stains, facial telangiectasia, small- vessel 
disorders, vascular lesions, pigmented lesions, and tattoo and hair 
removal. The laser procedure may be performed alone, or in com-
bination with other surgical/ non- surgical procedures. The type of 
laser selected depends upon the particular lesion and the effect that 
is desired. While laser treatments are usually performed under top-
ical or local/ regional anaesthesia, anaesthetists may be required for 
paediatric cases, poorly tolerant adult patients, or for large lesions. 
As the treatments may also be carried out in the operating theatre 
as an adjunct to other operative procedures, anaesthetists must be 
familiar with the risks associated with laser use and the safety strat-
egies employed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103
Considerations for non-surgical facial aesthetic procedures
Categories of laser
Lasers can be categorized as ablative or non- ablative, and fraction-
ated or non- fractionated.50 Ablative lasers are the most aggres-
sive, vaporizing tissue and removing the whole epidermal layer. 
Consequently, they have the longest downtime period for healing 
with the greatest degree of discomfort, but the most effective results. 
Non- ablative lasers are gentler, inducing controlled tissue injury to 
the dermis, leaving the epidermis intact, and stimulating dermal re-
modelling and collagen production. The effects are more moderate, 
and the downtime for healing is significantly less compared with 
ablative therapies; however, repeated treatments are necessary to 
achieve the desired effect. Fractionated lasers target a small portion 
of the treatment area, whereas non- fractionated lasers act on the en-
tire projected surface of the treated skin.50 Non- ablative fractionated 
lasers may be considered to offer the best of both worlds— achieving 
effects close to ablative laser procedures with multiple treatments 
and shorter recovery times.
Radiofrequency therapy is another non- ablative therapeutic mo-
dality used for skin rejuvenation. It produces a controlled increase in 
tissue temperature in order to stimulate changes in collagen within 
skin cells. It has a high penetration depth, and with relatively low op-
erating temperatures, it may spare the skin from damage.
Topical anaesthesia for laser surgery
There are several options for topical anaesthesia for facial laser ther-
apies, dictated by the size of intended treatment area, the anatomical 
location, the skin depth required to be effective, the duration of LA 
required, and the safety profile of the LA. In common use is EMLA™ 
(Eutectic Mixture of Local Anaesthetic) topical cream, which con-
tains 2.5% lidocaine, 2.5% prilocaine, and a fatty acid emulsifier. It 
reaches a depth of 3 mm at 60 minutes and 5 mm at 120 minutes. It 
produces vasoconstriction within the first 90 minutes and then re-
bound vasodilation and erythema.51
Cryoanaesthesia for laser surgery
This modality provides anaesthesia by cooling the epidermis, and 
may confer some thermal protection during laser therapy. Contact 
cooling involves direct application of a cooling system (e.g. cold 
water or ice) to the skin. Some lasers have an integrated cooling tip 
or ‘finger’. Non- contact cooling is where the cooling effect is trans-
ferred via a gaseous medium, either by the evaporation of liquid (cold 
spray) or by the blowing of cold air onto the skin. Cryoanaesthesia 
can be used in conjunction with topical anaesthesia.51
Laser safety
All personnel should have appropriate training in the safe use of la-
sers in the medical environment.52 Precautions mainly pertain to 
minimizing fire risk and the protection of patients and staff from the 
potentially damaging effects of lasers.
A fire risk exists when the three essential elements of the ‘fire triad’ 
are present— an oxidizer (oxygen or nitrous oxide), a fuel (tracheal 
tube, surgical drape, sponge or gauze, oxygen masks or nasal can-
nulae, alcohol- based skin preparations), and an ignitor (laser, elec-
trocautery). Fire risk can be minimized by addressing each of the 
three ‘fire triad’ elements in turn. The lowest inspired oxygen con-
centration with the lowest flows should be used, and nitrous oxide 
should be avoided. Closed breathing circuits should be used where 
possible, and circuit leaks minimized. Surgical drapes should be 
well configured and vented to prevent oxygen pooling. Any surgical 
sponges or swabs should be kept moist, and alcohol- based skin pre-
parations should be applied carefully to avoid pooling, allowed to 
air- dry, or avoided completely. Laser- safe equipment should be used, 
and only operated by a single trained practitioner. Tracheal tube 
cuffs should be inflated with water, with uncuffed tubes avoided, 
and laser- resistant tracheal tubes used if indicated (e.g. for surgery 
around the airway). The risks relating to laser surgery within the 
airway are not discussed in detail here as the lasers used for aesthetic 
purposes are typically employed externally. However, if the airway 
device being used during non- airway surgery is not laser resistant, 
it is advisable to protect it with aluminium foil or damp swabs when 
a laser is in use.
In the event of a laser fire, the laser should be deactivated immedi-
ately, any burning material removed, and the area should be flooded 
with 0.9% saline solution to extinguish the fire (a saline- soaked 
gauze or towel can be used to pat the area if it is small). A carbon 
dioxide fire extinguisher or fire blanket should be used if flames are 
not immediately controlled. In the event of an airway fire (involving 
the patient’s airway or in situ airway device), gas flows should be 
discontinued and the airway device removed immediately, followed 
by flooding of the area with 0.9% saline. Airway control and manual 
ventilation should be re- established as soon as possible (usually with 
tracheal intubation), and the patient assessed for inhalational injury 
and airway burns.53,54
The eyes are particularly susceptible to damage from lasers, ei-
ther directly or through reflection of the beam. The optical gain of 
the eye can result in a concentrated area of radiant energy falling on 
the cornea or retina, potentially resulting in permanent damage in 
a matter of seconds. Carbon dioxide lasers can cause serious cor-
neal injury, whereas argon, KTP (potassium titanyl phosphate), and 
Nd:YAG (neodymium- doped yttrium aluminium garnet) lasers 
may burn the retina. The eyes of both the patient and operating the-
atre personnel should be protected by approved laser safety glasses 
appropriate to the type of laser in use (wavelength specific). Regular 
eyeglasses may provide sufficient protection, but contact lenses 
will not. Protective eyewear should be a good fit, undamaged with 
no surface reflections, incorporate side- shields, provide a damage 
threshold of >10 seconds, display permanent labels detailing the 
wavelength and optical density tolerance, and must be approved 
by the institution’s laser safety officer. If patient protective eyewear 
interferes with the operative field, moistened sterile eye pads can be 
used to protect the eyes. Scleral/ corneal protective shields are also 
available for surgery performed near or on the eyelids. All operating 
theatre windows must be covered with an opaque material that will 
absorb the appropriate wavelength of the particular laser, and spe-
cially designed warning signs should be displayed.52,53
During laser use, a bioaerosol of very small particles (smoke 
plume) may be released during the destruction of skin cells, which 
may contain hair, desiccated cells (viable and non- viable cellular 
material), prions, or other harmful matter. In addition to the smoke 
plume, noxious gaseous fumes or vapours can be emitted, which 
may have toxic or carcinogenic constituents.52 Consequently, face 
masks should be worn by the laser operator and patient, and a smoke 
evacuator is recommended at the surgical site (operating theatre 
evacuation/ ventilation systems are not effective in the removal of 
the smoke plume).
 
 
 
 
104
Aesthetic surgery
Revision surgery
Revision surgery of any type is not uncommon in facial cosmetic 
surgery. In revision surgery, the anaesthetist should prepare for the 
duration of the surgical procedure to be significantly prolonged, for 
any LA infiltration to be less effective due to scarring at the opera-
tive site, and for patient analgesic requirements to be considerably 
higher.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the following for their valued con-
tributions to the chapter: Mr W. N. A. Kirkpatrick, Consultant 
Craniofacial Plastic Surgeon, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, 
London, UK; Mr N. Joshi, Consultant Oculoplastic Surgeon, Chelsea 
and Westminster Hospital, London, UK; Mr F. C. Bast, Consultant 
Rhinology and Facial- Plastic Surgeon, Guys’ and St Thomas’ 
Hospital, London, UK; Dr B. Norman, Consultant Anaesthetist, 
Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, UK.
REFERENCES
 1. Royal College of Surgeons. Professional standards for cosmetic 
surgery. April 2016. https:// rcs eng.ac.uk/ cosme tics urge ryst 
anda rds
 2. British Association of Aesthetic Surgeons. Cosmetic surgery 
statistics: dad bods and filter jobs. Updated 27 March 2019. 
https:// baaps.org.uk/ about/ news/ 1535/ cosmetic_ surgery_ sta ts_ d 
ad_ b ods_ and_ filt er_ j obs
 3. Klein AA, Meek T, Allcock E, Cook TM, Mincher N, Morris C, 
Nimmo AF, Pandit JJ, Pawa A, Rodney G, Sheraton T, Young 
P. Recommendations for standards of monitoring during 
anaesthesia and recovery 2021. Anaesthesia. 2021;76:1212– 1223.
 4. American Society of Anesthesiologists. ASA physical status 
classification system. Updated 23 October 2019. https:// www.
asahq.org/ standa rds- and- gui deli nes/ asa- physi cal- sta tus- cla ssif 
icat ion- sys tem
 5. Hartle A, McCormack T, Carlisle J, Pichel A, Woodcock T, 
Heagerty A. The measurement of adult blood pressure and 
management of hypertension before elective surgery. Joint 
Guidelines from the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland and the British Hypertension Society. 
Anaesthesia. 2016;71(3):326– 337.
 6. Grover R, Jones BM, Waterhouse N. The prevention of 
haematoma following rhytidectomy: a review of 1078 consecutive 
facelifts. Br J Plast Surg. 2001;54(6):481– 486.
 7. Nekhendzy V, Ramaiah VK. Prevention of perioperative and 
anesthesia- related complications in facial cosmetic surgery. Facial 
Plast Surg Clin N Am. 2013;21(4):559– 577.
 8. Ahlstrom KK, Frodel JL. Local anesthetics for facial plastic 
procedures. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2002;35(1):29– 53.
 9. Beck JI, Johnston KD. Anaesthesia for cosmetic and functional 
maxillofacial surgery. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 
2014;14(1):38– 42.
 10. Brunton G, Paraskeva N, Caird J, Schucan Bird K, Kavanagh J, 
Kwan I, et al. Psychosocial predictors, assessment, and outcomes 
of cosmetic procedures: a systematic rapid evidence assessment. 
Aesth Plast Surg. 2014;38(5):1030– 1040.
 11. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of depth of 
sedation: definition of general anesthesia and levels of sedation/ 
analgesia. Amended 23 October 2019. https:// www.asahq.org/ 
standa rds- and- gui deli nes/ contin uum- of- depth- of- sedat ion- def 
init ion- of- gene ral- ane sthe sia- and- lev els- of- sedati onan alge sia
 12. Newton M, Blightman K. Guidelines for the Provision of Anaesthesia 
Services (GPAS). Chapter 19: Guidance on the Provision of Sedation 
Services. London: Royal College of Anaesthetists; 2016.
 13. Forrester P. Anaesthesia and sedation. In: Jones BM, Grover 
R (eds) Facial Rejuvenation Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby 
Elsevier; 2008:11– 16.
 14. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. Safe sedation practice for 
healthcare procedures: standards and guidance. 2013. https:// 
www.aomrc.org.uk/ wp- cont ent/ uplo ads/ 2016/ 05/ Safe _ Sed atio n_ 
Pr acti ce_ 1 213.pdf
 15. Taghinia AH, Shapiro FE, Slavin SA. Dexmedetomidine in 
aesthetic facial surgery: improving aesthetic safety and efficacy. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;121(1):269– 276.
 16. McMorrow SP, Abramo TJ. Dexmedetomidine sedation: uses in 
pediatric sedation outside the operating room. Pediatr Emerg 
Care. 2012;28(3):292– 296.
 17. Tobias JD. Dexmedetomidine and ketamine: an effective 
alternative for procedural sedation? Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2012;13(4):423– 427.
 18. Pavlakovic L, Lee G. Anaesthesia for maxillofacial surgery. 
Anaesth Intensive Care Med. 2014;15(8):379– 384.
 19. Athanassoglou V, Patel A, McGuire B, Higgs A, Dover MS, 
Brennan PA, et al. Systematic review of benefits or harms of 
routine anaesthetist- inserted throat packs in adults: practice 
recommendations for inserting and counting throat packs. 
Anaesthesia. 2018;73(5):612– 618.
 20. Bailey CR, Nouraie R, Huitink H. Have we reached the end for 
throat packs inserted by anaesthetists? Editorial. Anaesthesia. 
2018;73(5):535– 548.
 21. Nimmo AF, Absalom AR, Bagshaw O, Biswas A, Cook 
TM, Costello A, et al. Guidelines for the safe practice of 
total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA). Anaesthesia. 2019;74 
(2):211– 224.
 22. Pal S, Kumar C. Anaesthesia for aesthetic surgery. In: Shaw 
I, Kumar CM, Dodds C (eds) Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia 
for Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 1st ed, pp. 131– 141. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2010.
 23. Heesen M, Klimek M, Imberger G, Hoeks SE, Rossaint R, Straube 
S. Co- administration of dexamethasone with peripheral nerve 
block: intravenous vs perineural application: systematic review, 
meta- analysis, meta- regression and trial- sequential analysis. Br J 
Anaesth. 2018;120(2):212– 227.
 24. Kurian A, Ward- Booth P. Blood transfusion and orthognathic 
surgery— a thing of the past? Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2004;42(4):369– 371.
 25. Olsen JJ, Skov J, Ingerslev J, Thorn JJ, Pinholt EM. Prevention of 
bleeding in orthognathic surgery— a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2016;74(1):139– 150.
 26. Christabel A, Muthusekhar MR, Narayanan V, Ashok Y, Loong 
Soh C, Ilganovan M, et al. Effectiveness of tranexamic acid 
on intraoperative loss in isolated Le Fort 1 osteotomies— a 
prospective, triple blinded randomized clinical trial. J 
Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2014;42(7):1221– 1224.
 27. Ker K, Edwards P, Perel P, Shakur H, Roberts I. Effect of 
tranexamic acid on surgical bleeding: systematic review and 
cumulative meta- analysis. BMJ. 2012;344:e3054.
105
Acknowledgements
 28. Carlos E, Monnazzi MS, Castiglia YMM, Gabrielli MFR, 
Passeri LA, Guimaraes NC. Orthognathic surgery with or 
without induced hypotension. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2014;43(5):577– 580.
 29. Barak M, Yoav L, Abu el- Naaj I. Hypotensive anesthesia 
versus normotensive anesthesia during major maxillofacial 
surgery: a review of the literature. ScientificWorldJournal. 
2015;2015:480728.
 30. Prasant MC, Kar S, Rastogi S, Mukram Ali F, Mudhol A. 
Comparative study of blood loss, quality of surgical field and 
duration of surgery in maxillofacial cases with and without 
hypotensive anesthesia. J Int Oral Health. 2014;6(6):18– 21.
 31. Praveen K, Narayanan V, Muthusekhar MR, Baig MF. 
Hypotensive anaesthesia and blood loss in orthognathic surgery. 
Evid Based Dent. 2004;5(1):16.
 32. Wesselink EM, Kappen TH, Torn HM, Slooter AJC, van Klei 
WA. Intraoperative hypotension and the risk of postoperative 
adverse outcomes: a systematic review. Br J Anaesth. 
2018;121(4):706– 721.
 33. Vernooij LM, van Klei WA, Machina M, Pasma W, Beattie WS, 
Peelen LM. Different methods of modelling intraoperative 
hypotension and their association with postoperative 
complications in patients undergoing non- cardiac surgery. Br J 
Anaesth. 2018;120(5):1080– 1089.
 34. Popat M, Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, Swampillai C, Higgs 
A. Difficult Airway Society Guidelines for the management of 
tracheal extubation. Anaesthesia. 2012;67(3):318– 340.
 35. Nair I, Bailey PM. Use of the laryngeal mask for airway 
maintenance following tracheal extubation. Anaesthesia. 
1995;50(2):174– 175.
 36. Bates AS, Knepuk GJ. Systematic review and meta- analysis of the 
efficacy of hilotherapy following oral and maxillofacial surgery. 
Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015;45(1):110– 117.
 37. Glass GE, Waterhouse N, Shakib K. Hilotherapy for the 
management of perioperative pain and swelling in facial 
surgery: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Br J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 2016;54(8):851– 856.
 38. O’Doherty M, Joshi N. The ‘bespoke’ upper eyelid blepharoplasty 
and brow rejuvenation. Facial Plast Surg. 2013;29(4):264– 272.
 39. Scawn R, Gore S, Joshi N. Blepharoplasty basic for the 
dermatologist. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2016;9(2):80– 84.
 40. Mejia JD, Maria Ergo F, Nahai F. Visual loss after 
blepharoplasty: incidence, management and preventive measures. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2011;31(1):21– 29.
 41. Lee H, Quatela VC. Endoscopic browplasty. Facial Plast Surg. 
2018;34(2):139– 144.
 42. Dobryansky M, Morrison CM, Zins JE. Patient draping and 
endotracheal tube positioning during facelift surgery. Ann Plast 
Surg. 2009;63(1):9– 10.
 43. Chaffoo RAK. Complications in facelift surgery: Avoidance and 
management. Facial Plast Surg Clin N Am. 2013;21(4):551– 558.
 44. Trussler AP, Hatef DA, Rohrich RJ. Management of hypertension 
in the facelift patient: results of a national consensus survey. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2011;31(5):493– 500.
 45. Ramanadham SR, Costa CR, Narasimhan K, Coleman JE, 
Rohrich RJ. Refining the anesthesia management of the face- lift 
patient: lessons learned from 1089 consecutive face lifts. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2015;135(3):723– 730.
 46. Samil E, Casselden E, Bast F, Whiteley W, Hopkins C, Surda P. 
Role of local anaesthetic nerve block in patients undergoing 
endonasal surgery— our experience of 48 patients. Rhinol Online. 
2018;1:90– 93.
 47. Benjamin E, Wong DK, Choa D. ‘Moffett’s solution: a review of 
the evidence and scientific basis for the topical preparation of the 
nose. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 2004;29(6):582– 587.
 48. Lykoudis EG, Seretis K. Tapia’s syndrome: an unexpected but real 
complication of rhinoplasty: case report and literature review. 
Aesthet Plast Surg. 2011;36(3):557– 559.
 49. Simonacci F, Bertozzi N, Pio Grieco M, Grignaffini E, Raposio E. 
Procedure, applications and outcome of autologous fat grafting. 
Ann Med Surg (Lon). 2017;20:49– 60.
 50. Preissig J, Hamilton K, Markus R. Current laser resurfacing 
technologies: a review that delves beneath the surface. Semin 
Plast Surg. 2012;26(3):109– 116.
 51. Gaitan S, Markus R. Anaesthesia methods in laser resurfacing. 
Semin Plast Surg. 2012;26(3):117– 124.
 52. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 
Lasers, Intense Light Source Systems and LEDs— Guidance for 
Safe Use in Medical, Surgical, Dental and Aesthetic Practices. 
London: Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory 
Authority; 2015.
 53. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland. 3- 7 
Patient fire. 2018. https:// anaest heti sts.org/ Port als/ 0/ PDFs/ QRH/ 
QRH_ 3- 7_ Pati ent_ fire _ v1.pdf?ver= 2018- 07- 25- 112 714- 097
 54. Ward P. Airway fire. Anaesthesia tutorial of the week (tutorial 
353). World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists. 2017. 
https:// resour ces.wfs ahq.org/ wp- cont ent/ uplo ads/ 353_ engl 
ish.pdf
10
Orthognathic surgery
Patrick A. Ward and Michael G. Irwin
Introduction
Orthognathic surgery involves the surgical repositioning of the 
mandible, maxilla, and/ or the dentoalveolar segments, in order 
to correct malocclusion, craniofacial deformity, or skeletal dis-
proportion (whether congenital, or acquired, e.g. post- traumatic 
injury, or following treatment of childhood malignancy). It is 
important to note that, while patients undergoing orthognathic 
procedures may have a significantly improved aesthetic facial ap-
pearance following the surgery, the fundamental purpose is to ad-
dress underlying functional limitations that will lead to long- term 
health problems if not corrected. Significant malalignment of the 
maxilla, mandible, and/ or associated dentition can lead to issues 
with occlusion, bite, chewing, speech, breathing, sleeping, oral and 
dental hygiene, and the health of the soft tissues, underlying bone, 
and temporomandibular joints. Untreated, these can lead to exces-
sive erosion and damage, chronic pain syndromes, sleep apnoea 
and associated sequelae, impaired speech, and significant psycho-
logical harm. This type of surgery often represents the final step in 
a lengthy patient journey, since most of these techniques will not 
be undertaken until bone maturity, and because they are usually 
commenced only after more conservative management strategies 
have failed to correct the facial or dental disharmony. Treatments 
require extensive planning, are often performed as staged proced-
ures, taking several years to achieve the final result, and involve a 
large multidisciplinary team.
Preoperative assessment, preparation, 
and planning
The majority of patients undergoing orthognathic surgery are 
young and healthy with dental malocclusion, who have reached 
bone maturity (i.e. late teens, early twenties) and have failed con-
servative orthodontic treatments. There are, however, a few patients 
with craniofacial anomalies and syndromes (e.g. Treacher Collins, 
Goldenhar, Crouzon, Apert, and Nager syndromes; cleft lip and 
palate) undergoing orthognathic procedures that pose additional 
challenges relating to airway management and their associated 
comorbidities. Additionally, there is now also a growing trend in 
orthognathic surgery to treat patients with severe obstructive sleep 
apnoea syndrome, such that the patient cohort is becoming increas-
ingly complex, with a greater premorbid burden, placing an even 
greater importance upon thorough preoperative assessment, opti-
mization, and planning.
A multidisciplinary team approach is essential throughout the pa-
tient journey and can involve dentists and dental hygienists; ortho-
dontists; oromaxillofacial, otorhinolaryngology, neuro- , and plastic 
surgeons; anaesthetists; speech, language, and audiology specialists; 
psychologists and psychiatrists; dieticians and nutritionists; respira-
tory and sleep physicians (increasingly important given the evolu-
tion of sleep apnoea surgery); radiologists; intensivists; prosthetic 
specialists; and more.
The contribution from orthodontists, in particular, is funda-
mental. Having been involved with the patient from the outset with 
more conservative orthodontic treatment options, they are often 
the referring specialists to oromaxillofacial surgery, whom they will 
then work closely with to optimize the surgical outcome. The ortho-
dontist will make dental impressions and occlusal records, create 
maxillary and mandibular surgical models to plan and guide the 
best surgical approach (Figs 10.1– 10.3), utilize orthodontic braces 
and appliances to improve preoperative alignment and optimize 
postoperative dentoskeletal stability, and create bespoke occlusal 
wafers that are used intraoperatively to locate the dental arches in 
a pre- planned relationship, to help achieve the desired occlusion. 
There is an increasing role for computer- aided surgical simulation, 
or virtual surgical planning, combining three- dimensional tomo-
graphic data, digital photographic images, and virtual dental models 
to assist in accurately preparing these surgical splints and occlusal 
wafers (Fig. 10.4).
Specialist input from psychiatric and psychological teams is also 
extremely important. As already mentioned, the timing of surgery 
is aligned with the onset of bone maturity and, therefore, patients 
tend to be in their late teens, or early twenties, forming a unique pa-
tient cohort that should be recognized as having their own distinct 
psychosocial challenges. Patients may have undergone many treat-
ments and hospital visits, developing a particular set of behaviours, 
perceptions, and expectations. Additionally, concerns over body 
image can be heightened in this age group, especially when there 
is significant craniofacial deformity, such that all anxieties should 
 
 
 
108
Orthognathic surgery
be explored fully so that they can be optimally managed. Although 
rarely used, special mention should be made regarding patients 
treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, as there is potential 
for hypertensive crises in the context of the large volumes of local 
anaesthetic solutions containing adrenaline that is commonplace 
during orthognathic surgery. Caution is also warranted if large doses 
of local anaesthetics are planned to be used in patients taking tri-
cyclic antidepressants because of their structural similarity to local 
anaesthetics, reduction of the seizure threshold, and propensity for 
bradycardia and hypotension. Perioperative management of psy-
choactive drugs should involve a multidisciplinary team approach, 
with careful consideration of if and when to discontinue medication, 
minimizing the risk of withdrawal, alternative short- term strategies 
to manage patients’ psychiatric illness, clear planning for recom-
mencement of patients’ normal regimens, and involvement of pa-
tients’ usual mental health support team.
Another subgroup of patients who merit special consider-
ation are those who are taking anticoagulants and/ or antiplatelet 
agents, including direct oral anticoagulants (such as apixaban and 
rivaroxaban), given the importance of minimizing bleeding intra- 
and postoperatively. Fortunately, the typical orthognathic patient 
rarely requires such agents; however, with the increasing trend of 
surgical intervention for sleep apnoea, this may become a more 
frequent occurrence (in those with cardiovascular comorbidity). 
Again, a multidisciplinary approach is indicated, with involvement 
of patient, surgeon, anaesthetist, haematologist, and cardiologist in 
order to fully explore the risk/ benefit implications, to devise a clear 
plan for discontinuation of these drugs preoperatively, as well as 
bridging therapies if indicated.
As mentioned, there appears to be growing evidence to sup-
port the referral of patients with severe obstructive sleep apnoea 
for orthognathic intervention1 and, with the rates of obesity now 
reaching epidemic levels in many countries, this trend is only likely 
to increase. Maxillomandibular advancement (bimaxillary oste-
otomy) may be effective in such patients, where the site of airway 
collapse is largely retrolingual, and more conservative strategies 
such as weight loss, non- invasive ventilation (continuous positive 
airway pressure (CPAP)), nasal surgery, tongue reduction surgery, 
               
Figs 10.1– 10.3 Occlusal records and models created preoperatively to assist in surgical planning.
109
Preoperative assessment, preparation, and planning
Descriptor
SNA
SNB
ANB
WITS
UI-PAL.PLANE
LI to MAND
Interincisal Angle
PL-MAND PLANE
UPPER FACE HEIGHT
LOWER FACE HEIGHT
RATIO
LI-APOG
LOWER LIP TO E-LINE
Y AXIS
Meas.
/1 to 1/
N-ANS
ANS-Gn
FH to S-Gn
Type
Deg
Deg
Deg
mm
Deg
Deg
Deg
Deg
%
%
%
mm
mm
Deg
Mean
82.0
80.0
2.0
0.0
110.0
90.0
131.0
25.0
45
55.0
55.0
1.0
–2.0
59.4
Sd
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
5.0
3.7
13.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
3.8
Patient
75.91
80.06
–4.15
–5.69
117.92
84.51
135.34
22.21
43.0
56.83
56.83
2.45
–2.46
49.08
Comment
Maxilla retruded
Class III relationship
Class III Skeletal problem
Upper incisor proclined forward
Lower incisor too upright
Horizontal growth tendency
Graph
–(  *  |     )+
–(     *     )+
–(  *  |     )+
–(*    |     )+
–(     |*   )+
–(    *|     )+
–(     *     )+
–(     *     )+
–(     *     )+
–(     *     )+
–(     *     )+
–(     *     )+
–(     *     )+
–(   * |     )+
Fig. 10.4 Cephalometric tracing and Eastman analysis, utilized in surgical procedure planning.
and other soft tissue procedures such as uvulopalatopharyngoplasty 
have failed to improve symptoms. Careful preoperative assessment 
and planning is essential, with early involvement of respiratory/ sleep 
physicians, combined with specific knowledge and understanding 
of sleep medicine, the associated metabolic syndrome, obstructive 
sleep apnoea and obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
Multidisciplinary craniofacial planning meetings can provide 
an ideal format for all of these diverse specialities to convene and 
discuss complex patients, to meet and establish a rapport with the 
patients in person (along with their next of kin), discuss relevant 
imaging, plan the best surgical approach, and, crucially, highlight 
and assess patients who may pose particular perioperative risk so 
that any necessary optimization can be undertaken, and so that 
appropriate perioperative management strategies and postopera-
tive care can be organized (e.g. planned postoperative critical care 
admissions for patients with severe obstructive sleep apnoea or 
those with predicted difficult airways). Patients identified as high 
risk can be directed towards the appropriate resources, and should, 
ideally, be assessed by an anaesthetist with a special interest and 
in- depth knowledge of these type of surgical procedures. It is 
unreasonable to expect all anaesthetists to be competent in all 
areas of anaesthesia and there is a move towards anaesthetic de-
partments consisting of smaller teams of anaesthetists, each with 
subspeciality skills and knowledge (in this case, a small group of 
experts in oromaxillofacial anaesthesia and advanced airway man-
agement techniques).
110
Orthognathic surgery
Preoperative consent and premedication
High- risk cases should, ideally, have already been assessed, opti-
mized, and a clear plan agreed between patient, surgeon, and an-
aesthetist. On the day of surgery, patients should be consented 
for general anaesthesia, with the discussion tailored to cover spe-
cific aspects relating to orthognathic surgery. Nasal intubation/ 
nasotracheal tubes should be discussed, with the associated risks of 
postoperative sore throat, nasal discomfort, and nasal bleeding. If 
the use of more advanced airway techniques is indicated, such as 
awake/ asleep fibreoptic intubation, submental intubation or trache-
ostomy, or airway exchange catheters/ staged extubation strategies, 
these should be discussed in detail.
Patients should expect to have blurred vision on emergence due 
to the water- based lubricant used intraoperatively to protect the eyes 
(eye tapes/ eye guards are frequently contraindicated as they com-
promise the surgical field and can affect the surgeon’s perception 
of facial symmetry), and this can be particularly distressing if not 
mentioned preoperatively. Intraoperative use of hypotensive anaes-
thesia should be specifically discussed, if planned, and consent for 
blood transfusion obtained if blood loss is expected to be greater 
than usual (it is rare to require blood transfusion in orthognathic 
surgery). Salient postoperative points should be addressed, in par-
ticular the use of ice- packs/ hilotherapy masks to reduce oedema 
and pain, the use of patient- controlled analgesia (rarely required), 
the sensation of numbness secondary to local anaesthetic infiltra-
tion (very common), and intermaxillary fixation, if being utilized 
(specifically, the limitations on communication, oral intake, etc. 
postoperatively).
Chlorhexidine mouthwash (e.g. Corsadyl®) should be adminis-
tered to all patients preoperatively to reduce the risk of infection. 
Anxiolytic premedication is rarely indicated but may be required in 
young, particularly anxious patients. Caution should be taken with 
the increasing number of patients with obstructive sleep apnoea 
and their increased sensitivity to sedative medication. Pregabalin is 
generally safer than benzodiazepines and has additional analgesic 
properties.
Intraoperative management
Airway management
The patient’s airway is ‘shared’ between anaesthetist and surgeon, 
therefore a good understanding of each other’s requirements and 
good communication is essential. Oral tracheal tubes are generally 
contraindicated for orthognathic surgery as they preclude unob-
structed surgical access to the oral cavity, maxilla, and mandible, 
and also prevent dental occlusion being utilized as a reference point 
for bony fixation. Consequently, nasotracheal intubation is the most 
common means of securing the airway to optimize surgical access.
For nasal intubation of the trachea, the nasal passages should be 
prepared with a local anaesthetic and vasoconstrictor spray (e.g. co- 
phenylcaine) to reduce the risk of epistaxis, administered after in-
duction (to prevent the unpleasant burning sensation) and prior to 
intubation. Various different local anaesthetic and vasoconstrictor 
combinations have been described, with limited evidence to support 
the efficacy of one over another.2 Epistaxis usually results from minor 
mucosal tears in the anterior nasal septum, but can also occur from 
avulsion of nasal polyps, and from trauma to the turbinates, tonsils, 
adenoids, or posterior pharyngeal wall. Fortunately, epistaxis from 
nasotracheal intubation is usually mild and self- limiting. Pressure 
from the nasal tube itself can often tamponade the bleeding, but oc-
casionally a nasal tampon or a Foley catheter (with cuff inflated after 
insertion) may be required. Submucosal placement and the forma-
tion of false passages with nasal tubes have been described, which 
has the potential for retropharyngeal abscess formation, and should 
be managed with prophylactic antibiotics.
Flexible reinforced/ armoured nasal tubes are less likely to kink 
intraoperatively; however, the softer preformed north- facing polar 
nasal tubes are less traumatic to introduce and are more conveni-
ently secured in position with tape and padding across the forehead. 
Nasotracheal tubes should certainly be well lubricated to aid pas-
sage, and sized appropriately for the patient to avoid trauma relating 
to an over- sized tube. The nasal airway should be assessed preopera-
tively, identifying any history of patency issues, septal deviation, 
nasal polyps, and so on in order to determine the preferred nostril 
for intubation. However, enquiry is poorly predictive and flexible 
nasendoscopy is rarely performed as an objective measure. Elective 
blind nasal intubation is generally not recommended due to the risk 
of causing airway trauma and bleeding and, for similar reasons, mul-
tiple attempts and the application of excessive force when navigating 
the nasotracheal tube through the nasal passages should be avoided. 
Serial dilatation of the nasal passages prior to intubation is not ad-
vocated as this also exposes the nasal mucosa to increased risk of 
trauma.
Asleep fibreoptic nasal intubation is probably best, least traumatic, 
and allows the anaesthetist to become very familiar with this tech-
nique, should it be required in more difficult circumstances. Nasal 
intubation can, however, usually be safely conducted with direct 
laryngoscopy or videolaryngoscopy (where mouth opening is not 
impaired), utilizing Magill forceps to assist in guiding the nasal tube 
if required. Awake nasal fibreoptic intubation may be required in pa-
tients presenting with very severe malocclusion or severe temporo-
mandibular joint pathology who have significantly reduced mouth 
opening (as will some patients requiring revision surgery), which is 
unlikely to improve following induction of anaesthesia and neuro-
muscular blockade, such that an awake technique is the safest option 
(various approaches to awake fibreoptic intubation are discussed in 
detail in other chapters).
Thermo- softening of the nasal polar tube (in warm sterile water) 
is practised in some institutions to make the tube more malleable 
and less likely to cause trauma on insertion. However, this can make 
the tube more likely to twist and kink intraoperatively as the tube 
cools rapidly after removal from the water. Care should be taken to 
ensure that the nasal tube does not cause traction on the nasal tip/ 
nostril, as this can lead to tissue necrosis in prolonged operations 
and can also distort the nasal septum during maxillary impaction. 
This passive positioning of the tube can be achieved by several strat-
egies: securing the tube with tape at the nostril (although this may 
interfere with the surgical view); providing some ‘slack’ in the north- 
facing section of the tube; by securing the tube and breathing circuit 
on the forehead with a sponge (Figs 10.5– 10.7) and additional tape 
around the head (Figs 10.8 and 10.9); and by supporting the weight 
of the breathing circuit using a tube support (orientated in an upside- 
down position) and breathing circuit ties. These ties also ensure that 
 
 
 
111
Intraoperative management
the breathing circuit is kept off the operating room floor away from 
the surgeon’s feet, minimizing the risk of accidental occlusion or tra-
cheal extubation. Considerable movement of the head and neck may 
be required, particularly during temporomandibular joint surgery, 
and the surgeon may also wish to undrape the face from time to 
time to assess facial symmetry. Therefore, the nasal tube, connec-
tions, and breathing circuit must be very secure. It is important to 
note that damage to the nasotracheal tube is also a recognized com-
plication during maxillary osteotomy. Loss of tube integrity may be 
recognized immediately by the surgeon (audible air leak, gurgling, 
or smell of inhalational anaesthetic), or by failure to adequately ven-
tilate the patient’s lungs, or by appearance of blood in the nasal tube 
and breathing circuit. In this event, it may sometimes be possible 
to compensate for small air leaks by packing with surgical swabs; 
however, an urgent tube exchange may be indicated. Performing a 
tube exchange in these circumstances may be very difficult, due to 
restricted access and impaired views, therefore exchange over an ex-
change catheter is advisable.
Figs 10.8 and 10.9 Passive positioning of nasotracheal tube, supported 
by foam block and tape around the head.
Figs 10.5– 10.7 Positioning of polar nasal tube across the forehead 
using foam sponge from single- use surgical scrub brush (additional tape 
to secure nasotracheal tube not present in Fig. 10.7).
112
Orthognathic surgery
Occasionally, nasal intubation may not be possible and alternative 
strategies for securing the patient’s airway and optimizing surgical 
conditions must be sought. Examples include when nasal passages 
are obstructed, particular craniofacial malformations, post- surgical 
intervention (e.g. sometimes after cleft palate repair, depending on 
the site of surgery), in naso- orbitoethmoidal or base of skull frac-
tures, and in combined orthognathic and rhinoplasty cases.
One such strategy is retromolar intubation, where a reinforced 
tracheal tube is positioned in the retromolar space, which lies behind 
the most posterior molars, bounded anteriorly by the last molar and 
posteriorly by the anterior edge of the ascending mandibular ramus. 
It is less invasive than the other strategies and, usually, still enables 
occlusion of the teeth intraoperatively. It is normally performed 
using a flexible bronchoscope or Bonfils retromolar intubation fibre-
scope to optimize tube position.
Alternatively, submental intubation may be indicated (especially 
if the retromolar space is not adequate to allow dental occlusion). 
This provides unobstructed surgical access to both the nasal and 
oral cavities, while carrying fewer long- term complications than a 
surgical tracheostomy and better cosmetic outcome. In this case, 
the trachea is intubated with an oral tracheal tube (ideally an ar-
moured reinforced tube), which is then passed, after removing the 
universal connector, through the anterior floor of the mouth via a 
small midline submental incision made by the surgeon. The uni-
versal connector may need to be removed in advance from some 
reinforced tubes (depending on the manufacturer) and replaced by 
the connector from a conventional, non- reinforced, tracheal tube 
(Figs 10.10– 10.12). Alternatively, a Teleflex intubating laryngeal 
mask airway (iLMA; Teleflex Medical Europe Ltd, Ireland) tube is 
ideal for this procedure as it is flexible, reinforced, with a detach-
able universal connector (Figs 10.13 and 10.14). A dilator from a 
percutaneous tracheostomy set can then be used to assist in dilating 
the track along which the tracheal tube will pass, and then can 
be used to facilitate the safe transfer of the pilot balloon and tra-
cheal tube through the submental aperture, in a two- stage process 
(Figs 10.15– 10.17). If using the Teleflex iLMA tube, the iLMA intro-
ducer can, alternatively, be used to pull the tracheal tube through the 
submental incision (Fig. 10.14).
Finally, a surgical tracheostomy may still be indicated at the time 
of operation in some patients (very rare in orthognathic surgery). 
This may be the case when a prolonged period of ventilatory sup-
port is anticipated or when reintubation by other means would be 
impossible in the event of postoperative airway compromise (both 
submental intubation and surgical tracheostomy, are discussed in 
detail in Chapter 3).
Throat packs
The routine use of throat packs is a controversial area. Historically, 
throat packs have been used routinely in oral and maxillofacial sur-
gery in an attempt to minimize the passage of blood, liquid nasal 
vasoconstrictors, secretions, and debris (e.g. bone chips, extracted 
teeth) down into the airway (theoretically reducing the potential 
risk of airway compromise, respiratory distress, laryngospasm at 
extubation of the trachea, and the so- called coroner’s clot). Throat 
packs have also been utilized in an attempt to absorb any blood, 
with the intention of reducing its ingestion into the stomach, and 
minimizing the associated emetogenic effect. Throat packs can also 
be utilized to minimize cuff leak, stabilize the airway device in situ, 
and may also confer some protection to the airway device from acci-
dental damage by the surgeon. However, throat packs have been as-
sociated with significant complications, such as infection, bleeding, 
passage into the oesophagus or stomach, tears to the frenulum, 
trauma to the soft and hard palate, pharyngeal nerve injury, pharyn-
geal venous plexus compression ischaemia, death from accidental 
Figs 10.10– 10.12 Removal of connector from reinforced tracheal tube 
and replacement with standard universal connector, to facilitate passage 
of reinforced tracheal tube through submental incision.
 
113
Intraoperative management
retention at the end of surgery, critical airway obstruction, and hyp-
oxia. Following National Patient Safety Agency alerts relating to 
accidentally retained throat packs (now considered a ‘Never Event’ 
by NHS England), guidance has been produced on minimizing this 
risk.3 This guidance has evolved over time, with a range of recom-
mendations made, including allocating responsibility for the throat 
pack to surgeon or anaesthetist (not both); highlighting the presence 
of the throat pack by utilizing high- visibility alert stickers in close 
proximity, on the airway device and/ or on the patient; leaving a por-
tion of the throat pack still visible from the mouth (usually precluded 
in oromaxillofacial surgery due to compromise of the surgical field 
and impaired surgical access); physically attaching the throat pack to 
the airway device, to ensure simultaneous removal; careful written 
documentation of its insertion and removal on the scrub count 
board and/ or in patient notes and anaesthetic chart; formal inclu-
sion of the throat pack in the swab count; the use of radio- opaque 
strips on the throat pack to facilitate radiological identification; re-
moval by the same person who inserted it; and adaptation of the 
World Health Organization sign out to include removal of a throat 
pack as part of the checklist. Unfortunately, despite these recom-
mendations, and others, there have still been significant safety con-
cerns, and further critical incidents reported from their use. This led 
to a systematic review of the routine insertion of throat packs by an-
aesthetists and a subsequent consensus statement from the Difficult 
Airway Society, the British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Surgery, and the British Association of Otorhinolaryngology, Head 
and Neck Surgery.4 The systematic review found that there is no evi-
dence to support the routine use of throat packs and all available evi-
dence relates to the harmful consequences of their use. Furthermore, 
with the advances in anaesthetic and surgical techniques (e.g. use 
Figs 10.13 and 10.14 Teleflex iLMA tracheal tube with detachable 
connector and introducer that can be used to pull the tracheal tube 
through the submental incision.
Figs 10.15– 10.17 Pilot balloon inserted into lumen of percutaneous 
tracheostomy dilator, and dilator attached to Teleflex iLMA tracheal tube, 
to aid passage of pilot balloon and tube through submental incision.
114
Orthognathic surgery
of vasoconstrictor solutions), and availability of newer pharmaco-
logical agents (e.g. antifibrinolytic agents and remifentanil to reduce 
bleeding, antiemetics to reduce nausea and vomiting, etc.), the ten-
dency for major bleeding and the associated negative sequelae has 
been significantly reduced. Interestingly, the systematic review also 
found that there was no available evidence on the best type of throat 
pack material, the optimum size (length or width), the ideal prep-
aration (dry, damp, or wet), the recommended position for place-
ment (anterior or posterior), or the best means of insertion of throat 
packs (blind finger placement or with Magill forceps under direct 
vision with a laryngoscope). Therefore, the consensus guidance is 
that throat packs should be avoided where possible, and should not 
be inserted routinely. If deemed absolutely necessary by the surgeon, 
the relevant national professional bodies have produced a protocol 
(Fig. 10.18) to be followed. In the case of oromaxillofacial surgery, 
where the throat pack lies within the operative field (as opposed to 
outside the operative field, e.g. in nasal surgery), the recommenda-
tion is that the surgeon should insert the throat pack, using a surgical 
swab (included in the surgical swab count), with placement assisted 
by the anaesthetist using laryngoscopy if required, and the surgeon 
should also remove the throat pack (and final swab count completed, 
before wakening the patient and extubating the trachea). Crucially, 
the anaesthetist is then responsible for examining the airway at the 
end of surgery, and meticulously suctioning under direct vision/ 
videolaryngoscopic guidance, before extubation of the trachea.
Eye protection
As mentioned, standard eye pads/ tapes/ guards may be contraindi-
cated as they may disrupt the surgical field or obscure the bony 
anatomy used by the surgeon as a guide to achieve symmetry. 
Therefore, a water- based eye lubricant should be used to protect 
the eyes, and the surgeon should apply steri- strips to keep the eyes 
closed without obscuring the bony contours. Patients should be con-
sented specifically about blurred vision, secondary to the eye lubri-
cant, at emergence.
Positioning
Patients should be orientated in a modest head- up supine position 
to aid venous drainage, minimize blood loss, and improve surgical 
access. The head should be kept in a stable position on a head ring, 
with the cervical spine supported appropriately. Alternatively, a 
specialist operating table (also utilized for ear, nose, and throat sur-
gery and ophthalmic surgery) can be utilized, which has a shaped 
upper- back section and specially designed head rest that offers un-
restricted surgical access to the head. Procedures can last 4– 6 hours 
(e.g. combined bimaxillary osteotomy and genioplasty), therefore 
Active decision made to site throat pack
Team decides whether surgeon or
anaesthetist to site throat pack
Surgeon
Surgeon sites throat pack from the
scrub count*. Like all other swabs or
packs these should be removed by the
surgeon, so that the ﬁnal count can be
completed, before wakening the
patient and extubation.
1.
1.
2.
2.
Anaesthetist uses pack from the scrub
count, so that it is automatically
counted as part of the ﬁnal count. If
this is impossible and a different source
for the pack is used, the anaesthetist
must ensure it is added to the surgical
count. Like all other swabs or packs
these should be removed by the
surgeon, so that the ﬁnal count can be
completed, before wakening the
patient and extubation.
The anaesthetist is responsible for
checking a clear airway at the end of
surgery before extubation**.
The anaesthetist is responsible for
checking a clear airway at the end of
surgery before extubation**.
Anaesthetist
Fig. 10.18 Consensus protocol for throat pack use.4 *The anaesthetist may be asked to assist, for example, with laryngoscopy; ** Notwithstanding 
cases where the jaw is wired, patient transferred ventilated to intensive care, etc, or where a pack is intentionally left in situ.
Athanassoglou, V, Patel, A, McGuire, B, et al. Systematic review of benefits or harms of routine anaesthetist-inserted throat packs in adults: practice recommendations for inserting 
and counting throat packs. Anaesthesia 2018; 73: 612– 8.
115
Intraoperative management
pressure areas must be meticulously protected with gel padding, and 
limbs placed in neutral positions. This is particularly important in 
the morbidly obese patient, where special consideration should also 
be made to safe manual handling (increasing the number of theatre 
staff assisting to ensure safe transfer and positioning, and utilizing 
hover mattresses when indicated).
Rather obviously, and as is the case for most oromaxillofacial 
procedures, the operating table is orientated with the ‘head end’ 
away from the anaesthetist, anaesthetic machine, and ventilator. 
Access to the shared airway by the anaesthetist intraoperatively 
is, therefore, extremely restricted (particularly in an emergency), 
adding additional importance to careful preoperative positioning 
and securing of the patient’s head and neck, nasal tube, breathing 
circuit, and connections, in order to avoid injury, kinking, twisting, 
dislodging, or disconnection. Extensions to the breathing circuits 
and end- tidal carbon dioxide sampling line are recommended as 
they prevent excessive tension and aid with optimal positioning, 
minimizing inadvertent surgeon- related airway/ breathing circuit 
issues.
Controlling blood loss
The midface is very vascular, therefore bleeding during orthognathic 
procedures from both bone and soft tissues can be extensive, 
particularly those involving the maxilla. During osteotomy, in 
particular, surgical haemostasis can be hard to achieve due to re-
stricted access and difficulty in identification of the blood vessels 
as any bleeding rapidly obscures the surgical field. There are sev-
eral strategies that can be employed to minimize surgical bleeding 
and optimize the surgical field. Simple strategies can be employed 
prophylactically, from the start of surgery. These include head- up 
positioning, avoidance of anything that may impair venous drainage 
or increase venous pressure (e.g. avoidance of coughing, tight 
drapes, high positive end- expiratory pressure), controlled venti-
lation (i.e. normocapnia), maintaining normothermia, relatively 
restrictive fluid administration regimens, the use of tranexamic 
acid (antifibrinolytic agent, usually 1 g administered following in-
duction), and the liberal infiltration of local anaesthetic containing 
adrenaline prior to incision (maximum doses of local anaesthetic 
and adrenaline must be calculated preoperatively). These prophy-
lactic measures are important; however, a brief period of deliberate 
moderate hypotension is often indicated when osteotomy cuts are 
made in the maxilla (which directly causes bleeding) and when 
the maxilla is down- fractured (particularly stimulating, indirectly 
causing bleeding) during a Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy. Bleeding 
occurs from branches of the maxillary artery, pterygoid, and greater 
palatine veins during the down- fracture, and can obscure the sur-
gical field making further bony incision more difficult, and can be 
quite significant if not controlled (>500 mL blood loss). Often the 
down- fracture must be completed before surgical haemostasis can 
be achieved, making blood pressure control at this particular time 
crucial. A degree of deliberate hypotensive anaesthesia can be in-
duced by various pharmacological agents, but most importantly 
must be employed in a safe, carefully monitored manner, in selected 
patients, only for the discrete period of maximal stimulus and blood 
loss and not for the whole duration of the operation. Good com-
munication between surgeon and anaesthetist is essential, and ad-
vance warning that the maxilla is due to be ‘taken down’ enables the 
anaesthetist to ensure that the blood pressure is under meticulous 
control before this procedure is undertaken (further intricacies of 
hypotensive anaesthesia are discussed in detail in Chapter 7). With 
all these blood- conserving strategies employed, patients undergoing 
orthognathic surgery rarely require blood transfusion these days; 
however, those undergoing bimaxillary osteotomy should still have 
their haemoglobin level checked routinely preoperatively and an 
up- to- date group and save sample should be screened for atypical 
antibodies and availability made for rapid release of cross- matched 
blood units if required.
Trigeminocardiac reﬂex
Profound bradycardia, and even ventricular asystole, has, rarely, 
been described during down- fracture or mobilization of the maxilla, 
resulting from the parasympathetic response to traction on branches 
of the trigeminal nerve. As discussed above, good communication 
between surgeon and anaesthetist is, therefore, essential along with 
a high degree of vigilance. In the event of this reflex being provoked, 
surgical manipulation of the maxilla must be stopped immediately 
and anticholinergic medications administered as required.
Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
Given the generally young and healthy patient cohort, postopera-
tive venous thromboembolism is rare. However, with the increasing 
trend of treating patients with obstructive sleep apnoea, the average 
body mass index may start to rise and the incidence of venous 
thromboembolism may also increase. Hypotensive anaesthesia 
and a relatively restrictive fluid administration regimen (both de-
signed to reduce blood loss), combined with the increasing use of 
antifibrinolytic agents and prolonged surgery, are all risk factors. 
Therefore, standard measures should be employed intraoperatively 
with graduated compression stockings and pneumatic compression 
devices, and postoperative low- molecular- weight heparin prophy-
laxis (usually the following morning after bimaxillary osteotomy to 
reduce bleeding risk, but to be considered on the same day of surgery 
for those with additional risk factors, e.g. morbid obesity).
Temperature control and measurement
Some orthognathic procedures can last several hours, therefore pa-
tients’ core temperature should be monitored and patients should 
be actively warmed in order to maintain normothermia, using 
warmed intravenous fluids, fluid warmers, and forced air warmers. 
It is usually possible to utilize a nasopharyngeal temperature probe 
to monitor a patient’s core temperature, placed via the free nostril 
that is not obscured by the nasotracheal tube; however, peripheral 
and rectal temperature probes obviate any potential issues with nasal 
placement. It is important to note that with only the head and neck 
exposed during these orthognathic procedures, and the rest of the 
body covered by the patient’s surgical gown, a forced air warmer/ 
blankets, and the surgical drapes, that it is very easy to overheat the 
patient during prolonged surgery, therefore it is always important to 
monitor the patient’s temperature throughout.
Total intravenous anaesthesia and inhalational agents
Maintenance of anaesthesia can be conducted with total intravenous 
anaesthesia (TIVA) or inhalational agents, depending upon patient 
factors and anaesthetist preferences, with each technique, arguably, 
conferring potential pros and cons. Specifically for the orthognathic 
patient, TIVA reduces postoperative nausea and vomiting, produces 
 
 
 
 
 
116
Orthognathic surgery
a rapid and smooth emergence with swift recovery of protective 
airway reflexes (reducing laryngospasm and bronchospasm), and 
a speedy return to baseline cognition. Although processed electro-
encephalogram monitoring is not essential, some anaesthetists prefer 
to use it and the type of surgery can pose some practical issues in 
obtaining reliable monitoring intraoperatively. Careful skin prepar-
ation with an alcohol- based wipe and securing of the adhesive moni-
toring strip across the forehead, together with a cooperative surgeon 
can usually circumvent these issues. Arguably, inhalational agents 
can be used to induce deliberate hypotension more easily (although 
the chapter authors don’t recommend using excessive depth of an-
aesthesia to induce hypotension). The relative merits of TIVA versus 
volatile agents are beyond the scope of this chapter. Remifentanil can 
be used with both anaesthetic techniques and has become extremely 
popular and widely used due to its rapid onset and offset, and easily 
titratable properties, conferring a smooth anaesthetic during the 
intermittent peaks of surgical stimulus. Remifentanil can also be 
used to provide a smooth wake up for extubation of the trachea at 
the end of surgery (specific extubation strategies are discussed in 
detail later in the chapter).
Intraoperative analgesia
A multimodal approach to analgesia is indicated for orthognathic 
procedures. As discussed above, a remifentanil infusion is now the 
mainstay of intraoperative analgesia but must, of course, be com-
bined with administration of longer- acting opioids, throughout 
the procedure or towards the end, to ensure adequate pain relief 
postoperatively. Given the high risk of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting following orthognathic surgery, opioid- sparing tech-
niques are preferable.
The surgical team will infiltrate large volumes of dental local anaes-
thetic, typically lidocaine 2% with 1:80,000 epinephrine (Lignospan®; 
Fig. 10.19), principally to minimize bleeding and optimize surgical 
conditions, but this also significantly reduces intraoperative anal-
gesic requirements. Maxillary and mandibular local anaesthetic 
nerve blocks (e.g. inferior alveolar nerve block), performed at the 
start of surgery, can also be particularly beneficial, reducing the sym-
pathetic response to surgery (attenuating spikes in blood pressure 
and reducing bleeding). Crucially, the maximum doses of local an-
aesthetic should be calculated and agreed preoperatively by the sur-
gical and anaesthetic teams, in order to minimize the risk of local 
anaesthetic toxicity (7 mg/ kg for lidocaine with adrenaline). Special 
consideration of the particularly high concentration of adrenaline 
in dental local anaesthetic solutions should also be made, so as not 
to exceed the maximum recommended dosage of adrenaline, lim-
iting usage to 300 micrograms per hour. In keeping with the gen-
eral requirement for good communication between surgeon and 
anaesthetist in oromaxillofacial surgery, the surgeon should always 
inform the anaesthetist before infiltrating the local anaesthetic solu-
tion to prevent misinterpretation of a sudden increase in heart rate 
and blood pressure (resulting from the adrenaline), and especially 
in patients with cardiovascular comorbidities. In addition to lido-
caine and adrenaline solutions, bupivacaine (Marcaine®) 0.5% can 
be infiltrated at the end of surgery to reduce postoperative analgesic 
requirements (local anaesthetics and nerve blocks are also discussed 
in detail in Chapter 4).
Intravenous paracetamol and intravenous non- steroidal anti- 
inflammatory medications are widely used intraoperatively, and 
also provide the basis of most postoperative analgesic regimens. The 
transient hypotensive effect following administration of intravenous 
paracetamol can also be utilized to good effect by withholding ad-
ministration until just before down- fracture of the maxilla, when 
controlled hypotension is desirable. Administration of non- steroidal 
anti- inflammatory drugs should generally be withheld until much 
of the orthognathic procedure is complete and maximal bleeding 
risk has passed or, alternatively, a cyclooxygenase (COX)- 2 selective 
(coxib) drug selected.
Dexamethasone is a particularly useful adjunct to the advocated 
multimodal approach to analgesia, with positive effects in reducing 
the risk of trismus, reducing oedema (and the pain associated), its 
antiemetic properties, and in higher doses (equivalent to 8 mg), it 
has been shown to have beneficial effects on reducing postoperative 
analgesic requirements,5 particularly for dental and orthognathic 
procedures. Magnesium, clonidine, and dexmedetomidine can also 
be used intraoperatively, being efficacious in both reducing opioid 
requirements and for inducing controlled hypotension, although the 
latter two agents may cause drowsiness on emergence, which may 
not be considered desirable in patients where there is concern re-
garding the ease of managing an airway or breathing complication 
at extubation (e.g. known difficult airway or intermaxillary fixation). 
Low- dose ketamine (0.25– 0.5 mg/ kg) can be a useful analgesic 
and opioid- sparing adjunct, particularly in longer, more extensive 
procedures.
Antiemetics
Orthognathic surgery is associated with a high incidence of post-
operative nausea and vomiting, with specific risk factors including 
young patients, perioperative opioids, and inhalational anaesthetic 
agents. Of course, other factors such as female sex, non- smoking 
status, previous postoperative nausea and vomiting, motion sick-
ness, excessive fasting and dehydration, inadequate pain relief, will 
also contribute. Intuitively, one might also include as a potenti-
ating factor the presence of blood that has drained into the stomach 
perioperatively; however, the incidence of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting does not appear to be reduced by the presence of a throat 
pack. Multimodal prophylaxis is recommended with ondansetron 
and dexamethasone administered intraoperatively (particularly 
effective when administered together), with cyclizine available for 
treatment postoperatively and further ondansetron prescribed regu-
larly for prevention. Clearly it is desirable to reduce postoperative 
nausea and vomiting in all patients, but it is particularly important 
Fig. 10.19 Dental local anaesthetic, containing lidocaine 2% with 
1:80,000 adrenaline.
 
 
117
Tracheal extubation and emergence
in those undergoing orthognathic procedures, as retching and 
vomiting will increase venous pressure causing bleeding and may 
also potentially disrupt surgical sutures. Crucially, in those patients 
with intermaxillary fixation devices, vomiting can not only be ex-
tremely distressing, but can be potentially life- threatening, given the 
potential risk of acute airway obstruction and/ or aspiration in such 
circumstances (specific management strategies are discussed later in 
the section on postoperative management).
Intraoperative ﬂuid management
A generally liberal intravenous fluid administration regimen is 
advantageous, with early recommencement of oral fluid intake 
postoperatively, to reduce postoperative nausea and vomiting. 
However, for orthognathic cases where a relatively high degree of 
bleeding is expected, employing a relatively restrictive fluid policy 
up until maxillary down- fracture has occurred may be advanta-
geous in minimizing blood loss, whereafter a more liberal approach 
can be resumed. Urinary catheterization is generally not indicated, 
even for longer cases such as combined bimaxillary osteotomy and 
genioplasty, but may be considered for cases that are expected to 
be more surgically challenging and prolonged. As discussed earlier, 
with current bleeding prevention strategies, blood transfusion is 
rarely required.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis
Postoperative infection is rare following orthognathic surgery. 
Nevertheless, in addition to preoperative rinsing of the oral cavity 
with chlorhexidine mouthwash, one dose of a broad- spectrum anti-
biotic is generally recommended at induction for most procedures 
(usually Augmentin® 1.2 g intravenously). Two postoperative anti-
biotic doses may also be requested by some surgeons for more com-
plex procedures such as bimaxillary osteotomy, although practice 
will vary from centre to centre. Regular chlorhexidine mouthwash 
can also be continued for the first few days postoperatively.
Tracheal extubation and emergence
Extubation planning
An individualized tracheal extubation plan should be agreed for 
each patient, following discussion between the anaesthetist and sur-
geon, and considering the relative ease or difficulty with which the 
patient’s airway was managed at induction, surgical concerns such 
as excessive swelling or bleeding, patient comorbidities, and specific 
risk factors, such as obstructive sleep apnoea.
Inspection and suctioning
The anaesthetist is responsible for assessing and preparing the airway 
prior to tracheal extubation and this should be undertaken before 
any intermaxillary fixation device (elastics or wiring) is undertaken. 
The anaesthetist should inspect the oropharynx to ensure that any 
throat pack has been removed (this should be a confirmatory check, 
as the throat pack should have already been removed by the oper-
ating surgeon by this stage of the operation, clearly announced to the 
theatre team at the time of removal, seen and confirmed by the an-
aesthetist, and carefully documented). The anaesthetist should then 
undertake meticulous suctioning of the oropharynx, under direct 
vision, removing any clots that have accumulated during surgery 
(especially occult blood in the nasopharynx behind the soft palate, 
which has the potential for causing fatal airway obstruction, the so- 
called coroner’s clot). Care must be taken not to apply excessive for-
ward traction on the mandible during direct laryngoscopy as this 
may displace osteotomy segments. For similar reasons, it is rarely 
appropriate to exchange the nasotracheal tube for a supraglottic 
airway device, to facilitate smooth emergence, as this also requires 
manipulation of the mandible which is not desirable in patients 
after osteotomy. At this time, an appropriately sized nasopharyngeal 
airway can be inserted carefully via the un- intubated nostril, pro-
viding additional airway protection at extubation and emergence. 
A suction catheter can also be passed via this nasopharyngeal airway 
and the tip guided into the posterior nasopharynx under direct 
vision so that it is optimally placed for suctioning during emer-
gence and postoperatively. The anaesthetist must be as confident 
as possible that surgical haemostasis has been achieved before any 
intermaxillary fixation devices are applied by the surgical team, and 
before extubation of the trachea is undertaken. This is particularly 
important if deliberate hypotension has been used intraoperatively 
and the blood pressure is now back to normal.
Nasopharyngeal adjuncts and smooth extubation
A smooth, no- cough, extubation is desirable to minimize straining 
and the associated surgical bleeding. However, even with good sur-
gical haemostasis, further bleeding/ ooze into the upper airway is 
not uncommon and, therefore, extubation of the trachea is most 
safely performed with the patient awake, with full return of pro-
tective airway reflexes. Clearly, extubation in these patients is a very 
carefully managed process, balancing the risk of coughing, disrup-
tion of suture lines, and bleeding in an awake patient with the po-
tential for airway compromise in an obtunded patient. Slow and 
steady deflation of the nasotracheal cuff is advocated to reduce the 
stimulus to cough and a low- dose remifentanil infusion (prefer-
ably target controlled) can be used to facilitate smooth extubation 
in an awake patient. Remifentanil has little sedative effect and can 
be titrated to patient comfort while maintaining satisfactory spon-
taneous ventilation. The nasotracheal tube should be withdrawn 
slowly and gently to minimize the stimulus to cough and to pre-
vent displacement of the sectioned nasal septum. It can also be only 
partially withdrawn and cut at the desired depth (Figs 10.20 and 
10.21), such that it also acts as a nasopharyngeal airway, optimizing 
airway patency and oxygen delivery at extubation and emergence 
(i.e. at extubation, both nasal passages can be maintained by a naso-
pharyngeal airway device, with an optimally positioned suction 
catheter also in situ). These soft nasal airway devices are extremely 
well tolerated by patients, and can be removed safely in the post- 
anaesthesia care unit (PACU). During this process of extubation of 
the trachea, minimal head and neck movement is desirable, again 
to reduce the stimulus to cough. Therefore, placement of a Hudson 
mask (and hilotherapy mask) is recommended prior to lightening 
of anaesthesia and extubation of the trachea. Forceful airway man-
oeuvres (in particular, jaw thrust in mandibular surgery or chin lift 
in genioplasty surgery) and the application of a tight- fitting face 
mask are to be avoided in order to minimize pressure on the sur-
gical plates, screws, and osteotomized segments. For patients in 
whom airway management was particularly complicated initially, 
or in whom there are concerns about adequacy of postoperative 
118
Orthognathic surgery
oxygenation, airway patency, or the ease of reintubation, an airway 
exchange catheter can be employed and left in situ at extubation, to 
be removed safely later.
Postoperative management
Safe postoperative environment
After orthognathic surgery, patients should be cared for immedi-
ately postoperatively in a recovery area (PACU) near the operating 
theatre, with immediate access to the responsible anaesthetist and 
maxillofacial surgeon, by nursing staff who are experienced in 
managing this particular type of patient, especially those with ob-
structive sleep apnoea and/ or intermaxillary fixation devices in 
place, where a particularly high degree of vigilance is required. 
Continuous capnography is important in enabling early recognition 
of complications.
Intermaxillary ﬁxation devices
Rigid (wire) intermaxillary fixation devices are less common 
nowadays, but if the jaws have been wired together at the end of 
surgery, wire cutters must be immediately available at the bed-
side. Elastics, attached to arch bars or orthodontic brackets, are 
far more common and are used to facilitate the final jaw pos-
ition. These can be cut easily with scissors for immediate access 
to the oropharynx (although if time allows, these can be plucked 
off swiftly with a finger, avoiding subsequent issues in locating 
and retrieving the elastic remnants). Anaesthetic, surgical, and 
nursing recovery staff should be familiar with the management of 
such airway emergencies, and should regularly practise simulated 
scenarios.
Nausea and vomiting
As mentioned earlier, postoperative nausea and vomiting is 
common, unless TIVA is used, despite perioperative multimodal 
antiemetic prophylaxis. Vomiting patients with intermaxillary 
fixation devices are at potential risk of aspiration and/ or airway 
obstruction, and should be immediately sat upright and leant 
forwards as this promotes the passage of vomitus from the oro-
pharynx via gaps in the fixation device on each side (if the patient 
is managed in the supine or semi- recumbent position, the gastric 
contents are more likely to overwhelm the oropharynx and be as-
pirated). Regular antiemetics should be prescribed and adminis-
tered postoperatively.
Bleeding
As discussed earlier, minor epistaxis from traumatic nasotracheal in-
tubation is not uncommon and usually self- limiting. Nasal bleeding 
can also occur following maxillary osteotomy, and this may require 
nasal packing with a tampon.
Positioning
Patients should be positioned in a moderate head- up position, to 
reduce swelling, aid venous drainage, and optimize respiratory 
mechanics. The nasopharynx should be suctioned as necessary via 
the in situ suction catheter (whose tip can be optimally positioned 
in the nasopharynx prior to extubation, as described earlier). 
The nasopharyngeal airways in each nostril can be removed after 
a short period, along with the suction catheter, when no longer 
required.
Respiratory support
If oxygen is required postoperatively, it should, ideally, be delivered 
with humidification to improve patient comfort and to prevent 
drying of blood and secretions in the nasopharynx. For patients with 
CPAP- dependent severe sleep apnoea, there is often symptomatic 
improvement postoperatively negating the need for additional re-
spiratory support. However, if oxygen/ CPAP is still necessitated, a 
Figs 10.20 and 10.21 Nasotracheal tube withdrawn and cut at desired 
length, to act as a nasopharyngeal airway. Note: the Hudson mask 
and Hilotherapy mask were positioned carefully prior to lightening of 
anaesthesia and tracheal extubation.
119
Postoperative management
high- flow humidified nasal oxygen delivery device (e.g. Optiflow™, 
Fisher and Paykel Healthcare Limited, Auckland, New Zealand), 
which also provides some positive airway pressure/ small airways 
splinting is probably preferable to a tight- fitting traditional CPAP 
mask in patients after orthognathic surgery. Regular nebulized 
hypertonic saline every 4– 6 hours can also be beneficial in reducing 
crusting of secretions and blood.
Analgesia
Generally speaking, orthognathic procedures, like most head and 
neck operations, are not too painful postoperatively. For minor 
procedures, regular paracetamol and ibuprofen or a coxib is nor-
mally sufficient. For moderate to major surgery (e.g. single jaw oste-
otomy), adding in regular codeine and oral morphine as required 
is usually adequate. Crucially, all oral analgesic medications should 
be in soluble/ syrup formulation as capsules and tablets may be dif-
ficult to ingest. For two- jaw surgery such as bimaxillary osteotomy, 
a bolus- only fentanyl patient- controlled analgesia is recommended 
postoperatively, and for overnight the first night, being discon-
tinued the following morning as the patient is converted onto the 
standard soluble oral regimen. Care must, of course, be taken with 
the severe sleep apnoeic patient and the risk of increased opioid 
sensitivity.
Reducing oedema
Along with nursing patients sitting upright, hilotherapy masks 
(Fig. 10.22) are very effective in reducing facial swelling, bruising, 
and relieving pain. The mask pumps cooled water through an 
anatomically fitted cuff at a controllable temperature. Simple ice 
packs are suitable for minor procedures such as dental extractions, 
but the hilotherapy mask confers significant advantages for mod-
erate to major surgery, moulding to the patient’s individual facial 
anatomy and having no limitation to the duration of use due to the 
temperature control (unlike ice packs). For bimaxillary osteotomy, 
hilotherapy masks may be worn for up to a week postoperatively 
(taken home by the patient on discharge), and have been associ-
ated with improved patient satisfaction and reduced length of hos-
pital stay.
Dexamethasone is also effective in reducing postoperative oe-
dema. Therefore, in addition to intraoperative administration, it 
can be given regularly for the first 24 hours postoperatively.
Fluid regimens
Early resumption of oral intake (free fluids) is important in reducing 
postoperative nausea and vomiting and improving comfort. Oral 
ice chips can be given in the PACU and provide some comfort to 
patients. For bimaxillary osteotomy, slow maintenance intravenous 
fluids are also recommended for the immediate postoperative pe-
riod and overnight for the first night as oral intake is often inad-
equate. Hypotonic fluids (e.g. 5% glucose) and excessive crystalloids 
are not recommended intra- or postoperatively as they can exacer-
bate tissue and airway oedema.
Critical care
Routine postoperative admission to the intensive care unit or to a 
high dependency facility is no longer recommended, unless there 
are other pre- existing comorbidities that necessitate it, or there are 
particular concerns regarding excessive bleeding, oedema, or the 
potential for airway or breathing compromise, requiring additional 
monitoring and/ or respiratory support. However, patients should 
be managed in a dedicated maxillofacial or head and neck surgical 
ward, where the nursing staff are experienced with such patients and 
can recognize potential complications early.
Enhanced recovery pathways
There is certainly the potential to develop pathways and proto-
cols for patients undergoing orthognathic surgery, with the 
aim of ensuring best evidence- based practice, such that patient 
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.22 Hilotherapy (a) machine and (b) mask, used for reducing 
oedema postoperatively.
120
Orthognathic surgery
satisfaction, postoperative pain, incidence of nausea and vomiting, 
overall complication rates, and length of stay can be optimized. 
Constant audit and review of surgical and anaesthetic outcomes 
is essential to promote discussion, refinement of anaesthetic 
(and surgical) techniques, maintenance of high standards, and 
consistency in practice, leading to the generation of agreed 
protocols (e.g. bimaxillary osteotomy standardized postoperative 
prescription; Table 10.1). With appropriate preoperative plan-
ning and preparation (Fig. 10.23), good perioperative manage-
ment, and adequate postoperative care and support, it should be 
possible/ expected that patients undergoing single- jaw surgery are 
discharged home the same or the next day, and for those having 
Table 10.1 A typical postoperative drug prescription for bimaxillary osteotomy
Drug
Dose and frequency
Duration
Fentanyl
0– 100 mcg IV (in 10– 20 mcg boluses)
Recovery/ PACU only
Fentanyl patient- controlled analgesia
20 mcg bolus IV, lockout 5 mins, no background 
infusion
Overnight first night only
Paracetamol
1 g QDS IV or PO liquid preparation
Continue, and take home on discharge, 1- week supply
Ibuprofen
400 mg TDS, PO liquid preparation
Continue, and take home on discharge, 1- week supply
Codeine
30 mg QDS, PO liquid preparation
Commence when patient- controlled analgesia discontinued, 
and take home on discharge for PRN use, 4– 6- hourly, 1- week 
supply
Ondansetron
4 mg TDS IV
Regular for first 24 hours, changed to PRN after that
Cyclizine
50 mg TDS IV/ IM
PRN only
Dexamethasone
8 mg BD IV
2 postoperative doses
Oxygen
2– 10 L/ min, inhalational, as required via Hudson 
mask or nasal cannulae as appropriate
Recovery/ PACU only, rarely required on ward following discharge 
from recovery but should be humidified if needed
Hypertonic saline
5 mL 3% NaCl, sterile, nebulized, QDS
Regular for first 24– 48 hours
Chlorhexidine mouthwash
QDS, PO (not swallowed)
Regular for first 24– 48 hours
0.9% saline, compound sodium lactate, 
Plasma- Lyte®
60– 100 mL/ hr IV
Overnight first night
Augmentin
1.2 g TDS
2 doses only
BD, twice daily; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral; PRN, as required; QDS, four times daily; TDS, three times daily.
Mandible
Maxilla
Osteotomies
Fig. 10.23 A typical equipment list and visual aid to facilitate preoperative preparation.
121
Conclusion
two- jaw surgery (e.g. bimaxillary osteotomy), a 48- hour hospital 
stay should be the aim.
Speciﬁc orthognathic procedures
See Table 10.2 for procedure- specific details of commonly per-
formed orthognathic procedures.
Conclusion
The principles that apply to anaesthesia for orthognathic procedures 
have been discussed. While Table 10.2 includes some procedure- 
specific additions, the general approach already described is uni-
versally applicable— careful multidisciplinary assessment, planning 
and optimization, attentive shared airway management necessi-
tating cooperation and clear communication between surgeon and 
anaesthetist, strict control of blood loss, multimodal analgesia and 
antiemetic prophylaxis, safe and smooth extubation of the trachea, 
strategies to reduce postoperative oedema and bleeding, and spe-
cialist postoperative care facilities.
REFERENCES
 1. Bettega G, Pépin JL, Veale D, Deschaux C, Raphaël B, Lévy P. 
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: fifty- one consecutive patients 
treated by maxillofacial surgery. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2000;162(2 Pt 1):641– 649.
 2. Katz RI, Hovagim AR, Finkelstein HS, Grinberg Y, Boccio RV, 
Poppers PJ. A comparison of cocaine, lidocaine with epinephrine, 
and oxymetazoline for prevention of epistaxis on nasotracheal 
intubation. J Clin Anesth. 1990;2(1):16– 20.
 3. Curran J, Ward M, Knepil G. Reducing the risk of retained throat 
swabs after surgery. National Patient Safety Agency. 2009. https:// 
web arch ive.natio nala rchi ves.gov.uk/ 201 7103 0130 742/ http:// www.
nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/ resour ces/ type/ ale rts/ ?entryi d45= 59853&p= 2
4. Athanassoglou V, Patel A, McGuire B, Higgs A, Dover MS, 
Brennan PA, et al. Systematic review of benefits or harms of 
routine anaesthetist- inserted throat packs in adults: practice 
recommendations for inserting and counting throat packs. 
Anaesthesia. 2018;73(5):612– 618.
 5. N. H. Waldron NH, Jones CA, Gan TJ, Allen TK, Habib AS. 
Impact of perioperative dexamethasone on postoperative 
analgesia and side- effects: systematic review and meta- analysis, 
Br J Anaesth. 2013;110(2):191– 200.
Table 10.2 Orthognathic surgical procedures, with additional procedure- speciﬁc details
Operation
Procedure- speciﬁc details
Maxillary osteotomy
Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy
Indications: maxillary– mandibular disproportion, obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome, post- cleft palate surgery, craniofacial 
abnormalities, skull base surgery
Involves complete mobilization and repositioning of the maxilla
Bleeding from down- fracture of the maxilla can be significant
The inferior turbinates may also be trimmed, as necessary
Postoperative intermaxillary fixation with elastics may be required
Mandibular osteotomy
Bilateral sagittal split mandibular ramus osteotomy
Involves horizontal, vertical, and sagittal osteotomies to enable mobilization and repositioning of dentoalveolar segment of the 
mandible
Indications: mandibular deficiency, prognathism, or asymmetry
Postoperative intermaxillary fixation with elastics may be required
Bimaxillary osteotomy
Combination of Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy, followed by bilateral sagittal split mandibular ramus osteotomy (‘bimax’)
Indications: used for optimal correction of significant maxillary– mandibular disproportion and other craniofacial deformities
Postoperative intermaxillary fixation with elastics may be required
Genioplasty
Involves osteotomy of the mandibular symphysis
Indications: augmentation or reduction of the chin, improving the chin profile and cosmetic appearance of the face
Can be performed as the sole procedure, but is often combined with other osteotomies
Temporomandibular joint 
(TMJ) surgery
Procedures can include arthroscopy, arthrocentesis, meniscal surgery and arthrotomy for TMJ dysfunction, coronoidectomy for 
TMJ ankylosis, and even TMJ replacement for severe cases
Mouth opening can range from mild restriction owing to muscle spasm in TMJ dysfunction (which usually relaxes after induction) 
to severely restricted, almost complete trismus, in patients with joint ankylosis, necessitating awake fibreoptic intubation
Nasotracheal intubation and muscle relaxation are often necessary to optimize surgical access
There is significant bleeding risk during TMJ replacement owing to the proximity of the carotid artery
TMJ procedures are generally more painful than other orthognathic operations, requiring intravenous opioids, and patient- controlled 
analgesia postoperatively for TMJ replacement
Distraction osteogenesis
A relatively new technique used to generate new bone and soft tissue. Following a corticotomy or osteotomy, an adjustable 
distraction device is applied, which promotes bone formation between the surfaces of the bony segments as they are gradually 
separated by incremental traction, based upon the tension- stress principle
Indications: severely deficient maxilla, midface hypoplasia (e.g. in Crouzon and Apert syndromes), deficient hypoplastic mandible, 
deficient maxillary alveolar bone prior to dental implant insertion
Maxillary distraction osteogenesis is achieved through a Le Fort I osteotomy followed by placement of a distractor to achieve 
horizontal expansion (surgically assisted rapid palatal expansion (SARPE))
Midfacial advancement requires Le Fort II or Le Fort III osteotomy procedures, depending on the particular defect. Submental 
intubation is usually required. Once the distraction (halo) frame is attached, access to the airway can be significantly 
impaired, and even though the frames are designed to disarticulate, these patients can pose significant challenges to airway 
management at both intubation and extubation
 
 
 
11
Paediatric surgery
Silky Wong and Theresa Wan- Chun Hui
Introduction
Anaesthesia for paediatric oromaxillofacial surgery involves the 
care of children with congenital craniofacial and developmental fa-
cial anomalies, cleft lip and palate, trauma, abnormal jaw growth, 
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders, dentoalveolar condi-
tions/ anomalies, paediatric pathology, and obstructive sleep apnoea 
(OSA). Anaesthetists need to manage the specific needs of neo-
nates, infants, and the growing child with special consideration of 
the anatomy, pharmacology, and physiology, along with behavioural 
factors which are different from adults.
Preoperative evaluation
The preoperative visit provides an opportunity to establish rapport 
and gain the confidence and acceptance of the patient and parents/ 
carers. During the visit, a complete medical evaluation is required. 
History of respiratory compromise such as dependence on con-
tinuous positive airway pressure, bilevel positive airway pressure, 
or oxygen; airway obstruction like choanal stenosis or atresia; and 
snoring with OSA must be undertaken. Unlike in adults with OSA 
who are often obese, children with severe OSA may present as failure 
to thrive. In infants, there may be a history of difficulties with feeding. 
Tachypnoea, use of accessory muscles of respiration, subcostal re-
traction, and pectus excavatum indicate significant obstruction. 
Children with congenital syndromes requiring maxillofacial surgery 
may also have associated heart disease. Screening for cardiac defects 
and other coexisting congenital abnormalities should be under-
taken as these can affect the perioperative anaesthetic management. 
History of recent upper respiratory tract infection, needle phobia, or 
problems with anaesthesia should be elicited. Anaesthesia in chil-
dren with upper respiratory tract infection increases the risk of peri-
operative bronchospasm, laryngospasm, oxygen desaturation, and 
breath holding. Children with severe symptoms like purulent nasal 
secretions, fever, lethargy, moist cough, and wheezing will benefit 
from deferring elective surgery for at least 2 weeks.1 For children 
with uncomplicated upper respiratory tract infection, the decision 
to postpone surgery is individualized and based on balancing both 
patient and surgical risks of developing complications with the 
benefit of proceeding to surgery. Investigations for a healthy child 
are not always required. However, if surgery is extensive, baseline 
investigations are indicated (including blood cross- matching).
Premedication
Sedation with premedication helps to smooth the induction process. 
While many older children do not need preoperative sedation, in-
fants (around 6 months to 1 year old) and preschool age children 
who have developed stranger anxiety are often anxious upon en-
tering the anaesthetic room/ operating theatre. Moreover, many chil-
dren with special educational needs and disabilities require sedation 
to allay their anxiety even after they reach adulthood.
Benzodiazepines are commonly used for this purpose. Midazolam 
given orally, 0.5– 0.75 mg/ kg with a maximum dose of 15 mg, half 
an hour before entering the anaesthetic room/ operating theatre or 
intranasally, with doses of 0.2 mg/ kg, has anxiolytic and amnesic ef-
fects.2 Overdosing may cause respiratory depression. Some children 
exhibit paradoxical effects and become more agitated.
The highly selective α2 agonist, dexmedetomidine, is equally 
effective3– 6 and does not cause respiratory depression. Intranasal ad-
ministration has a rapid onset and high bioavailability. Dose ranges 
from 1 to 4 mcg/ kg intranasally. This is often given in the preopera-
tive receiving area with monitoring because it may cause brady-
cardia and hypotension.5,7
Ketamine is also an effective sedative premedication. When given 
intranasally at 5 mg/ kg, though a little irritating, intramuscular in-
jection or venous cannulation can be avoided. When the child is dif-
ficult to control, it can be given intramuscularly at doses of 3 mg/ kg.8
Sedative premedication should not be substituted for psycho-
logical preparation during the preoperative visit. Preoperative prep-
aration with skilled nurses and play therapists, visits to the operating 
theatre, and videos can help to allay anxiety. One must also consider 
the need for sedation and the presence of coexisting conditions and 
airway anomalies. Sedatives are contraindicated in children with po-
tential airway obstruction and raised intracranial pressure because 
these children may not safely tolerate respiratory depressants. Local 
anaesthetic cream such as Eutectic Mixture of Local Anaesthetic 
(EMLA™) and amethocaine placed over a vein minimize the pain 
 
 
 
 
Paediatric surgery
124
of inserting a venous catheter and is commonly prescribed with 
premedication.
Fasting
Preoperative fasting is to allow enough time for the stomach to empty 
and hence reduce the incidence of regurgitation of gastric contents 
into the trachea (and lungs). Fasting for prolonged periods increases 
thirst and irritability and results in detrimental physiological and 
metabolic effects. Traditionally, children have been permitted clear 
fluids until 2 hours, breast feeding until 4 hours, and formula feeds 
until 6 hours prior to surgery.9 Accumulating evidence indicates 
that a more liberal clear fluid fasting regime does not affect the inci-
dence of pulmonary aspiration10 and 1 hour of clear fluid fasting did 
not alter gastric pH or residual volume as compared with 2 hours of 
fasting.11 This has led to the recent recommendation of allowing and 
encouraging children to have clear fluids up to 1 hour before elective 
general anaesthesia in the UK, Europe, and Australia.12 However, 
adherence to fasting guidelines must be emphasized as violations 
were identified as a potential cause of aspiration.13
Identiﬁcation of the difﬁcult airway and its 
management
A difficult airway in children can lead to potential serious complica-
tions. It is important to identify risk factors accurately and ascertain 
whether the difficulty is with tracheal intubation or ventilation, or 
both. The most serious of all is when there is an unanticipated diffi-
cult airway (in a retrospective study, 0.5% of paediatric intubations 
were classed as difficult, of which 20% were unanticipated).14 In the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists closed claims analysis and 
perioperative cardiac arrest registry, claims in children were often 
due to cardiovascular events and airway incidents that were asso-
ciated with inadequate ventilation, hypoxic brain damage, cardiac 
arrest, and death.15– 18
At preoperative assessment, identification of a difficult airway 
is achieved through thorough history taking and physical exam-
ination.19 The clinician must establish whether the child has noisy 
breathing, snoring, increased work of breathing, feeding intoler-
ance, or apnoea. If the child has had previous anaesthesia, any pre-
vious difficulty with the airway management must be identified. The 
existence of any syndrome associations must be established, along 
with the position the child is most comfortable breathing in. During 
physical examination of the airway, it is prudent to look for fea-
tures like midface hypoplasia, micrognathia or receding chin, large 
tongue, and poor dentition which indicate the possibility of difficult 
tracheal intubation (Figs 11.1 and 11.2).20
Unanticipated difficult tracheal intubation in children is unusual.14 
Most difficult airway cases are those with primary airway emergen-
cies or specific syndromes like Pierre Robin Sequence, Goldenhar, 
Treacher Collins, achondroplasia, mucopolysaccharidoses, or cra-
niofacial synostosis such as Apert, Crouzon, or Pfeiffer.21 These 
syndromes are associated with various dysmorphic features like 
mandibular hypoplasia, retrognathia, facial asymmetry, limited 
mouth opening, and enlarged tongue.
Management of difficult intubation and ventilation varies greatly. 
Experience and familiarity with the equipment available will de-
termine one’s approach and it is important to have a backup plan.21 
A difficult intubation trolley which houses all airway management 
equipment should be in the operating theatre. To open the airway 
and optimize ventilation, the sniffing position should be maximized 
Fig. 11.1 Potential features of difﬁcult airway management: a large 
tongue which is protruding out of the mouth.
Fig. 11.2 Lateral view of a child showing mandibular hypoplasia.
 
 
Tracheal tube selection
125
using a shoulder roll or ramp. Most paediatric anaesthetists use 
the technique of spontaneous ventilation and intubation without 
muscle relaxation as their first- line management. This gives the 
greatest margin of safety because the child is breathing on his/ her 
own. This technique, however, requires skill. Oversedation depresses 
breathing while inadequate sedation predisposes to laryngospasm 
during airway manipulation.
In recent years, with the introduction of sugammadex, use of the 
muscle relaxant rocuronium for better intubating conditions instead 
of a sedated but unrelaxed patient has been proposed by the Difficult 
Airway Society.22 Neuromuscular blockade abolishes laryngeal re-
flexes, increases chest compliance, and facilitates face mask ventila-
tion.23,24 Rocuronium has a rapid onset and can be reversed rapidly 
with sugammadex. However, confirming the ability to perform ef-
fective face mask ventilation before paralysis may still be preferred 
by some anaesthetists in a child with an anticipated difficult airway.
In children with anticipated difficult mask ventilation, the goal is 
to maintain spontaneous breathing while adequately sedated for in-
tubation. If the child’s airway becomes obstructed, inserting an oral 
or nasopharyngeal airway into the posterior nasopharynx is often 
helpful. Where a paediatric nasopharyngeal airway is unavailable, 
a shortened uncuffed tracheal tube can be used as an alternative.25
For anticipated difficult tracheal intubation, laryngoscope blades 
of appropriate sizes and a supraglottic airway device must be avail-
able. In neonates and infants who have a relatively large and floppy 
epiglottis, a straight blade is often used to lift the epiglottis to obtain a 
good view of the larynx. Recently, videolaryngoscopy is being more 
widely used as backup or as first- line management. Local anaesthetic 
topicalization of the larynx with lidocaine may help to smooth the 
intubation procedure in a spontaneously breathing child.
Fibreoptic intubation is favoured as an alternative technique or 
as the primary technique when the airway is known to be difficult.26 
Awake tracheal intubation, which may be performed in cooperative 
adolescents, is impossible in infants or young children, and is not 
recommended. Asleep fibreoptic intubation requires skill due to the 
small airway size, partially collapsed soft tissue, and low threshold 
for oxygen desaturation. Such skill is acquired through training and 
practice. A nasopharyngeal airway or a small size tracheal tube in-
serted through one nostril into the posterior nasopharynx allows in-
sufflation of oxygen while fibreoptic intubation is performed (Fig. 
11.3). Alternatively, high flow nasal oxygen can be used to maintain 
oxygenation during fibreoptic intubation. Transnasal humidified 
rapid-insufflation ventilatory exchange (THRIVE) has been shown 
to safely prolong apnoeic oxygenation in children with healthy lungs 
and high flow nasal oxygen has been used successfully in spontan-
eously breathing children with abnormal airways who are at risk of 
apnoea during anaesthesia.27 High- flow nasal oxygen can double the 
expected time to oxygen desaturation below 90% in healthy chil-
dren. Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) competency to maintain 
spontaneous breathing is an important adjunct for a successful high- 
flow nasal oxygen technique.28
Fibreoptic tracheal intubation assisted by direct/ videolaryngoscopy 
has been described in the paediatric population. With this technique, 
the first anaesthetist controls the fibreoptic scope loaded with the tra-
cheal tube. Meanwhile another anaesthetist uses the laryngoscope to 
push the tongue and other soft tissue away and facilitates the manipu-
lation of the fibreoptic scope to gain access into the larynx. Another 
technique is to intubate via a supraglottic airway device. There are 
devices specifically designed for this purpose such as the Air- Q® intub-
ating laryngeal airway (Cookgas LLC, Mercury Medical, Clearwater, 
FL, USA). This method enables insufflation of oxygen, allows more 
time for manipulation of the tracheal tube without oxygen desatur-
ation, and can be less stressful.29,30
For many anaesthetists, the ultimate backup plan is for the sur-
geon to perform tracheostomy. In infants and small children, crash 
tracheostomy is difficult to perform and is associated with significant 
morbidity. For management of unanticipated difficult intubation, 
difficult ventilation, and can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate situations, 
the Difficult Airway Society has useful guidelines.31
Induction of anaesthesia
Parental/ carer presence at induction helps to allay the young child’s 
anxiety. Either inhalation induction with sevoflurane or intravenous 
induction with propofol is appropriate. Gaseous induction is em-
ployed for children with needle phobia. However, establishment of 
intravenous access before induction is preferred in patients with 
an anticipated difficult airway. Some anaesthetists prefer spontan-
eous ventilation without muscle relaxation for tracheal intubation in 
young infants; others administer a neuromuscular blocking agent to 
facilitate intubation.
Tracheal tube selection
In the past, paediatric anaesthetists preferred to use uncuffed tra-
cheal tubes in young children due to the fear the cuff may cause 
mucosal ischaemia and subsequent subglottic stenosis. Over the 
last decade, many have switched to using cuffed tracheal tubes with 
low- pressure cuffs that are designed specifically for use in children 
(e.g. microcuff tube).32 This is beneficial as there is less leak at any 
time point throughout the procedure,33,34 providing better venti-
lation. Compared to uncuffed tracheal tubes, there is less tube ex-
change; less perioperative respiratory events like laryngospasm 
and bronchospasm; and less stridor, sore throat, and hoarse voice 
Fig. 11.3 Fibreoptic tracheal intubation of an infant, with insufﬂation of 
oxygen through a tracheal tube inserted into the nasopharynx via the left 
nostril.
 
 
Paediatric surgery
126
postoperatively.33,35 Although cuffed tracheal tubes are more expen-
sive, the cost difference may be balanced by the fewer tube exchanges 
and lower fresh gas flows required due to reduced leak.33
Fluid management
During surgery, fluid management aims at providing basal meta-
bolic requirements (maintenance fluids), compensating for pre-
operative fasting deficit and replacing losses from the surgical field. 
In children, volume and composition, tonicity, and glucose are im-
portant considerations. Maintenance fluids are given as isotonic 
crystalloid infusions. The common practice of ‘4– 2– 1’ rule in cal-
culating hourly infusion rate was evolved from Holliday and Segar’s 
description of the relationship between physiological fluid losses 
and caloric expenditure:
 • 4 mL/ kg/ hour for the first 10 kg body weight.
 • 2 mL/ kg/ hour for the second 10 kg.
 • 1 mL/ kg/ hour for each kg >20 kg thereafter.
Like in adults, infants and children mount a stress response secondary 
to surgery. This neurohormonal response promotes glycogenolysis 
and gluconeogenesis. The risk of perioperative hypoglycaemia is low 
except in neonates, young infants, those on total parenteral nutri-
tion or certain metabolic diseases like glycogen storage disease, and 
prolonged surgery of >3 hours. Moreover, hyperglycaemia increases 
the risk of hypoxic– ischaemic brain damage and poor outcome.36– 38 
Routine dextrose infusions are no longer recommended for healthy 
children undergoing surgery. In infants requiring glucose supple-
ment, Plasma- Lyte® or Hartmann’s solution with dextrose con-
centration of 12% are usually adequate, as infusions with higher 
concentrations of dextrose result in hyperglycaemia.39– 41
Major maxillofacial surgery may be both prolonged and have ex-
tensive blood loss. The volume of blood loss is estimated and re-
placed with blood products and colloid. Regular point- of- care tests 
for measurements of haemoglobin, glucose, and electrolyte con-
centrations help guide the choice of fluids. Most children can drink 
early after maxillofacial surgery. Controversy exists regarding the 
choice and quantity of intravenous fluids for children who cannot 
tolerate oral fluids or in whom oral feeding is contraindicated in the 
postoperative period.42 Intravenous fluids are usually infused at a 
rate of two- thirds of the hourly maintenance volume (because of the 
risk of increased antidiuretic hormone secretion) and 0.45% sodium 
chloride with glucose 5% may be safely administered. Whichever 
fluid is used, treatment should be individualized. There should be 
careful monitoring of patients with a minimum of daily blood tests 
for plasma electrolyte levels, weighing of the patient, and charting of 
fluid balance.
Analgesia
Multimodal analgesia is the regimen of choice. Dependent upon 
the type of surgical procedure, various combinations of local anaes-
thesia infiltration by the surgeon, nerve blocks, and non- opioid and 
opioid analgesics can be effective. Paracetamol is efficacious for mild 
pain in children and is opioid sparing in more major cases.43 In those 
with low risk of bleeding, non- steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) can be given. These also reduce opioid consumption 
and the incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV).44 
A NSAID in combination with paracetamol produces better anal-
gesia than either alone.45 Opioids, like morphine or oxycodone, can 
be used for severe pain.46 However, careful titration of opioids ac-
cording to the individual child’s response is advised.
Postoperative nausea and vomiting
PONV, which causes dehydration and delayed discharge,47 has a high 
incidence in children.48 Oromaxillofacial surgery is associated with 
increased risk due to accidental ingestion of blood, and vomiting 
may disrupt the surgical site and/ or cause airway obstruction, there-
fore preventive measures are mandatory. 5- Hydroxytryptamine 
type 3 antagonists, such as ondansetron, tropisetron, or granisetron, 
are used as first- line prevention. Dexamethasone is effective for 
preventing late PONV and has the added effect of decreasing oe-
dema in the oropharyngeal region as well as reducing pain. The use 
of single antiemetics versus combination therapy depends upon the 
risk factors present (Table 11.1). Children at increased risk of PONV 
are given prophylactic intravenous ondansetron 0.15 mg/ kg while 
in those at high risk of PONV, the addition of dexamethasone 0.15 
mg/ kg intravenously is recommended.49 Metoclopramide is contra-
indicated for children aged <1 year of age and is only indicated as 
second- line therapy. Inhalational anaesthesia is more emetogenic 
than TIVA.44 Hence, TIVA should be considered in high- risk pa-
tients. Stimulation of the P6 acupuncture point is also effective in 
preventing PONV and is best done before anaesthesia.50,51
The compromised airway in the 
postoperative period
All children with a potentially compromised airway should be fully 
awake before tracheal extubation. They must be closely monitored 
for respiratory obstruction, preferably in a high dependency unit. 
Where there is significant airway oedema from the surgery, tracheal 
Table 11.1 Risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting 
in children
Patient factors
Age
Age >3 years old— adolescent years
History
Previous history of PONV
Motion sickness
Positive motion sickness history
Sex
Postpubertal girls
Surgical factors
Types of surgery
Adenotonsillectomy, strabismus surgery
Duration of surgery
>30 minutes
Anaesthetic factors
Choice of drugs
Inhalational anaesthetic agents, anticholinesterase, 
and longer- acting opioids in the postoperative 
period
Oromaxillofacial procedures
127
extubation should be deferred for 24– 48 hours until it has subsided. 
In some patients, tracheostomy may be needed for postoperative re-
spiratory care. Close monitoring and sedation of young infants (as 
well as paediatric arm splints, in some cases) may be required to 
prevent dislodgement of the tracheostomy tube.
Oromaxillofacial procedures
Cleft lip and palate
Cleft lip and palate are among the most common congenital anom-
alies and occur in about 1:600– 700 live births.52,53 Isolated cleft lip 
occurs in about 26% of cases, isolated cleft palate in 39% of cases, 
and both cleft lip and palate in 35% of cases.53 These are further div-
ided into syndromic and non- syndromic. More than 400 syndromes 
are associated with orofacial clefts. Common syndromes include 
Van der Woude syndrome,54 DiGeorge syndrome,55 Pierre Robin 
sequence,56 and Down syndrome. Non- syndromic cleft lip with or 
without cleft palate (cleft lip, cleft palate, cleft lip and palate) is be-
lieved to be due to both environmental57 and genetic factors.58
Children with orofacial clefts may have other congenital mal-
formations even without a recognized syndrome. Congenital heart 
disease occurs in 5– 10% of these patients.59,60 Right ventricular 
hypertrophy and cor pulmonale may result from recurrent hypoxia 
secondary to airway obstruction. Chronic rhinorrhoea is common 
in infants with cleft palate due to nasal regurgitation during feeds.
Cleft lip is often repaired at 2– 3 months of age whereas primary 
cleft palate repair occurs at 9– 12 months old. Alveolar bone grafting 
is now widely considered an essential step for the repair of max-
illary defects to stabilize the maxillary arch, to create support for 
permanent tooth eruption, to eliminate oral– nasal fistula, and to re-
construct the pyriform aperture. Optimal age for bone grafting is be-
tween 8 and 12 years old, before canine eruption.61 Pharyngoplasty 
may be required for velopharyngeal incompetence. Sometimes 
rhinoplasty and maxillary osteotomy may be needed at 17– 20 years 
of age (i.e. after the child has matured).
For anaesthesia in cleft surgery, preoperative assessment is im-
portant to identify two key issues: (1) any associated abnormalities 
and (2) the presence of predicted difficult airway management. The 
presence of syndromic facies like mandibular hypoplasia in Pierre 
Robin sequence should alert the anaesthetist to the possibility of dif-
ficult tracheal intubation. History of difficult breathing at birth and 
OSA are important clues. Rescheduling the surgery should be con-
sidered for infants with acute respiratory tract infection as adverse 
postoperative respiratory events after cleft palate repair have been 
reported to be 23%.62
Anaesthesia may be induced by intravenous or inhalation 
methods.53,63 Where difficult intubation is suspected, mainten-
ance of spontaneous ventilation until the airway is secured is gen-
erally advocated. Anticholinergic drugs such as atropine decrease 
secretions which, in turn, facilitates laryngoscopy and surgery. 
Dexamethasone 0.25– 0.5 mg/ kg may be given to decrease airway oe-
dema. Tracheal intubation is usually performed using a south- facing 
oral Ring– Adair– Elwyn (RAE) tracheal tube. Alternatively, a wire- 
reinforced tube can be used. If the cleft defect is large, the laryngo-
scope blade may be lodged in the defect during laryngoscopy. Care 
should be taken to avoid the defect by placing the blade to one side 
or packing the defect with moist gauze. The tracheal tube fits under 
the tongue plate of the mouth gag during palate repair, and it should 
be securely taped to the lower lip during lip or palate repair. A throat 
pack is placed to prevent airway soiling with blood and secretions. 
The mouth gag that surgeons place may compress the tracheal tube, 
causing difficult ventilation intraoperatively. Good communication 
must be maintained with surgeons for repositioning the mouth gag 
in such an event.
Anaesthesia may be maintained with inhalational or intra-
venous agents. The goal is to allow the patient to awaken rapidly 
and smoothly at the end of surgery. Ultra- short- acting opioids like 
remifentanil (infusion) or short- acting fentanyl are commonly used.
At the end of surgery, the mouth should be carefully examined. 
Gentle suction should be undertaken, and all surgical packs re-
moved under direct vision. Suctioning, if not done carefully, may 
cause rebleeding of the wound.64 The trachea should be extubated 
awake and the patient closely observed postoperatively for 48 hours. 
The anaesthetist should be wary of excessive sedation from anal-
gesics, airway obstruction due to tongue or laryngeal oedema,65,66 
and reduction of the pharyngeal space after closure of cleft palate. 
Where there is significant oedema, the patient should be transferred 
to the intensive care unit and extubation deferred until the swelling 
has subsided.
Cleft lip and palate correction surgeries are associated with intense 
postoperative pain. Incorporation of a multimodal analgesic ap-
proach reduces pain and aids recovery of these children. Infiltration 
of local anaesthetics by the surgeon has been used in both cleft lip 
and palate repair. Bilateral infraorbital nerve blocks reduce opioid 
requirements,67 decrease emergence delirium,68 and are superior to 
peri- incisional infiltration in cleft lip repair.69 In cleft palate repair, 
palatal nerve block (nasopalatine, greater and lesser palatine)70 or 
a bilateral suprazygomatic maxillary nerve block can reduce post-
operative pain and favour early feeding71 while intravenous para-
cetamol followed by regular oral paracetamol reduces postoperative 
morphine requirements.72 NSAIDs reduce pain scores and the need 
for rescue opioids for up to 48 hours post- cleft palate repair, even 
more so when combined with paracetamol.73 When opioids are used 
for postoperative analgesia, proper supervision in a high depend-
ency unit is needed because of the concerns regarding sedation, re-
spiratory depression, and consequent airway compromise.
Temporomandibular joint surgery
Temporomandibular joint ankylosis results in restricted or com-
plete inability to open the mouth. Features of unilateral TMJ an-
kylosis include facial asymmetry, deviation of the mandible, and 
a hypoplastic mandible with receding chin on the affected side. In 
bilateral TMJ ankylosis, facial symmetry is maintained but there 
may be micrognathia from failure of the mandible to grow, a narrow 
maxilla, and protruding upper incisors, with limited (or non- 
existent) mouth opening. The child may suffer from OSA due to a 
small retruded mandible, malnutrition, and poor dental hygiene.
The aetiology of TMJ ankylosis may either be congenital or 
acquired. Acquired TMJ ankylosis may be caused by trauma, 
infection, systemic inflammatory disorders, irradiation, pre-
vious surgery, and neoplasm. The surgical techniques used 
to treat TMJ ankylosis are gap arthroplasty, interpositional 
arthroplasty, and joint reconstruction (Fig. 11.4).74 Correction 
Paediatric surgery
128
of secondary deformities like facial asymmetry, occlusal canting, 
and micrognathic mandible may be performed concomitantly 
with the release of the ankylosis.75– 77
The anaesthetic challenge in managing patients for surgical re-
lease of TMJ ankylosis lies in the management of the difficult airway. 
When mouth opening is limited, use of an oral airway or supraglottic 
airway and laryngoscopy becomes impossible. A nasal fibreoptic 
technique is often used.78 Blind nasal intubation has also been used 
successfully.79 Gaseous induction of the child is followed by instil-
lation of a vasoconstrictor into the nares. A nasopharyngeal airway 
or a small size tracheal tube is placed into the pharynx to provide a 
means for insufflation of oxygen and anaesthetic agent. A cuffed re-
inforced tracheal tube or nasal RAE tube is preferred because it is not 
possible to pack the throat due to limited mouth opening. Elective 
tracheostomy is sometimes required in the child whose airway is 
precarious, to ensure safety perioperatively (Fig. 11.5).
Craniofacial procedures
One of the most common congenital craniofacial abnormalities 
requiring surgery is craniosynostosis where there is premature fu-
sion of one or more cranial sutures. The restrictive nature of this 
defect can lead to impaired brain growth, increased intracranial 
pressure, and psychologically devastating craniofacial deformities 
(Figs 11.6 and 11.7). Craniosynostosis occurs as an isolated con-
dition in 80% of cases or as part of a syndrome in 20% of cases.80 
Mutation in genes coding for fibroblast growth factor receptors 
(FGFRs) or the TWIST1 gene are responsible for the most common 
syndromes (Table 11.2).
In syndromic synostosis like Apert, Crouzon, and Pfeiffer syn-
dromes, midface hypoplasia is an additional feature (Figs 11.8  
and 11.9). Reconstruction of the cranium and midface involves 
several phased procedures (Fig. 11.10). Frontal orbital advance-
ment and remodelling is undertaken in infancy to allow brain 
Fig. 11.4 An interpositional costochondral graft for a child with 
temporomandibular joint ankylosis.
Fig. 11.5 Congenital temporomandibular joint ankylosis requiring 
surgical tracheostomy.
Fig. 11.6 Unilateral left lambdoidal craniosynostosis.
Fig. 11.7 Cloverleaf skull, due to premature closure of multiple cranial 
sutures.
 
Orthognathic procedures
129
growth and to protect the eyes in severe cases of exorbitism. 
Midface hypoplasia can be addressed at the time of cranial vault 
surgery with a monobloc advancement of the frontal bone, supra-
orbital bar, and midface, or staged— being undertaken later as a Le 
Fort III advancement. Orthognathic surgery is undertaken in young 
adulthood. A multidisciplinary approach involving plastic and re-
constructive surgeons, neurosurgeons, maxillofacial surgeons, ear, 
nose, and throat surgeons, anaesthetists, orthodontists, orthoptists, 
speech therapists, and clinical psychologists is the key to success in 
craniofacial surgery.81
Orthognathic procedures
Le Fort III osteotomy
The Le Fort III osteotomy is a subcranial advancement of the lat-
eral, inferior, and medial orbital elements including the zygoma 
and maxilla and is used to normalize orbital volume and restore 
projection of the zygoma. The monobloc procedure mobilizes the 
midface, brow, and forehead as a single unit that requires creating a 
Table 11.2 Syndromes most commonly associated with craniosynostosis
Disorder
Genetic mutation locus
Associated features
Apert syndrome
FGFR2 (chromosome 10)
Midface hypoplasia, maxillary retrusion, proptosis, hypertelorism, syndactyly, cleft palate. May 
be associated with intellectual disability
Crouzon syndrome
FGFR2 (chromosome 10)
Midface hypoplasia, maxillary retrusion, proptosis, hypertelorism, strabismus, beaked nose, 
often normal intelligence
Pfeiffer syndrome
FGFR1 (chromosomal 8)
FGFR2 (chromosome 10)
Midface hypoplasia, maxillary retrusion, nasopharyngeal stenosis, proptosis, hypertelorism, 
strabismus, beaked nose, hearing loss, partial syndactyly, cartilaginous tracheal sleeve, broad 
thumbs and great toes, often normal intelligence
Saethre– Chotzen syndrome 
(acrocephalosyndactyly type III)
TWIST1 (chromosome 7)
Short stature, hypertelorism, facial asymmetry, hearing loss, low frontal hairline, ptosis, mild 
partial syndactyly, usually normal intelligence
Fig. 11.8 Patient with Crouzon syndrome, showing midface hypoplasia 
and proptosis.
Fig. 11.9 Lateral view of a patient with Pfeiffer syndrome, demonstrating 
midface hypoplasia and exophthalmos.
Fig. 11.10 Reconstruction of the cranium during craniosynostosis 
surgery.
Paediatric surgery
130
communication between the intracranial and nasal cavities, whereas 
Le Fort III is completely extracranial.82 Facial bipartition osteotomy, 
done in hypertelorism, allows three- dimensional correction of max-
illa and orbits at the same time.
Distraction osteogenesis
Since the late 1990s, distraction osteogenesis using the Le Fort III or 
monobloc technique has been applied to midface advancement sur-
gery. Distraction procedures utilize traditional patterns for osteoto-
mies but generate new bone by allowing a period of healing followed 
by gradual advancement of the distraction segment by internal 
or external devices. The traditional use of bone graft is avoided.83 
However, a second operation is required to remove the external 
maxillary distraction device.
Anaesthesia for craniofacial and orthognathic 
procedures
Induction and airway management
Patients with congenital syndromes associated with craniofa-
cial abnormalities may present a number of airway management 
challenges. Face mask ventilation can be difficult in patients with 
midface hypoplasia and proptosis. A suitable mask should be 
carefully selected to avoid injury to the eyes. An oropharyngeal 
airway is an effective adjunct for face mask ventilation in an obli-
gate nose- breathing young infant who has choanal stenosis. About 
50% of patients with Apert, Crouzon, or Pfeiffer syndrome develop 
OSA.84 The role and indications for tracheostomy in these children 
with syndromes associated with OSA is unclear. In some centres, 
the presence of significant OSA is considered an indication for 
tracheostomy 1– 2 weeks prior to definitive midfacial surgery,85 
while others prefer a more conservative approach with the use of 
continuous positive airway pressure. It is important to consider 
the effect of chronic airway obstruction on the child’s cardiovas-
cular system. Prior to surgery, all patients should have basal blood 
counts and cross- match done.
Gaseous induction with maintenance of spontaneous venti-
lation is often performed to minimize the risk of sudden loss of 
airway. An oropharyngeal or nasal airway is indicated if the child’s 
airway obstructs during induction. Intravenous access can be 
difficult in young infants and particularly those with associated 
congenital limb abnormalities. It may be prudent to secure this 
before gaseous induction in those with severe OSA. Fentanyl and 
a non- depolarizing muscle relaxant should be administered after 
establishing intravenous access. Dexamethasone is administered 
at induction for its analgesic and antiemetic effects, and to min-
imize oedema.
Unlike mandibular hypoplasia, children with maxillary hypoplasia 
are less likely to be associated with a difficult tracheal intubation. 
However, in children who have undergone frontofacial advancement 
surgery, tracheal intubation may be more difficult as a result of the 
altered relationships between the maxilla and mandible and reduced 
TMJ movement.86 For secondary surgery to remove the external max-
illary distraction device (after distraction osteogenesis), the vertical 
bar can be removed to allow unobstructed access for direct laryngos-
copy (Fig. 11.11).
Intraoperative management
Major craniofacial surgery is associated with sudden cardiovascular 
changes and rapid blood loss. Two large peripheral intravenous 
catheters are essential. An arterial line is mandatory for close moni-
toring of blood pressure and blood sampling. A central venous line 
may be an appropriate measure in children requiring long- term 
venous access, particularly in cases where peripheral venous access 
proves limited.82
Maintenance of anaesthesia can be performed with an inhalational 
agent and oxygen/ air mixture or TIVA with propofol and remifentanil 
infusion. Nitrous oxide is avoided when there is a cranial compo-
nent to the surgery due to the risk of venous air embolism. There are 
now a number of commercial target- controlled infusion devices for 
propofol that incorporate pharmacokinetic algorithms which sim-
plify TIVA in children, making it a viable option.87
Intraoperative fluids consist of routine maintenance fluids 
and replacement of blood loss. Estimation of blood loss is diffi-
cult and goal- directed fluid therapy using stroke volume variation 
or pulse pressure variation, together with regular point- of- care 
testing of haemoglobin and blood gases provide guidance in clin-
ical management. A combination of opioids like fentanyl or mor-
phine and intravenous paracetamol are administered for analgesia. 
Intravenous ondansetron and dexamethasone are recommended to 
prevent PONV.
Blood conservation
Various strategies for reducing homologous blood transfusion 
have been used. Preoperative autologous blood donation and acute 
Fig. 11.11 Rigid external distraction (RED) device applied for distraction 
osteogenesis in midface advancement surgery. The vertical bar can be 
removed in the event of an airway emergency.
 
 
 
 
 
Minor oromaxillofacial procedures
131
normovolaemic haemodilution are difficult to achieve in young chil-
dren because of their age and insufficient blood volume. Recombinant 
human erythropoietin and iron supplementation given weekly for 
3– 4 weeks prior to surgery increases the preoperative haemoglobin 
level and decreases transfusion requirements, particularly in those 
with pre- existing anaemia.88– 90 In children who cannot receive or do 
not respond to oral iron due to intolerance, poor adherence, or iron 
malabsorption, parenteral iron is a safe and effective means to treat 
iron deficiency.91 Since the safe limits for hypotension in children 
are unknown, it has been suggested that hypotensive anaesthesia 
should not be used in paediatric midface advancement surgery.82 
Intraoperative blood salvage from the surgical site with reinfusion 
after processing can reduce homologous blood transfusion. In in-
fants and young children, application of this technique is limited 
because of high priming volume and slow processing time. The 
safety of this cell salvage technique in operations where there may 
be microbiological contamination from the respiratory tract mu-
cosa in the surgical field has also being questioned.92 Antifibrinolytic 
agents have been shown to effectively decrease blood loss and ex-
posure to allogeneic blood transfusion in children undergoing 
craniosynostosis surgery,88,93 major orthopaedic surgery,94 and car-
diac surgery95 and is therefore recommended in craniofacial surgery 
where there is a significant risk for perioperative transfusion.
Prophylactic or therapeutic administration of tranexamic acid, 
an antifibrinolytic agent, is a well- tolerated and effective strategy 
to reduce bleeding, decrease the requirement for allogeneic blood 
product transfusion, and improve patient outcomes.96,97 It has a 
good safety profile.98 Patients may develop hypotension with fast 
intravenous administration, but convulsions occur only with very 
high doses. Although the optimal dose regimen is not established, a 
loading dose of between 10 and 30 mg/ kg followed by 5– 10 mg/ kg/ 
hr maintenance infusion have been used in paediatric trauma and 
surgery.99 Absolute contraindications include hypersensitivity, ac-
tive thromboembolic disease, and fibrinolytic conditions with con-
sumption coagulopathy.
Postoperative management
Children should be nursed in a high dependency area after major 
craniofacial surgery. In a multicentre observational study com-
prising 72 patients, 52% of the Le Fort III and 73% of the monobloc 
patients were kept intubated in the intensive care unit after sur-
gery.82 Head- up position is recommended to decrease local swelling. 
Analgesia should be multimodal, with an intravenous opioid (mor-
phine or fentanyl) infusion or patient/nurse-controlled analgesia, 
regular paracetamol, and NSAID. Nausea or vomiting should be 
treated with antiemetics.
Surgery for trauma
Paediatric facial injuries are usually minor, and fracture is rare com-
pared to adults. However, when it occurs, it is associated with se-
vere injury and disability. Concomitant head, cervical spine, and 
ocular injuries need to be considered. Motor vehicle accidents, 
falls from height, and sport- related injuries are the leading causes. 
It is estimated that <1% of maxillofacial trauma occurs in children 
<5 years of age.100 Greater flexibility of bones, underdeveloped 
sinuses, unerupted teeth, the presence of protective fat pads, and less 
involvement in high- velocity road traffic accidents make children 
less prone to injury.101 Cranial and central facial injuries are more 
common among toddlers and infants, and mandibular injuries are 
more common among adolescents. Treatment is usually conserva-
tive for facial injury with minimal manipulation to prevent growth 
disturbance. Surgical intervention is indicated only for the repair of 
severely displaced and comminuted fractures that are likely to cause 
functional impairment, aesthetic deformity, or both.102
Anaesthetic management requires immediate assessment of the 
airway. Even an unobstructed airway should be carefully moni-
tored, as increasing oedema, swelling, and haematoma may later 
cause compromise. Depending on the degree of obstruction, simple 
measures like clearing the airway, optimizing positioning, and in-
sertion of an oropharyngeal airway will suffice. Obstruction from 
bi- mandibular fractures can be relieved by anterior traction on the 
jaw or tongue. Successful tracheal intubation can be achieved using 
several different techniques (as described in the earlier section on 
difficult airway management), depending on the type of injury and 
patient condition. When anatomical disruption makes intubation 
difficult or impossible, a surgical airway is lifesaving.
Minor oromaxillofacial procedures
Tongue tie
Tongue tie (ankyloglossia) is an anomaly comprising an abnormally 
short lingual frenulum. Tongue tie occurs in about 4% of newborns 
and may be associated with feeding and speech problems.103 There is 
no consensus on the optimum timing and the indications for tongue 
tie surgery. This operation is a short procedure where the surgeon 
performs frenulotomy under local or general anaesthesia. A simple 
approach to anaesthesia, without airway instrumentation, is to allow 
the child to spontaneously breathe sevoflurane/ oxygen via a face 
mask. Once the child is anaesthetized, local anaesthetic is applied 
topically, and the surgeon performs the frenulotomy. The anaesthe-
tist should be wary of laryngospasm if the patient is not in a suf-
ficiently deep plane of anaesthesia, and close cooperation between 
the surgeon and anaesthetist is required. Alternatively, a supraglottic 
airway may be used by some anaesthetists, though tracheal intub-
ation is seldom required. Simple oral analgesics are sufficient for 
postoperative pain management.
Dental surgery
Children may present for dental procedures such as teeth scaling 
and polishing, extraction, or drainage of dental abscess (and its com-
plication Ludwig’s angina). Most young children will need general 
anaesthesia for extensive and lengthy dental procedures.
For dental abscess, it is important to assess the airway before sur-
gery to ensure it is not compromised. Trismus is unusual and may 
relax upon induction of anaesthesia if the infection is superficial. If 
the infection has spread to the submasseteric area, relaxation of the 
trismus is unlikely and fibreoptic intubation will be required.
Many anaesthetists insert a nasotracheal tube if both left and right 
sides are to be manipulated. Nasotracheal tubes have less chance of 
dislodgement, but increased risk of epistaxis and sinusitis. Some 
anaesthetists intubate the trachea orally with a south- facing RAE 
tube, taped to the opposite side if only one side is to be manipulated. 
 
 
 
 
 
Paediatric surgery
132
A throat pack (if required) should be placed after the patient is 
asleep. A study comparing propofol versus sevoflurane- based an-
aesthesia for dental procedures showed less PONV and less nursing 
interventions with propofol, although a similar rate of postopera-
tive delirium.104 Careful suctioning and removal of the throat pack 
should be done before awake tracheal extubation. Simple analgesics 
suffice for postoperative pain.
Conclusion
Anaesthesia for oromaxillofacial surgery in children can be challen-
ging. The type of anaesthesia required for children of different age 
groups, comorbidities, and severity of operation may vary greatly 
and needs to be tailored to each child. Anaesthetists should always 
be prepared for the possibility of difficult intubation and ventilation, 
massive fluid shifts, and prolonged procedures. A multidisciplinary 
approach is essential for satisfactory outcome.
REFERENCES
 1. Regli A, Becke K, von Ungern- Sternberg BS. An update on the 
perioperative management of children with upper respiratory 
tract infections. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2017;30(3):362– 367.
 2. Mostafa MG, Morsy KM. Premedication with intranasal 
dexmedetomidine, midazolam and ketamine for children 
undergoing bone marrow biopsy and aspirate. Egypt J Anaesth. 
2013;29(2):131– 135.
 3. Ghai B, Jain K, Saxena AK, Bhatia N, Sodhi KS. Comparison of 
oral midazolam with intranasal dexmedetomidine premedication 
for children undergoing CT imaging: a randomized, double- 
blind, and controlled study. Paediatr Anaesth. 2017;27(1):37– 44.
 4. Jun JH, Kim KN, Kim JY, Song SM. The effects of intranasal 
dexmedetomidine premedication in children: a systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Can J Anaesth. 2017;64(9):947– 961.
 5. Yuen VM, Hui TW, Irwin MG, Yuen MK. A comparison 
of intranasal dexmedetomidine and oral midazolam for 
premedication in pediatric anesthesia: a double- blinded 
randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg. 2008;106(6):1715– 1721.
 6. Zub D, Berkenbosch JW, Tobias JD. Preliminary experience 
with oral dexmedetomidine for procedural and anesthetic 
premedication. Paediatr Anaesth. 2005;15(11):932– 938.
 7. Yuen VM, Irwin MG, Hui TW, Yuen MK, Lee LH. A double- 
blind, crossover assessment of the sedative and analgesic effects of 
intranasal dexmedetomidine. Anesth Anal. 2007;105(2):374– 380.
 8. Gyanesh P, Haldar R, Srivastava D, Agrawal PM, Tiwari AK, 
Singh PK. Comparison between intranasal dexmedetomidine and 
intranasal ketamine as premedication for procedural sedation in 
children undergoing MRI: a double- blind, randomized, placebo- 
controlled trial. J Anesth. 2014;28(1):12– 18.
 9. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use 
of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary 
aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective 
procedures: an updated report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative Fasting and the 
Use of Pharmacologic Agents to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary 
Aspiration. Anesthesiology. 2017;126(3):376– 393.
 10. Andersson H, Zaren B, Frykholm P. Low incidence of pulmonary 
aspiration in children allowed intake of clear fluids until called to 
the operating suite. Paediatr Anaesth. 2015;25(8):770– 777.
 11. Schmidt AR, Buehler P, Seglias L, Stark T, Brotschi B, Renner T, 
et al. Gastric pH and residual volume after 1 and 2 h fasting time 
for clear fluids in children. Br J Anaesth. 2015;114(3):477– 482.
 12. Thomas M, Morrison C, Newton R, Schindler E. Consensus 
statement on clear fluids fasting for elective pediatric general 
anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth. 2018;28(5):411– 414.
 13. Pfaff KE, Tumin D, Miller R, Beltran RJ, Tobias JD, Uffman JC. 
Perioperative aspiration events in children: a report from the Wake- 
Up Safe Collaborative. Paediatr Anaesth. 2020;30(6):660– 666.
 14. Karsli C, Pehora C, Al- Izzi A, Mathew P. A retrospective review 
of pediatric difficult airways: once easy, not always easy. Can J 
Anaesth. 2016;63(6):776– 777.
 15. Morray JP, Geiduschek JM, Caplan RA, Posner KL, Gild WM, 
Cheney FW. A comparison of pediatric and adult anesthesia 
closed malpractice claims. Anesthesiology. 1993;78(3):461– 467.
 16. Mamie C, Habre W, Delhumeau C, Argiroffo CB, Morabia A. 
Incidence and risk factors of perioperative respiratory adverse 
events in children undergoing elective surgery. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2004;14(3):218– 224.
 17. Jimenez N, Posner KL, Cheney FW, Caplan RA, Lee LA, Domino 
KB. An update on pediatric anesthesia liability: a closed claims 
analysis. Anesth Anal. 2007;104(1):147– 153.
 18. Bhananker SM, Ramamoorthy C, Geiduschek JM, Posner KL, 
Domino KB, Haberkern CM, et al. Anesthesia- related cardiac 
arrest in children: update from the Pediatric Perioperative 
Cardiac Arrest Registry. Anesth Anal. 2007;105(2):344– 350.
 19. Adewale L. Anatomy and assessment of the pediatric airway. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2009;19 Suppl 1:1– 8.
 20. Santillanes G, Gausche- Hill M. Pediatric airway management. 
Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2008;26(4):961– 975, ix.
 21. Bew S. Managing the difficult airway in children. Anaesth 
Intensive Care Med. 2006;7(5):172– 174.
 22. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath 
R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
 23. Warters RD, Szabo TA, Spinale FG, DeSantis SM, Reves JG. 
The effect of neuromuscular blockade on mask ventilation. 
Anaesthesia. 2011;66(3):163– 167.
 24. Sachdeva R, Kannan TR, Mendonca C, Patteril M. Evaluation 
of changes in tidal volume during mask ventilation following 
administration of neuromuscular blocking drugs. Anaesthesia. 
2014;69(8):826– 831.
 25. Masters IB, Chang AB, Harris M, O’Neil MC. Modified 
nasopharyngeal tube for upper airway obstruction. Arch Dis 
Child. 1999;80(2):186– 187.
 26. Brooks P, Ree R, Rosen D, Ansermino M. Canadian pediatric 
anesthesiologists prefer inhalational anesthesia to manage 
difficult airways. Can J Anaesth. 2005;52(3):285– 290.
 27. Humphreys S, Lee- Archer P, Reyne G, Long D, Williams T, 
Schibler A. Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventilatory 
exchange (THRIVE) in children: a randomized controlled trial. 
Br J Anaesth. 2017;118(2):232– 238.
 28. Humphreys S, Schibler A. Nasal high- flow oxygen in pediatric 
anesthesia and airway management. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2020;30(3):339– 346.
 29. Walker RW. The laryngeal mask airway in the difficult paediatric 
airway: an assessment of positioning and use in fibreoptic 
intubation. Paediatr Anaesth. 2000;10(1):53– 58.
 30. Walker RW, Allen DL, Rothera MR. A fibreoptic intubation 
technique for children with mucopolysaccharidoses using the 
laryngeal mask airway. Paediatr Anaesth. 1997;7(5):421– 426.
Conclusion
133
 31. Difficult Airway Society. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines 
for cannot intubate and cannot ventilate (CICV) in a paralysed 
anaesthetised child aged 1 to 8 years 2015. https:// das.uk.com/ gui 
deli nes/ pae diat ric- diffic ult- air way- gui deli nes
 32. Weiss M, Dullenkopf A, Gerber AC. [Microcuff pediatric tracheal 
tube. A new tracheal tube with a high volume- low pressure cuff 
for children]. Anaesthesist. 2004;53(1):73– 79.
 33. Chambers NA, Ramgolam A, Sommerfield D, Zhang G, 
Ledowski T, Thurm M, et al. Cuffed vs. uncuffed tracheal tubes 
in children: a randomised controlled trial comparing leak, tidal 
volume and complications. Anaesthesia. 2018;73(2):160– 168.
 34. Shah A, Carlisle JB. Cuffed tracheal tubes: guilty now proven 
innocent. Anaesthesia. 2019;74(9):1186– 1190.
 35. Weiss M, Dullenkopf A, Fischer JE, Keller C, Gerber AC; 
European Paediatric Endotracheal Intubation Study GROUP. 
Prospective randomized controlled multi- centre trial of cuffed 
or uncuffed endotracheal tubes in small children. Br J Anaesth. 
2009;103(6):867– 873.
 36. Elkon B, Cambrin JR, Hirshberg E, Bratton SL. 
Hyperglycemia: an independent risk factor for poor outcome 
in children with traumatic brain injury. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2014;15(7):623– 631.
 37. Drummond JC, Moore SS. The influence of dextrose 
administration on neurologic outcome after temporary spinal 
cord ischemia in the rabbit. Anesthesiology. 1989;70(1):64– 70.
 38. Duckrow RB, Beard DC, Brennan RW. Regional cerebral blood 
flow decreases during chronic and acute hyperglycemia. Stroke. 
1987;18(1):52– 58.
 39. Nishina K, Mikawa K, Maekawa N, Asano M, Obara H. 
Effects of exogenous intravenous glucose on plasma glucose 
and lipid homeostasis in anesthetized infants. Anesthesiology. 
1995;83(2):258– 263.
 40. Dubois MC, Gouyet L, Murat I, Saint- Maurice C. Lactated Ringer 
with 1% dextrose: an appropriate solution for peri- operative fluid 
therapy in children. Pediatr Anesth. 1992;2(2):99– 104.
 41. Tosh P, Rajan S, Barua K, Kumar L. Comparison of intraoperative 
glycemic levels in infants with the use of ringer lactate with 
supplemental 1% versus 2% dextrose as maintenance fluid. 
Anesth Essays Res. 2019;13(4):631– 635.
 42. Paut O, Lacroix F. Recent developments in the perioperative fluid 
management for the paediatric patient. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2006;19(3):268– 277.
 43. Anderson BJ. Paracetamol (acetaminophen): mechanisms of 
action. Paediatr Anaesth. 2008;18(10):915– 921.
 44. Michelet D, Andreu- Gallien J, Bensalah T, Hilly J, Wood C, 
Nivoche Y, et al. A meta- analysis of the use of nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs for pediatric postoperative pain. Anesth 
Anal. 2012;114(2):393– 406.
 45. Anderson BJ. Comparing the efficacy of NSAIDs and 
paracetamol in children. Paediatr Anaesth. 2004;14(3):201– 217.
 46. Wilson- Smith EM. Systemic analgesics in children. Anaesth 
Intensive Care Med. 2010;11(6):217– 223.
 47. Ali U, Tsang M, Igbeyi B, Balakrishnan S, Shackell K, Kotzer 
G, et al. A 4 year quality improvement initiative reducing 
post- operative nausea and vomiting in children undergoing 
strabismus surgery at a quaternary paediatric hospital. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2019;29(7):690– 697.
 48. Rose JB, Watcha MF. Postoperative nausea and vomiting in 
paediatric patients. Br J Anaesth. 1999;83(1):104– 117.
 49. Martin S, Baines D, Holtby H, Carr AS. APAGBI guidelines on 
the prevention of post- operative vomiting in children. 2016. 
https:// www.apa gbi.org.uk/ sites/ defa ult/ files/ inl ine- files/ 
2016%20APA%20POV%20Gu idel ine- 2.pdf
 50. Dune LS, Shiao SY. Metaanalysis of acustimulation effects on 
postoperative nausea and vomiting in children. Explore (NY). 
2006;2(4):314– 320.
 51. Zhang Y, Zhang C, Yan M, Wang N, Liu J, Wu A. The effectiveness 
of PC6 acupuncture in the prevention of postoperative nausea 
and vomiting in children: A systematic review and meta- analysis. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2020;30(5):552– 563.
 52. Kobayashi GS, Brito LA, Meira JGC, Alvizi L, Passos- Bueno 
MR. Genetics of cleft lip and cleft palate: perspectives in 
surgery management and outcome. In: Alonso N, Raposo- 
Amaral CE (eds) Cleft Lip and Palate Treatment, pp. 25– 35. 
Cham: Springer; 2018.
 53. Tremlett M. Anaesthesia for cleft lip and palate surgery. Curr 
Anaesth Crit Care. 2004;15(4):309– 316.
 54. Schutte BC, Sander A, Malik M, Murray JC. Refinement of the 
Van der Woude gene location and construction of a 3.5- Mb YAC 
contig and STS map spanning the critical region in 1q32– q41. 
Genomics. 1996;36(3):507– 514.
 55. Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Mortier G, van Thienen MN, Keymolen K. 
The annual incidence of DiGeorge/ velocardiofacial syndrome. J 
Med Genet. 1998;35(9):789– 790.
 56. Wan T, Chen Y, Wang G. Do patients with isolated Pierre Robin 
Sequence have worse outcomes after cleft palate repair: a systematic 
review. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2015;68(8):1095– 1099.
 57. Mirilas P, Mentessidou A, Kontis E, Asimakidou M, Moxham 
BJ, Petropoulos AS, et al. Parental exposures and risk of 
nonsyndromic orofacial clefts in offspring: a case- control study in 
Greece. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;75(5):695– 699.
 58. Kohli SS, Kohli VS. A comprehensive review of the genetic basis 
of cleft lip and palate. J Oral Maxillofac Pathol. 2012;16(1):64– 72.
 59. Barbosa MM, Rocha CM, Katina T, Caldas M, Codorniz A, 
Medeiros C. Prevalence of congenital heart diseases in oral cleft 
patients. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24(4):369– 374.
 60. Reena, Bandyopadhyay KH, Paul A. Postoperative analgesia 
for cleft lip and palate repair in children. J Anaesthesiol Clin 
Pharmacol. 2016;32(1):5– 11.
 61. Alonso N, da Silva Freitas R, Amundson J, Raposo- Amaral CE. 
Bone graft in alveolar cleft lip and palate. In: Alonso N, Raposo- 
Amaral CE (ed) Cleft Lip and Palate Treatment, pp. 247– 261. 
Cham: Springer; 2018.
 62. Jackson O, Basta M, Sonnad S, Stricker P, Larossa D, Fiadjoe 
J. Perioperative risk factors for adverse airway events in 
patients undergoing cleft palate repair. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 
2013;50(3):330– 336.
 63. Steward DJ. Anesthesia for patients with cleft lip and palate. 
Semin Anesth Periop Med Pain. 2007;26(3):126– 132.
 64. Oosthuizen A. Anaesthesia for cleft lip and palate surgery. S Afr J 
Anaesth Anal. 2017;23(2):128– 133.
 65. Patane PS, White SE. Macroglossia causing airway obstruction 
following cleft palate repair. Anesthesiology. 1989;71(6):995– 996.
 66. Chan MT, Chan MS, Mui KS, Ho BP. Massive lingual swelling 
following palatoplasty. An unusual cause of upper airway 
obstruction. Anaesthesia. 1995;50(1):30– 34.
 67. Rajamani A, Kamat V, Rajavel VP, Murthy J, Hussain SA. 
A comparison of bilateral infraorbital nerve block with 
intravenous fentanyl for analgesia following cleft lip repair in 
children. Paediatr Anaesth. 2007;17(2):133– 139.
 68. Wang H, Liu G, Fu W, Li ST. The effect of infraorbital nerve block 
on emergence agitation in children undergoing cleft lip surgery 
Paediatric surgery
134
under general anesthesia with sevoflurane. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2015;25(9):906– 910.
 69. Prabhu KP, Wig J, Grewal S. Bilateral infraorbital nerve block is 
superior to peri- incisional infiltration for analgesia after repair of 
cleft lip. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 1999;33(1):83– 87.
 70. Jonnavithula N, Durga P, Madduri V, Ramachandran G, Nuvvula 
R, Srikanth R, et al. Efficacy of palatal block for analgesia 
following palatoplasty in children with cleft palate. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2010;20(8):727– 733.
 71. Mesnil M, Dadure C, Captier G, Raux O, Rochette A, Canaud N, 
et al. A new approach for peri- operative analgesia of cleft palate 
repair in infants: the bilateral suprazygomatic maxillary nerve 
block. Paediatr Anaesth. 2010;20(4):343– 349.
 72. Nour C, Ratsiu J, Singh N, Mason L, Ray A, Martin M, et al. 
Analgesic effectiveness of acetaminophen for primary cleft palate 
repair in young children: a randomized placebo controlled trial. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2014;24(6):574– 581.
 73. Mireskandari SM, Makarem J. Effect of rectal diclofenac and 
acetaminophen alone and in combination on postoperative 
pain after cleft palate repair in children. J Craniofac Surg. 
2011;22(5):1955– 1959.
 74. Kennett S. Temporomandibular joint ankylosis: the rationale for 
grafting in the young patient. J Oral Surg. 1973;31(10):744– 748.
 75. Andrade NN, Raikwar KR. Management of patients with 
obstructive sleep apnoea induced by temporomandibular joint 
ankylosis: a novel 2- stage surgical protocol and report of 5 cases. 
Asian J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009;21(1):27– 32.
 76. Feiyun P, Wei L, Jun C, Xin X, Zhuojin S, Fengguo Y. 
Simultaneous correction of bilateral temporomandibular 
joint ankylosis with mandibular micrognathia using internal 
distraction osteogenesis and 3- dimensional craniomaxillofacial 
models. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2010;68(3):571– 577.
 77. Munro IR, Chen YR, Park BY. Simultaneous total correction 
of temporomandibular ankylosis and facial asymmetry. Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 1986;77(4):517– 529.
 78. Kilmartin E, Grunwald Z, Kaplan FS, Nussbaum BL. General 
anesthesia for dental procedures in patients with fibrodysplasia 
ossificans progressiva: a review of 42 cases in 30 patients. Anesthes 
Anal. 2014;118(2):298– 301.
 79. Marhatta MN, Acharya SP. Blind nasal intubation in a child 
with ankylosis of temporomandibular joint. Nepal Med Coll J. 
2008;10(4):271– 274.
 80. Buchanan EP, Xue AS, Hollier LH, Jr. Craniofacial syndromes. 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;134(1):128e– 153e.
 81. Sawh- Martinez R, Steinbacher DM. Syndromic Craniosynostosis. 
Clin Plast Surg. 2019;46(2):141– 155.
 82. Glover CD, Fernandez AM, Huang H, Derderian C, Binstock 
W, Reid R, et al. Perioperative outcomes and management in 
midface advancement surgery: a multicenter observational 
descriptive study from the Pediatric Craniofacial Collaborative 
Group. Paediatr Anaesth. 2018;28(8):710– 718.
 83. Yu JC, Fearon J, Havlik RJ, Buchman SR, Polley JW. Distraction 
osteogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2004;114(1):1E– 20E.
 84. Moore MH. Upper airway obstruction in the syndromal 
craniosynostoses. Br J Plast Surg. 1993;46(5):355– 362.
 85. Thomas K, Hughes C, Johnson D, Das S. Anesthesia for 
surgery related to craniosynostosis: a review. Part 1. Paediatric 
anaesthesia. 2012;22(11):1033– 1041.
 86. de Beer D, Bingham R. The child with facial abnormalities. Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol. 2011;24(3):282– 288.
 87. Anderson B, Houghton J. Ankle biters: how to use TIVA in 
children. In: Wong GTC, Irwin MG, Lam SW (eds) Taking on 
TIVA: Debunking Myths and Dispelling Misunderstandings, 
pp. 111– 123. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2019.
 88. Escher PJ, Tu A, Kearney S, Wheelwright M, Petronio J, Kebriaei 
M, et al. Minimizing transfusion in sagittal craniosynostosis 
surgery: the Children’s Hospital of Minnesota Protocol. Childs 
Nerv Syst. 2019;35(8):1357– 1362.
 89. Vega RA, Lyon C, Kierce JF, Tye GW, Ritter AM, Rhodes JL. 
Minimizing transfusion requirements for children undergoing 
craniosynostosis repair: the CHoR protocol. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 
2014;14(2):190– 195.
 90. Meara JG, Smith EM, Harshbarger RJ, Farlo JN, Matar MM, 
Levy ML. Blood- conservation techniques in craniofacial 
surgery. Ann Plast Surg. 2005;54(5):525– 529.
 91. Crary SE, Hall K, Buchanan GR. Intravenous iron sucrose for 
children with iron deficiency failing to respond to oral iron 
therapy. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011;56(4):615– 619.
 92. Anderson S, Panizza B. Are cell salvage and autologous blood 
transfusion safe in endonasal surgery? Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg. 2010;142(3 Suppl 1):S3– S6.
 93. Lu VM, Goyal A, Daniels DJ. Tranexamic acid decreases blood 
transfusion burden in open craniosynostosis surgery without 
operative compromise. J Craniofac Surg. 2019;30(1):120– 126.
 94. McNicol ED, Tzortzopoulou A, Schumann R, Carr DB, Kalra A. 
Antifibrinolytic agents for reducing blood loss in scoliosis surgery 
in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;9:CD006883.
 95. Hassan M, Hasan K, Salam A, Razzak A, Ferdous S, Maruf F, 
et al. Effect of tranexamic acid after cardiac surgery in children. 
Cardiovasc J. 2009;1(2):189– 192.
 96. Goobie SM, Meier PM, Pereira LM, McGowan FX, Prescilla 
RP, Scharp LA, et al. Efficacy of tranexamic acid in pediatric 
craniosynostosis surgery: a double- blind, placebo- controlled 
trial. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(4):862– 871.
 97. Dadure C, Sauter M, Bringuier S, Bigorre M, Raux O, Rochette A, 
et al. Intraoperative tranexamic acid reduces blood transfusion 
in children undergoing craniosynostosis surgery: a randomized 
double- blind study. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(4):856– 861.
 98. Goobie SM, Cladis FP, Glover CD, Huang H, Reddy SK, 
Fernandez AM, et al. Safety of antifibrinolytics in cranial vault 
reconstructive surgery: a report from the pediatric craniofacial 
collaborative group. Paediatr Anaesth. 2017;27(3):271– 281.
 99. Goobie SM, Faraoni D. Tranexamic acid and perioperative 
bleeding in children: what do we still need to know? Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol. 2019;32(3):343– 352.
 100. Haug RH, Foss J. Maxillofacial injuries in the pediatric patient. Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2000;90(2):126– 134.
 101. Ferreira PC, Amarante JM, Silva PN, Rodrigues JM, Choupina 
MP, Silva AC, et al. Retrospective study of 1251 maxillofacial 
fractures in children and adolescents. Plast Reconstr Surg. 
2005;115(6):1500– 1508.
 102. Mukherjee CG, Mukherjee U. Maxillofacial trauma in children. 
Int J Clin Pediatr Dent. 2012;5(3):231– 236.
 103. Klockars T, Pitkaranta A. Pediatric tongue- tie 
division: indications, techniques and patient satisfaction. Int J 
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2009;73(10):1399– 1401.
 104. Konig MW, Varughese AM, Brennen KA, Barclay S, Shackleford 
TM, Samuels PJ, et al. Quality of recovery from two types 
of general anesthesia for ambulatory dental surgery in 
children: a double- blind, randomized trial. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2009;19(8):748– 755.
12   
 Infection
Adam R. Duffen and David J. A. Vaughan
Introduction
This chapter describes the anaesthetic management of patients pre-
senting for surgery with oral and dental infections, including the 
pathophysiology, associated complications, clinical assessment, and 
management options (including antimicrobials), and an overview of 
the key aspects of managing patients with sepsis.
Infection of the oral cavity, including dental caries, dental ab-
scesses, and gingivitis, is the commonest disease in the world. 
Management of the majority of these conditions does not usually 
require an anaesthetist. In the minority, however, where simple 
management with oral hygiene and antibiotics fail, more serious lo-
calized infection may develop, or infection may become systemic 
(leading to sepsis), necessitating operative intervention and/ or sup-
portive management in the critical care unit. Indeed, infections of 
the head and neck make up a significant proportion of the emer-
gency workload in oromaxillofacial surgical units.
Epidemiology
Globally, despite great improvements in oral health, oral disease is 
still a major public health problem.1 Dental caries affects nearly all 
adults and between 60% and 90% of children worldwide, with par-
ticularly high rates in developed countries. Improved public health, 
through health promotion2 and the widespread addition of fluoride 
to drinking water and toothpaste, has led to a reduction in tooth 
decay (from 46% to 28% in adults, between 1998 and 2009). There 
are social variations in tooth decay prevalence, with those in profes-
sional occupations being 11% less likely to be affected.3
Most serious dental infections are preventable with regular dental 
care. However, there is some evidence that the incidence of hospital 
admissions from severe odontogenic infection may have increased 
in the UK. Analysis of hospital statistics between 1998 and 2006 
showed a doubling of admissions for drainage of dental abscesses. It 
has been suggested that this may be a consequence of reduced access 
to routine dental care,4 although it may also reflect the increasing 
reticence of community dental physicians to treat these issues, for 
medicolegal and possibly remunerative reasons.
Oral disease can be associated with other chronic conditions or 
health- related risk factors. Patients presenting with odontogenic in-
fections will therefore have a higher incidence of diabetes, obesity, 
smoking, and drug and alcohol misuse. Poor nutritional status may 
be a causative factor or a direct consequence of the condition.
Pathophysiology
Dental caries is caused by the action of acid- producing bacteria on 
the dental enamel, causing it to dissolve. Bacteria can enter the tooth 
through a carious cavity and then pass through the dentine and into 
the pulp (Fig. 12.1). Infection may track through the pulp to the 
root apex and into the alveolar bone forming a periapical abscess. 
Infection via
carious cavity
or traumatized
crown
Infected or
necrotic pulp
Periodontal
ligament
Alveolar bone
Apical foramen
Periapical infection
Fig. 12.1 Cross- section of a tooth showing the spread of infection.
 
 
 
 
Infection
136
Alternatively, infection may enter via a broken tooth, resulting 
from extensive periodontal disease, or failed root canal treatment. 
Periapical abscesses are the most common type of dental abscess. 
Other types of abscess can be classified according to the anatomical 
location of the tissue affected (Table 12.1).5
Infection that enters via the pulp may resolve, cause a pulpitis, be-
come localized and form a periapical abscess, or can spread through 
the cortical plate and into surrounding tissue. The position of the 
tooth influences the likely spread of an abscess formed at that site. 
Fig. 12.2 shows the position of the paediatric and adult teeth, and 
the location of the incisors, canines, premolars, and molars.6
Infection follows the path of least resistance, spreading along the 
fascial planes, and into adjoining structures (Fig. 12.3). Pus arising 
from the lower teeth (mandibular) may drain outwards, intraorally 
(from incisors, canines, and premolars) or extraorally through 
the skin or submandibular tissue (from second and third molars). 
Infection arising from the upper teeth (maxillary) may spread into 
the maxillary sinuses or infraorbital soft tissue.7 In addition, infec-
tion may spread deeper into the facial or deep neck spaces, or via 
the venous circulation into the cranium. Both phenomena can have 
serious consequences. The fascial spaces are potential areas which 
open as a consequence of pressure from spreading infection. The 
spread through these spaces is determined by muscle, bone, and fa-
scial attachments. The spread into the different planes can be either 
from mandibular or maxillary dental infections,8 and the clinical 
consequences of the spread is directly related to the fascial plane that 
is involved.9 The clinical effects of these infections are summarized 
in Table 12.2.
Microbiology
Dental caries is thought to be caused by serotypes of Streptococcus 
mutans (S. cricetus, S. rattus, S. ferus, and S. sobrinus) most com-
monly, although lactobacilli also contribute to enamel decay, by 
production of acid.
Odontogenic infections are usually polymicrobial and caused by 
the organisms that are present in the normal oral flora (Table 12.3).10 
Over 460 unique bacterial taxa have been identified in dental infec-
tions. They are commonly caused by a combination of facultative 
anaerobes and strict anaerobes.
Table 12.1 Classiﬁcation of dental abscesses
Type of abscess
Tissue affected
Periapical
Infection at the apex of the root
Periodontal
Infection begins at the periodontal pocket and 
affects the ligament
Gingival
Infection involves only the gum tissue, and not 
the tooth
Pericoronal
Infection involves the soft tissues surrounding 
the crown
Combined periodontic-  
 endodontic
Infection originates from both the dental pulp 
and the periodontal tissues
Central incisor
Central incisor
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Canine
First molar
Maxillary arch
Maxillary arch
Mandibular arch
Mandibular arch
Maxillary
(b)
(a)
Mandibular
E
D C
B
A
E
D C
B
A
E
D
C
B
A
E
Left
Right
D
C
B
A
Maxillary
Mandibular
8
6
4
2
7
5
3
1
8
6
4
2
7
5
3
1
8
Left
Right
6
4
7
5
3
2
1
8
6
4
7
5
3
2
1
First molar
First premolar
First premolar
First molar
First molar
Second molar
Second premolar
Second premolar
Second molar
Third molar
Third molar
(wisdom tooth)
Second molar
Second molar
Canine
Canine
Canine
Lateral incisor
Lateral incisor
Lateral incisor
Central incisor
Primary dentition
Permanent dentition
Fig. 12.2 (a) Paediatric and adult dentition. (b) Palmer notation, indicating the position of paediatric and adult teeth.
 
Antimicrobials
137
Antimicrobials
Patients with uncomplicated dental abscesses who are system-
ically well do not usually require antibiotic treatment. In more 
severe cases, with systemic signs or severe localized infections, 
early antibiotics are justified.11 Signs of severe infection include 
pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, cellulitis, and diffuse swelling. Early 
antibiotics should also be considered for patients at a high risk of 
complications, including those that are immunocompromised or 
diabetic.
Antibiotic therapy alone, without surgical intervention, may not 
be effective because of poor antibiotic penetration into the abscess 
cavity, ineffectiveness at low pH levels, and the inoculum effect 
(where an increased inhibitory concentration of an antibiotic is seen 
with an increase in the number of organisms inoculated, as with 
beta- lactam antibiotics).12
Antibiotic selection is ideally guided by sensitivity results from 
bacterial culture tests. However, a major limitation of culture tests 
is that the majority of oral microflora do not grow on conventional 
culture media.10 Strict sampling techniques are necessary to ensure 
contamination from normal oral flora does not give spurious results. 
Sampling of purulent material gives poor yields of strict anaerobes. 
Consequently, the antibiotic is often selected to cover a range of 
causative organisms.
First- line antibiotic choice is guided by local microbiology 
protocols, but traditionally has been co- amoxiclav, due to its 
high sensitivity against the majority of causative organisms (up 
to 90% in one microbiology study).13 The clavulanic acid binds 
and inhibits beta- lactamase enzymes expanding the spectrum of 
activity of the penicillin. In penicillin- allergic patients, options 
include azithromycin or macrolides (e.g. erythromycin), although 
the latter has high resistance among anaerobic organisms (in the 
same microbiology study, only 60% of organisms were sensitive).13 
Metronidazole is highly active against most anaerobes and can be 
used in combination with other first- line agents. Clindamycin 
confers additional benefits including good oral absorption and 
high penetration into bone. Table 12.4 summarizes the antibiotic 
options for dental infections, and the relative drug sensitivity of 
the bacteria.
Maxillary sinus
Deep lobe of
submandibular
gland
Mylohyoid muscle
Superﬁcial lobe of
submandibular gland
Buccinator
muscle
Fig. 12.3 Spread of odontogenic infection through the fascial planes.
Table 12.2 Clinical consequences of spread of infection 
according to the fascial plane involved
Maxillary spaces
Infraorbital space (canine)
Cavernous sinus spread
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Buccal space
Facial swelling
Infratemporal space
Trismus
Mandibular spaces
Parapharyngeal space:
   Anterior
Trismus, dysphagia, displacement of the tonsil 
and pharyngeal wall
   Posterior
Displacement of posterior pharyngeal wall, 
thrombosis of internal jugular vein
Retropharyngeal space
Airway obstruction at the pharynx
Torticollis
Lymphadenopathy
Buccal space
Facial swelling
Sublingual space
Drooling, dysphagia, Ludwig’s angina
Submandibular space
Trismus, Ludwig’s angina
Masticator space
Trismus
Submasseteric space
Marked trismus
Carotid space
Vocal cord paralysis, Horner’s syndrome
Pretracheal space
Dysphagia, airway obstruction, mediastinitis
Table 12.3 Common causative organisms in odontogenic 
infections
Facultative anaerobes
Strict anaerobes
Streptococcus viridans— mitis, oralis, salivarius, 
mutans
Prevotella (most common)
Streptococcus milleri
Fusobacterium species
Staphylococcus aureus
Porphyomonas species
Staphylococcus epidermidis (coagulase- negative 
strains)
Bacteroides species
Clostridium species
Table 12.4 Antibiotic options for the management of dental 
infections
Antibiotic choice
Relative sensitivity of the cultures
First- line agent
Co- amoxiclav (90% sensitivity)
Penicillin allergic
Azithromycin (90%) + / − metronidazole (85%)
Other agents
Erythromycin (60%)
Clindamycin (60%)
Ciproﬂoxacin (70%)
 
Infection
138
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Historically, dental procedures have been viewed as conferring a 
risk of bacteraemia, where oral organisms enter the bloodstream, 
causing a risk of colonization of vulnerable sites and resulting, par-
ticularly, in infective endocarditis. More recently, the UK National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has assessed the 
evidence for prophylactic antibiotics in this group of patients.14 
They identified high- risk patients as those with the following 
conditions:
 • Acquired valvular heart disease with stenosis or regurgitation.
 • Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
 • Previous infective endocarditis.
 • Structural congenital heart disease.
 • Valve replacement.
However, NICE also stated that antibiotic prophylaxis against in-
fective endocarditis is not recommended routinely for patients 
undergoing dental procedures. This conclusion is based upon the 
lack of evidence of a causal link between dental treatment and endo-
carditis, and even less evidence suggesting that prophylaxis may be 
of any benefit. NICE recommends that healthcare professionals offer 
those at risk clear and consistent information about prevention, in-
cluding an explanation of why antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer 
routinely advised, the importance of maintaining good oral health, 
and highlighting symptoms that may indicate infective endocarditis 
and when to seek expert help.
When considering the value of antibiotics for prophylaxis, it is also 
crucial to take into account the potential harm that can be caused by 
anaphylaxis to these agents (antibiotics are commonly implicated), 
and the importance of antibiotic stewardship in reducing microbial 
resistance.15 Conversely, patients presenting with severe infections, 
requiring anaesthetic care, are likely to be on antibiotics prior to sur-
gery, making the need for prophylactic antibiotics for prevention of 
postoperative infections less likely (discussed in more detail later in 
the section on secondary infections).
Clinical assessment
Many patients with dental abscesses can be managed in the commu-
nity, with surgical drainage under local anaesthetic and administra-
tion of appropriate antibiotics. More serious infections, including 
those where systemic symptoms have developed, are likely to require 
hospital management. This may include urgent or emergency sur-
gery under general anaesthesia and, in some cases, require ongoing 
care in the critical care unit. Even for patients not requiring imme-
diate surgery, the anaesthetic team is often involved from the point 
of admission due to concerns of airway compromise with worsening 
infection (‘watchful waiting’).
Preassessment
Patients presenting with odontogenic infections pose a number of 
challenges to the anaesthetist. The most common presenting symp-
toms are pain and facial swelling; however, if the infection pro-
gresses it can lead to trismus, dysphagia, stridor, and cardiovascular 
collapse (if sepsis ensues). This range of presentations precludes a 
single simple approach to the management of these patients. The 
occurrence of potentially life- threatening complications, albeit un-
common, means thorough preoperative assessment is essential in 
avoiding delayed diagnosis of any of these sometimes rapidly pro-
gressive conditions.
The patient population typically comprises younger adults. 
Comorbidities relating to drug and alcohol misuse are more 
common and should be specifically sought, along with other risk 
factors such as smoking, diabetes, and obesity. Patients can present 
late, dehydrated, and malnourished due to several preceding days 
of inadequate fluid intake and poor nutrition due to dysphagia.
An ‘ABCD’ approach to initial assessment is best practice. A de-
tailed airway assessment is critical as this will guide airway man-
agement planning and the urgency of any interventions. Table 12.5 
outlines the specific questions that must be considered when evalu-
ating the potentially difficult airway.16
An assessment of mouth opening, measured as interincisor gap, 
may indicate the feasibility of performing laryngoscopy, with a dis-
tance of <3 cm being a non- reassuring sign. Some videolaryngoscope 
blades require as little as 1.8 cm for insertion, and supraglottic 
airway devices have been successfully inserted in patients with 
<2 cm of mouth opening. Other airway assessment tools, including 
the Mallampati grade, thyromental distance, jaw protrusion, and 
neck movement, all assess different aspects of the airway and its dy-
namic response to movement. Although there is a lack of predictive 
power of any individual test, they should heighten awareness of the 
potential for difficulty and allow appropriate planning. Previously 
documented airway management technique and grade of laryngos-
copy can be helpful, although in the acute circumstances, previous 
grading may be falsely reassuring.
Cardiorespiratory physiological parameters are important in as-
sessment of the patient’s current fluid status. Respiratory rate, blood 
pressure, and heart rate, along with an assessment of conscious level, 
can be used to identify those with systemic involvement requiring 
urgent intervention (risk scoring systems are discussed in detail 
later in the chapter). Awareness of the symptoms and signs of rarer 
complicating conditions ensures that these are not missed, including 
eye signs (orbital cellulitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis), chest pain 
(mediastinitis), and haemoptysis (Lemierre’s syndrome), leading to 
more rapid diagnosis and treatment of these conditions.
In the acute setting, swelling and distortion of tissues can be very 
painful, and analgesia should be optimized. A multimodal approach 
to analgesia is advocated, although strong opioids are often required. 
Dental nerve blocks can offer a means of providing local anaesthesia, 
although poor tissue penetration, an acidic environment inhibiting 
transfer of active drug into the nerve, and restricted intraoral access 
often mean they are ineffective.
Table 12.5 Considerations when assessing patients with a 
potentially difﬁcult airway
Questions to consider when evaluating the anticipated difﬁcult airway
1
Will I be able to mask ventilate?
2
Will I be able to perform laryngoscopy, directly or indirectly?
3
Will I be able to intubate the trachea?
4
Is there a signiﬁcant aspiration risk?
5
Can I access the front of neck if required?
 
 
 
 
Management of the patient with serious complications
139
Management of the uncomplicated patient
Patients with an uncomplicated dental abscess, no significant med-
ical history, and an unobstructed airway may be managed in a con-
ventional manner, which may include:
 • Intravenous induction of anaesthesia using a rapid sequence 
technique (if indicated).
 • Nasotracheal intubation, to facilitate surgical access.
 • Use of a throat pack, to prevent spread of pus and debris.
 • Antibiotic administration (as discussed earlier).
 • Intraoperative optimization of patient temperature and blood 
pressure.
 • Standard tracheal extubation.
 • Admission to a surgical ward for postoperative observation.
Management of the patient with serious 
complications
Dental abscesses and other oral infections can cause a number of 
rare, but serious, complications that are associated with significant 
morbidity and mortality, and pose particular challenges to the anaes-
thetist (Table 12.6). An ‘ABCD’ approach to assessment is essential 
in minimizing issues during the management of these conditions.
Airway complications and their management
The effects of infection on the airway can be subdivided into those 
causing immediate airway compromise and those that make tra-
cheal intubation under general anaesthesia more challenging.17
Airway compromise
Infection causing airway compromise is an anaesthetic emergency 
and requires rapid assessment and management to avoid complete 
airway obstruction and respiratory arrest. Patients can present with a 
combination of respiratory and systemic signs, including dyspnoea, 
cyanosis, stridor, wheeze, agitation, confusion, or unconsciousness. 
The spectrum of presenting symptoms is wide and the decision re-
garding the need to secure the airway is made on the overall patient 
condition and response to initial treatment (Table 12.7). Emergency 
management of the obstructing airway requires experienced senior 
support to minimize the high risk of morbidity associated. Ludwig’s 
angina is one such aetiology associated with airway compromise, 
and is discussed in Box 12.1.
When the patient’s airway is at risk of obstruction, and requires 
immediate intervention, several approaches to airway management 
are available (Table 12.8). When selecting the most appropriate 
technique, it is important to consider separately the feasibility of face 
mask ventilation, the feasibility of laryngoscopy, and the feasibility 
of tracheal tube placement. The oedema and distorted anatomy as-
sociated with odontogenic infections often confer potential difficul-
ties with both face mask ventilation and laryngoscopy, and therefore 
an awake technique is often chosen.
In a retrospective study of 36 patients with Ludwig’s angina, 
standard tracheal intubation attempts failed in 55% and resulted 
in acute airway loss requiring emergency tracheostomy.19 This high 
level of morbidity associated with standard tracheal intubation 
attempts has led to awake fibreoptic tracheal intubation or sur-
gical airway being considered ‘plan A’ of the airway management 
strategy. In a further study of 93 patients with late presentation of 
Ludwig’s angina, 65% of patients underwent surgical tracheostomy 
under local anaesthesia.18 Awake fibreoptic tracheal intubation has 
been shown to have a high success rate20; nevertheless, oedema 
and immobility of tissues can cause significant distortion of airway 
anatomy such that navigation of the fibrescope can be challenging, 
and experience with the device is essential to ensure safe practice. 
Copious secretions, pus, blood, and a compressed airway can cause 
supraglottic or glottic obstruction on passing the scope, therefore 
the difficulties in securing the airway via this method should not be 
underestimated.
The particular technique chosen to secure the airway is also 
dependent upon the clinical skills of the anaesthetic team man-
aging the patient. Whichever method is chosen, the case should 
Table 12.6 Serious complications associated with oral infections
Airway complications
Airway compromise
Difﬁcult tracheal intubation and extubation
Systemic effects
Sepsis
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Spreading infection
Maxillary sinusitis
Orbital cellulitis and abscess
Brain abscess
Descending necrotizing mediastinitis
Cervical necrotizing fasciitis
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Lemierre’s syndrome
Table 12.7 Airway complications associated with oral infections
Infective causes of airway compromise
Infective causes of difﬁcult 
tracheal intubation
 • Airway oedema, causing mechanical 
obstruction and increased tissue friability
• Spreading infections:
• Epiglottitis
• Peritonsillar abscess
• Retropharyngeal abscess
• Ludwig’s angina
• Trismus
• Osteomyelitis
• Abscess of the ﬂoor of the 
mouth
Box 12.1 Ludwig’s angina
Ludwig’s angina is a potentially fatal, rapidly progressive infection of the 
tissues of the ﬂoor of the mouth. The term angina is derived from the 
Greek word meaning ‘strangling’ and the eponym relates to the German 
physician who ﬁrst described the condition in 1836.
Infection occurs bilaterally, involving more than one deep neck 
space around the mandible. As with other odontogenic infections the 
aetiology is polymicrobial and starts with a gangrenous, putrid inﬁltra-
tion often with very little pus initially.18 The infection is most commonly 
odontogenic (90%), but other causes include trauma to the ﬂoor of the 
mouth, recent tooth extraction, peritonsillar abscess, and postprocedural 
infection following frenulum piercing. The infection can lead to a board- 
like swelling of the submandibular tissues and elevation of the tongue, 
leading to drooling, dysphonia, and ultimately to airway obstruction.
Management of the condition requires a combination of antimicro-
bial treatment, urgent airway management, and surgery. Patients may be 
severely septic at presentation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infection
140
be managed collaboratively, with the surgical team present and 
immediately ready to perform an emergency tracheostomy or 
cricothyroidotomy if irretrievable airway compromise occurs. 
A stepwise airway strategy should be communicated clearly to the 
entire team, to ensure a shared approach in the event that the ini-
tial airway management plan is unsuccessful (‘preparing to fail’).21 
Ensuring all rescue devices are immediately available and oper-
ational ensures valuable time is not lost if the clinical situation de-
teriorates. Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventilatory 
exchange (THRIVE) has been shown to prolong safe apnoea time 
in patients with difficult or partially obstructed airways.22 As long 
as a patent airway can be maintained, THRIVE may provide greater 
time for direct or videolaryngoscopy views to be optimized and for 
tracheal intubation to be safely achieved, although currently there 
are no large- scale studies relating to this technique in this particular 
patient population.
Difﬁcult tracheal intubation
Rather more commonly than the life- threatening airway com-
promise described above, standard approaches to tracheal intub-
ation may be impaired by infection causing trismus. Trismus is 
reduced opening of the jaw and is usually caused by spasm of the 
muscles of mastication. Both odontogenic and non- odontogenic in-
fections can cause trismus and it is one of the presenting features of 
tetanus following infection by Clostridium tetani.
Trismus and an interincisor gap of <2.5 cm correlates with in-
creased difficulty in tracheal intubation, such that nasotracheal in-
tubation using a fibrescope is often the technique of choice. In this 
particular clinical situation, where airway compromise is not im-
minent, more time is available to plan the approach to airway man-
agement, and to undertake additional investigations. These might 
include computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head and neck, 
and flexible nasendoscopy.
CT images can assist in identifying the level of any airway swelling, 
help quantify the severity of any obstruction, and can demonstrate 
any extension into the deep neck spaces. Early CT imaging is there-
fore recommended, where the clinical situation permits, as this will 
guide surgical management,23 as well as assisting in the diagnosis of 
abscess formation and those at risk of complications such as vascular 
compromise or osteomyelitis.24 The airway dimensions (patency) 
can also be quantified, which may guide the type and size of tracheal 
tube selected, or indeed alter the approach to airway management 
(e.g. opting for an awake technique if the potential risk of airway 
compromise is deemed high). Flexible nasendoscopy facilitates 
evaluation of the airway above the glottis, allowing visualization of 
any airway oedema or compression. It is a dynamic investigation 
which enables assessment during normal and deep breathing. It 
can swiftly provide valuable information in the acute setting, which 
again, may be used to inform the choice of airway management tech-
nique. Virtual endoscopy combines these two investigations, gen-
erating reconstructed three- dimensional images of the airway, as 
assessed by a ‘virtual’ endoscope.25
Sepsis
Sepsis is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. In the 
UK, there are approximately 123,000 cases of sepsis per year and 
around 36,800 deaths, making sepsis the second highest cause of 
death after cardiovascular disease.26 The incidence is increasing as 
life expectancy increases, although patients without serious pre- 
existing comorbidities are more likely to survive.
Sepsis associated with odontogenic infections is common. In one 
study, 61% of patients with a primary odontogenic infection had 
sepsis on admission to hospital, as defined by systemic inflamma-
tory response syndrome criteria.7 In this study, 95% of patients re-
quired surgical incision and drainage as part of their management 
plan and 9% were admitted postoperatively to the critical care unit.
Recognition of sepsis is the first critical step in enabling timely 
intervention. Sepsis is a multisystem condition and remains diffi-
cult to define. The third international consensus definitions task 
force defined sepsis as a ‘life- threatening organ dysfunction due to 
a dysregulated host response to infection’.27 A gold standard diag-
nostic test for sepsis does not exist. Screening tools such as the sys-
temic inflammatory response syndrome criteria have been used 
previously to define sepsis, and allowed for early detection by iden-
tifying simple clinical measurements. The quick Sequential (Sepsis- 
related) Organ Failure Assessment (qSOFA) has been shown to 
detect sepsis with greater sensitivity (Table 12.9). Patients scoring 
≥2 points in the presence of infection accounted for 70% of deaths 
and 70% of prolonged critical care stays from sepsis, thereby correl-
ating with severity of illness. The presence of serum lactate levels of 
2.0 mmol/ L or higher does not form part of this scoring system but 
may be useful in identifying those with qSOFA scores of 1 who are at 
a higher overall risk of morbidity from sepsis.
To improve sepsis outcomes following identification, treatment 
should be rapid and targeted to improve organ perfusion. The 
‘Surviving Sepsis’ campaign was developed to reduce mortality 
from the condition by a process of building awareness, education, 
and the implementation of management guidelines.28 Care bundles 
(Table 12.10), which comprise time- dependent management aims, 
have also been shown to improve survival. These aims were sim-
plified into the ‘Sepsis Six’ resuscitation bundle, which includes:
 • Delivering high- flow oxygen to maintain oxygen saturations >94%.
 • Taking blood cultures.
 • Administering empirical intravenous antibiotics.
Table 12.8 Options for airway management in the compromised  
airway
Awake
Flexible ﬁbreoptic
Videolaryngoscopy
Surgical airway (cricothyroidotomy/ tracheostomy)
Asleep
Flexible ﬁbreoptic
Videolaryngoscopy
Direct laryngoscopy
Table 12.9 qSOFA criteria in the presence of infection
Criteria for deﬁning qSOFA score: total score of 3, 1 point gained for each 
criterion present
Respiratory rate
≥22 breaths per minute
Systolic blood pressure
≤100 mmHg
Altered mental status (Glasgow Coma Score)
<15
 
 
Management of the patient with serious complications
141
 • Measuring serum lactate and full blood count.
 • Starting intravenous fluid resuscitation.
 • Commencing accurate urine output measurement.
These steps should be commenced within 1 hour, and together have 
been shown to reduce mortality by 50%. Patients who are refractory 
to initial treatment may require invasive monitoring, targeted fluid 
resuscitation, and critical care management.
In certain circumstances, patients presenting with sepsis require 
immediate surgical management, such as those with necrotizing 
fasciitis. Other cases may benefit from a period of stabilization and 
optimization prior to undergoing surgical exploration. If an ab-
scess is present, surgical drainage is necessary to treat the source of 
the sepsis, and surgery should therefore be expedited, but patients 
should be resuscitated following the aforementioned guidance prior 
to any surgical procedure.
The response to initial treatment and continued assessment of 
oxygenation and serum lactate guide prognosis. A failure of lactate 
levels to decrease following initial therapy is indicative of a poor out-
come.29 The detailed management of sepsis is beyond the scope of 
this chapter but patients are best managed in a critical care environ-
ment. Acute respiratory distress syndrome and multiorgan failure 
can occur as a consequence of sepsis or odontogenic infections alone 
and may require invasive ventilation and additional organ support.
Spreading infection
Maxillary sinusitis and orbital cellulitis
Infection arising in the root apices of the maxillary teeth may spread 
into the maxillary sinuses or infraorbital soft tissues. Maxillary si-
nusitis can cause fever, pain, and tenderness, and requires treatment 
with antibiotics, as well as potentially requiring surgical drainage 
(endoscopically or intraorally).
Odontogenic infections can spread to cause orbital cellulitis or 
an orbital abscess. Spread can be through the local fascial planes, 
haematogenous or via involvement of the paranasal sinuses,30 and 
manifests as eyelid swelling, reddening, proptosis, and altered vi-
sion. Early visual assessment is needed to avoid a delay in diagnosis 
and treatment which can lead to severe and permanent visual loss. 
CT images showing gas within the orbit is strongly suggestive of an 
orbital abscess which may require drainage.
Dental cysts and osteomyelitis
Undrained dental abscesses may eventually resolve, leaving a fluid- 
filled cyst within the bone. These can lead to recurrent infection, and 
patients may present for surgical excision of the cyst. Alternatively, 
dental abscesses may progress to cause an osteomyelitis in either the 
mandible or maxilla. This is characterized by pain, swelling, fever, 
dental loss, and formation of fistulae31 and sequestrum (necrotic 
bone). This may be diagnosed using standard radiography (showing 
radiolucent regions of bony destruction) or via CT imaging (showing 
erosions of the medullary and cortical bone).13 Management often 
involves protracted courses of antibiotics. Oral osteomyelitis can be-
come chronic if it is refractory to treatment for >1 month, leading 
to bony destruction and deformity. The best treatment option for 
chronic osteomyelitis is a combination of antimicrobial therapy and 
surgical excision and reconstruction. Involvement of the mandible 
will compromise mouth opening and could lead to difficult tracheal 
intubation.
Intracranial abscess
Although rare, dental infections can spread to cause an intracra-
nial abscess. Direct spread tends to cause a solitary abscess, whereas 
haematogenous spread usually results in multiple foci.13 There is 
often a latent period of days to weeks before the cerebral symptoms 
of headaches, malaise, and apathy appear. Signs and symptoms will 
vary depending on the site of the lesions and the presence of any 
mass effect.32 Treatment involves the use of antimicrobials which, 
if odontogenic infections are suspected, should cover anaerobic or-
ganisms, and may also include surgical intervention.
Descending necrotizing mediastinitis
The fascial planes of the neck are contiguous with those of the medi-
astinum. Consequently, downward spread of infection from dental 
infections can occur very rapidly. Acute inflammation of the con-
nective tissues in the middle thoracic cavity defines mediastinitis. 
In 20% of cases, a diffuse polymicrobial infection can occur, known 
as descending necrotizing mediastinitis (DNM).33 Retrosternal or 
pleuritic pain may suggest spread, and early CT scanning of the neck 
and chest can aid diagnosis. The diagnostic criteria for DNM are 
described in Table 12.11. Management of this condition necessitates 
a multidisciplinary approach, broad- spectrum antibiotics covering 
Gram- positive and anaerobic organisms, critical care admission, 
and often repeated transthoracic surgical drainage. Early surgery 
is thought to be advantageous, but evidence for the optimal timing 
Table 12.10 ‘Surviving Sepsis’ time- dependent care bundle
‘Surviving Sepsis’ campaign care bundles
To be completed within 3 hours
1
Measure lactate level
2
Obtain blood cultures, prior to administration of antibiotics
3
Administer broad- spectrum antibiotics
4
Administer 30 mL/ kg crystalloid for hypotension or if lactate ≥4 mmol/ L
To be completed within 6 hours
5
Institute vasopressor medication (for hypotension that does not 
respond to initial ﬂuid resuscitation) to maintain a mean arterial 
pressure ≥65 mmHg
6
In the event of persistent arterial hypotension despite volume 
resuscitation (septic shock) or initial lactate ≥4 mmol/ L (36 mg/ dL):
• Measure central venous pressure (CVP)a
• Measure central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2)a
7
Remeasure lactate if initial lactate was elevateda
a Targets for quantitative resuscitation include a CVP of ≥8 mmHg, ScvO2 of ≥70%, and 
normalization of lactate levels.
Table 12.11 Diagnostic criteria for descending necrotizing 
mediastinitis
1
Clinical manifestation of severe infection
2
Characteristic radiographic ﬁndings— gas in the tissues, an air– ﬂuid 
level, mediastinal widening
3
Documentation of DNM at operation
4
Establishment of relationship between oropharyngeal infection 
and DNM
 
 
 
 
 
Infection
142
of surgery is still lacking. Although rare, the condition is associated 
with significant morbidity and a prolonged course in critical care. 
The mortality rate remains high at 18% despite improvements in 
diagnosis and management.
Cervical necrotizing fasciitis
Cervical necrotizing fasciitis, a condition of progressive necrotizing 
infection along the deep neck space planes, is an associated cause of 
mediastinitis. It carries a high mortality particularly when associ-
ated with septic shock (36– 64%)33 and requires extensive debride-
ment of necrotic tissue.
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Periapical abscesses affecting the maxillary incisors and canine teeth 
can spread via the facial vein into the cranium. Because of the absence 
of valves within the cavernous sinus, bidirectional spread of infec-
tion and thrombi can occur,13 leading to septic thrombosis of the cav-
ernous sinus. Seven per cent of all cavernous sinus thromboses are of 
dental origin. Patients present with headache, fever, periorbital oe-
dema, exophthalmos, and chemosis. Treatment involves high- dose 
broad- spectrum antibiotics, systemic anticoagulation, and surgical 
management of the causative infection. Fewer than 40% of patients 
have a full recovery, 20% may die secondary to meningitis or sepsis, 
and those who survive may suffer impaired vision, hemiparesis, and 
seizures.
Lemierre’s syndrome
Lemierre’s syndrome is described as thrombophlebitis of the in-
ternal jugular vein and subsequent haematogenic spread of infec-
tion via septic emboli.34 These emboli can cause lesions in the lung 
(which can present with haemoptysis and pleuritic chest pain) and 
other remote sites. Endocarditis or pericarditis are rare manifest-
ations. Prompt, aggressive surgical exploration and debridement is 
mandatory. Mortality rates range from 4% to 12%.
Tracheal extubation and postoperative 
management
Patients who have followed a complicated course due to their in-
fection may require a higher degree of planning, observation, and 
care postoperatively. Those that have developed organ dysfunc-
tion as a result of sepsis from an odontogenic infection may require 
organ support in a critical care environment. Such patients may re-
quire respiratory support (particularly if acute respiratory distress 
syndrome ensues), circulatory support in the form of meticulous 
fluid management, inotrope and vasopressor medications, renal re-
placement therapy in the context of acute kidney injury or severe 
acidosis, and other supportive measures (including, in particular, 
antimicrobials based upon positive cultures and continuous input 
from microbiology colleagues). Detailed postoperative manage-
ment of these patients is beyond the scope of this chapter.
A decision regarding the appropriateness and optimum timing of 
tracheal extubation must be made in every patient. Ongoing tracheal 
intubation and mechanical ventilation may sometimes be required 
solely for airway support, but is often necessary as part of ongoing 
supportive measures. Tracheal extubation is unlikely to be under-
taken while significant sepsis- related haemodynamic compromise 
persists, while severe complications continue to be treated, or when 
recurrent surgery is anticipated. The decision regarding tracheal 
extubation must therefore be judged on a case- by- case basis, and be 
agreed by the surgical, anaesthetic, and critical care teams together.
When considering tracheal extubation, the ability to oxygenate 
and reintubate the trachea must be considered. The Difficult Airway 
Society provides guidance on preparing for a potentially difficult 
tracheal extubation (Fig. 12.4).35 The cuff leak test (deflation of the 
cuff to assess air leak around the tracheal tube), is widely used in an 
attempt to predict successful tracheal extubation, but this has not 
been shown to reliably identify those patients who will require tra-
cheal reintubation.36 If after assessing and optimizing the patient it 
is felt safe to remove the tracheal tube, options include an awake 
extubation, or an advanced extubation technique, such as exchange 
for a laryngeal mask airway, use of an airway exchange catheter, or 
tracheal extubation on remifentanil. If the airway is still considered 
‘at risk’, a surgical tracheostomy should be considered, otherwise 
tracheal extubation should be postponed to allow further time for 
oedema/ bleeding to reside and/ or concurrent therapies to improve 
the likely chance of a successful tracheal extubation in due course.
Secondary infections
Infections of the oral cavity can be a complicating factor following 
elective oromaxillofacial procedures. Procedures that involve 
incising the oral mucosa are considered ‘clean- contaminated’ due 
to the abundance of bacteria and potential pathogens in the oral 
cavity.37 Surgical site infections can complicate both elective and 
emergency procedures, having a deleterious effect on outcomes, and 
potentially requiring further treatments. Reported infection rates 
range from 10% to 15% following intraoral surgery.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended before invasive surgery to 
minimize the rates of postoperative infection. Common antibiotics 
include co- amoxiclav, cephalosporins, or clindamycin. Studies have 
assessed the potential benefit of extended courses of postoperative 
antibiotics; however, there is little consensus on the value of this. 
One study comparing 3- day versus 1- day postoperative regimens 
for orthognathic surgery showed a reduction of surgical site infec-
tions from 17.6% to 7.0%. However, with a number needed to treat 
of 10 in this study, the benefit of reduced infection may not out-
weigh the risks of anaphylaxis or antibiotic- related infections such 
as C. difficile. The World Health Organization guidelines on the 
prevention of surgical site infection state that antibiotics should be 
given within 120 minutes prior to surgical incision and that there is 
insufficient evidence to recommend prolonged antibiotic use after 
surgery.38 Often local guidelines exist regarding antibiotic prophy-
laxis for specific surgical procedures.
Surgery requiring reconstruction with either a tissue flap or 
revascularized osteocutaneous flap are of particular concern with 
regard to postoperative infection, with infection being cited as the 
leading cause of flap failure in some studies.39 Infection of a free flap 
can cause breakdown of the vascular anastomosis, leading to cata-
strophic haemorrhage, requiring emergency surgery.
When prostheses are used in reconstructive procedures, postoper-
ative infection can lead to failure of the implant. One study into tem-
poromandibular joint prostheses found a prosthesis infection rate of 
1.6%. When a prosthesis becomes infected, it usually necessitates a 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion
143
prolonged in- patient stay on intravenous antibiotics, punctuated by 
multiple surgical procedures, in order to address the infection. Early 
aggressive treatment may reduce the risk of acute infection evolving 
into a chronic process.
Conclusion
Patients with oral or dental infections pose a number of particular 
challenges— potentially difficult airway management, combined 
with emergency surgery, and a high incidence of pre- and postoper-
ative morbidity. These are stressful and demanding high- risk cases 
that require a collaborative approach to management, with early in-
volvement of an experienced anaesthetic and surgical team, so that 
the best patient outcomes can be achieved.
REFERENCES
 1. Petersen PE, Bourgeois D, Ogawa H, Estupinan- Day S, Ndiaye 
C. The global burden of oral disease and risks to oral health. Bull 
World Health Organ. 2005;83(9):661– 669.
 2. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Oral health 
promotion: general dental practice. NICE guideline [NG30]. 2015. 
https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guida nce/ ng30
 3. White D, Pitts N, Steele J, Sadler K, Chadwick B. Disease and 
related disorders— a report from the Adult Dental Health Survey 
2009. The Health and Social Care Information Centre. 2011. 
https:// digi tal.nhs.uk/ data- and- info rmat ion/ publi cati ons/ stat isti 
cal/ adult- den tal- hea lth- sur vey/ adult- den tal- hea lth- sur vey- 2009- 
summ ary- rep ort- and- thema tic- ser ies
 4. Thomas SJ, Hughes C, Atkinson C, Ness AR, Revington P. Is 
there an epidemic of admissions for surgical treatment of dental 
abscesses in the UK? BMJ. 2008;336(7655):1219– 1220.
 5. American Academy of Periodontology. Parameter on acute 
periodontal disease. J Periodontol. 2000;7(5):863– 866.
 6. Abeyundara L, Creedon A, Soltanifar D. Dental knowledge for 
the anaesthetist. BJAnaesth Educ. 2016;16(11):362– 368.
 7. Handley T, Devlin M, Koppel D, McCaul J. The sepsis syndrome 
in odontogenic infection. J Intensive Care Soc. 2009;10(1):21– 25.
 8. Norton NS. Cervical fascia. In: Netter’s Head and Neck Anatomy for 
Dentistry, pp. 460– 472. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier: 2007.
 9. Murray AD. Deep neck infections. Medscape. 30 April 2020. 
http:// emedic ine.medsc ape.com/ arti cle/ 837 048- overv iew
 10. Shweta, Krishna Prakash S. Dental abscess: a microbiological 
review. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2013;10(5):585– 591.
 11. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Dental abscess. 
NICE Clinical Knowledge Summary. 2018. https:// cks.nice.org.
uk/ top ics/ den tal- absc ess/ 
 12. Gould J. Dental abscess medication. Medscape. 22 January 2019. 
http:// emedic ine.medsc ape.com/ arti cle/ 909 373- med icat ion#2
 13. Bahl R, Sandhu S, Singh K, Sahai N, Gupta M. Odontogenic 
infections: microbiology and management. Contemp Clin Dent. 
2014;5(3):307– 311.
 14. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Prophylaxis 
against infective endocarditis: antimicrobial prophylaxis against 
infective endocarditis in adults and children undergoing 
interventional procedures. NICE clinical guideline [CG64]. 2016. 
https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guida nce/ cg64
Step 1
Plan extubation
Step 2
Prepare for
extubation
Step 3
Perform
extubation
Step 4
Postextubation
care
Key question: is it safe to remove the tube?
Yes
Postpone
extubation
* Advanced techniques: require training and experience
Difﬁcult Airway Society Extubation Algorithm 2011
Analgesia
Stafﬁng
Equipment
Documentation
Tracheostomy
Recovery/HDU/ICU
Awake
extubation
No
Plan
Assess airway and general risk factors
Advanced Techniques*
1 Laryngeal mask exchange
2 Remifentanil technique
3 Airway Exchange Catheter
Prepare
Optimise patient and other factors
DAS Extubation Guidelines: ‘At risk’ algorithm
Fig. 12.4 Difﬁcult Airway Society tracheal extubation guidelines.
Popat M, Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, Swampillai C, Higgs A. Difﬁcult Airway Society Guidelines for the management of tracheal extubation. Anaesthesia. 2012; 67(3): 318–40. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2044.2012.07075.x.
 
 
Infection
144
 15. Hossaini- zadeh M. Current concepts of prophylactic antibiotics 
for dental patients. Dent Clin North Am. 2016;60(2):473– 482.
 16. Crawley SM, Dalton AJ. Predicting the difficult airway. Br J 
Anaesth Educ. 2015;15:253– 257.
 17. Bali RK, Sharma P, Gaba S, Kaur A, Ghanghas P. A review of 
complications of odontogenic infections. Natl J Maxillofac Surg. 
2015;6(2):136– 143.
 18. Botha A, Jacobs F, Postma C. Retrospective analysis of etiology 
and comorbid diseases associated with Ludwig’s angina. Ann 
Maxillofac Surg. 2015;5(2):168– 173.
 19. Parhiscar A, Har- El G. Deep neck abscess: a retrospective review 
of 210 cases. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2001;110(11):1051– 1054.
 20. Ovassapian A, Tuncbilek M, Weitzel EK, Joshi CW. Airway 
management in adult patients with deep neck infections: a case series 
and review of the literature. Anesth Analg. 2005;100(2):585– 589.
 21. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath 
R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
 22. Patel A, Nouraei SAR. Transnasal humidiﬁed rapid- insufﬂation 
ventilatory exchange (THRIVE): a physiological method 
of increasing apnoea time in patients with difﬁcult airways. 
Anaesthesia. 2015;70(3):323– 329.
 23. Kim YJ, Kim JD, Ryu HI, Cho YH, Kong JH, Ohe JY, et al. 
Application of radiographic images in diagnosis and treatment 
of deep neck infections with necrotizing fasciitis: a case report. 
Imaging Sci Dent. 2011;41(4):189– 193.
 24. Gonzalez- Beicos A, Nunez D. Imaging of acute head and neck 
infections. Radiol Clin North Am. 2012;50(1):73– 83.
 25. Ahmad I, Millhoff B, John M, Andi K, Oakley RJ. Virtual 
endoscopy— a new assessment tool in difficult airway 
management. Clin Anesth. 2015;27(6):508– 513.
 26. NHS England. Improving outcomes for patients with sepsis. 
2015. https:// www.engl and.nhs.uk/ wp- cont ent/ uplo ads/ 2015/ 08/ 
Sep sis- Act ion- Plan- 23.12.15- v1.pdf
 27. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, Brunkhorst FM, Rea TD, 
Scherag A, et al. Assessment of clinical criteria for sepsis  
for the Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and 
Septic Shock (Sepsis- 3). JAMA. 2016;315(8):762– 774.
 28. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, Annane D, Gerlach H, Opal 
SM, et al. Surviving Sepsis campaign: international guidelines for 
management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care 
Med. 2013;41(2):580– 637.
 29. McCrate Protus B. Evidence of effectiveness of BMJ Best Practice. 
J Med Libr Assoc. 2014;102(3):224– 225.
 30. Youssef OH, Stefanyszyn MA, Bilyk JR. Odontogenic orbital 
cellulitis. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;24(1):29– 35.
 31. Slough CM, Woo BM, Ueeck BA, Wax MK. Fibular free flaps in 
the management of osteomyelitis of the mandible. Head Neck. 
2008;30(11):1531– 1534.
 32. Azenha MR, Homsi G, Garcia IR Jr. Multiple brain abscess from 
dental origin: case report and literature review. Oral Maxillofac 
Surg. 2012;16(4):393– 397.
 33. Prado- Calleros HM, Jiménez- Fuentes E, Jiménez- Escobar I. 
Descending necrotizing mediastinitis: systematic review on its 
treatment in the last 6 years, 75 years after its description. Head 
Neck. 2016;38(1):E2275– E2283.
 34. Noy D, Rachmiel A, Levy- Faber D, Emodi O. Lemierre’s 
syndrome from odontogenic infection: review of the  
literature and case description. Ann Maxillofac Surg. 
2015;5(2):219– 225.
 35. Popat M, Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, Swampillai C, Higgs 
A. Difficult Airway Society Guidelines for the management of 
tracheal extubation. Anaesthesia. 2012;67(3):318– 340.
 36. Shin SH, Heath K, Reed S, Collins J, Weireter LJ, Britt LD. The 
cuff leak test is not predictive of successful extubation. Am Surg. 
2008;74(12):1182– 1185.
 37. Davis CM, Gregoire CE, Davis I, Steeves TW. Prevalence 
of surgical site infections following orthognathic surgery: a 
double- blind, randomized controlled trial on a 3- day versus 
1- day postoperative antibiotic regimen. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2016;75(4):796– 804.
 38. World Health Organization. Global guidelines on the prevention 
of surgical site infection. 2016. https:// www.who.int/ gpsc/ ssi- pre 
vent ion- gui deli nes/ en/ 
 39. Smolka W, Lizuka T. Surgical reconstruction of maxilla and 
midface: clinical outcome and factors relating to postoperative 
complications. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2005;33(1):1– 7.
13   
 Trauma
Rebecca Thurairatnam and Fauzia Mir
Introduction
Maxillofacial trauma forms a significant proportion of major trauma 
injuries. It affects patients across all age groups. Any severe trauma 
involving maxillofacial structures can have profound, life- changing 
consequences, with four of the five sensory modalities (sight, smell, 
taste, and hearing) potentially affected. Significant injuries can also 
cause aesthetic changes which drastically affect a patient’s identity, 
their social interactions, and their quality of life.
Epidemiology and aetiology
Maxillofacial trauma accounts for a significant proportion of 
major trauma patients, reported to be as high as 16% in one retro-
spective regional study of major trauma cases in Australia.1 The 
most common causes of maxillofacial trauma include road traffic 
accidents, interpersonal violence, sports- related injuries, falls (par-
ticularly in extremes of age), and industrial accidents.2– 4 Trauma is 
more common in men, with a mean age of 25 years.5 Alcohol- related 
injuries are common, and must be considered as part of patient as-
sessment and treatment.5
Classiﬁcation of fractures
Maxillofacial fractures can be classified anatomically, comprising 
lower, middle, and upper thirds of the facial structures. Trauma 
can also be classified according to blunt versus penetrating in-
juries. Fractures involving the maxillary region of the face are most 
frequent,4 while other common fractures involve the mandible, 
followed by zygomatic and nasal structures.2,7 Of interest to the an-
aesthetist, certain maxillofacial injuries can directly or indirectly 
affect airway patency and therefore their subsequent management.
Lower third
Lower- third fractures involve the mandible, teeth, temporoman-
dibular joint, and skull base. Trauma in this region is likely to cause 
more than one fracture.8 Airway compromise can be profound, 
such as with bilateral anterior mandibular fractures, where in an 
obtunded patient the tongue can obstruct the airway in the supine 
position.9 Other potential risks to the airway include the presence of 
haematomas or foreign bodies, such as avulsed or fractured teeth.9
Middle third
The middle third involves the maxilla, zygoma, and lower half of the 
naso- orbitoethmoidal complex. This area acts as a ‘crumple zone’ 
to protect the brain from injury and is most frequently involved in 
facial trauma.10 Haemorrhage in this area can be severe, resulting 
in both airway and haemodynamic compromise. Fractures in this 
region can be further subdivided according to the Le Fort classifi-
cation, I– III (Fig. 13.1), although this is largely academic since it 
is possible to have a combination of some or all subtypes, along 
with frequent involvement of the mandible8 (Fig. 13.2). In Le Fort 
I, fracturing of the maxilla causes separation from the face. Le Fort 
II involves the maxilla and nasal complex fracturing from the fa-
cial bones, causing increased mobility, relative to Le Fort I. Le Fort 
III injuries involve the whole midface dissociating from the base of 
the skull and facial bones. Le Fort fractures may cause airway com-
promise via maxillary prolapse, oedema, or haemorrhage.8
Upper third
The upper third comprises the frontal bone, sphenoid, and upper 
half of the naso- orbitoethmoidal complex. Trauma here can cause 
injuries to the eyes and the paranasal sinuses. Injuries to the frontal 
sinus can cause pneumatization of surrounding tissues and cra-
niofacial surgical emphysema, which, if severe, can cause airway 
obstruction. One case report describes this particular injury with 
subsequent pneumomediastinum.11 Severe fractures can involve 
the anterior skull base, with associated neurological injury and 
subsequent infection through dural tears and leakage of cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF). Though not an absolute contraindication, 
caution must be taken with the use of nasopharyngeal airways, 
nasotracheal tubes, nasogastric tubes, and nasopharyngeal tem-
perature probes.12
Blunt trauma
Blunt craniofacial trauma can be associated with severe haemor-
rhage, though in isolation is unlikely to result in circulatory shock. 
Options for management include anterior and posterior nasal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trauma
146
packing (Fig. 13.3), the use of angiography and arterial emboliza-
tion, and operative strategies such as fracture reduction (including 
intermaxillary fixation) and arterial ligation.13,14 General principles 
of Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) management regarding 
the control of haemorrhage and correction of coagulopathy are also 
applicable, including the use of pharmacological agents such as tran-
examic acid, the prevention of hypothermia (including judicious 
administration of warmed fluids), and the guided use of blood prod-
ucts, according to coagulation studies (laboratory clotting studies 
and/ or point- of- care testing).
Penetrating trauma
Penetrating trauma can be caused by gunshot wounds and stabbing 
injuries. The extent of the injury is dependent upon factors such as 
force and velocity, that is, the energy transfer to surrounding tis-
sues. Tissue disruption and subsequent oedema can be extensive, 
particularly with high- speed injuries. Injuries sustained from gun-
shots are more likely to require expedited surgical intervention.13 
Signs that would warrant urgent anaesthetic support, imaging, and 
possible surgical exploration include the presence of haemodynamic 
instability, or a pulsatile or expanding haematoma. Also, the pres-
ence of airway compromise, subcutaneous emphysema, air bubbling 
through the wound, or neurological deficits are concerning signs.15 
In the haemodynamically stable patient, computed tomography 
(CT) angiography is widely used to assess the extent and severity of 
Le Fort I
Le Fort II
Le Fort III
Fig. 13.1 Le Fort classiﬁcation of facial fractures.
Morosan M, Parbhoo A, Curry N. Anaesthesia and common oral and maxilla- facial emergencies. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain. 2012;12(5):257– 262.
Fig. 13.2 Severe midfacial trauma showing gross oedema and necessity 
for early deﬁnitive airway management.
Lynham AJ, Hirst JP, Cosson JA et al. Emergency department management of maxillofacial 
trauma. Emergency Medicine Australasia. 2004;16:7– 12.
Fig. 13.3 Major haemorrhage caused by closed maxillofacial trauma, 
treated by anterior and posterior nasal packing.
Hsu F-Y, Mao S-H, Chuang AD-C, Wong Y-C, Chen C-H. Shock Index as a Predictor 
for Angiographic Hemostasis in Life-Threatening Traumatic Oronasal Bleeding. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2021; 18(21):11051. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182111051.
 
Emergency airway management
147
injuries. Structured clinical examination, regardless of the zone of 
injury, is crucial to determine which patients warrant CT angiog-
raphy or indeed surgical exploration.15 Caution should be applied 
with the use of a cervical spine collar in the trauma patient as this 
may mask an expanding haematoma.
Associated injuries
Associated injuries are extremely common in patients presenting 
with severe maxillofacial trauma, given the proximity to vital struc-
tures and the magnitude of forces involved, so they must be actively 
sought and excluded, according to ATLS principles. The incidence 
of associated injuries varies in the literature, ranging from 35% up 
to 80% in severe traumatic injuries.6,7 Concomitant injuries can be 
missed— up to 22% in one retrospective study.6 Associated injuries 
can involve structures in the neck as well as ophthalmic, pharyngeal, 
and oesophageal trauma. Associated neurological injuries include 
traumatic brain injury, skull fractures, and dural tears, with resulting 
CSF leaks.
Traumatic brain injury
Maxillofacial injuries are associated with traumatic brain injury.7 If 
injuries involve the orbit and midface structures, traumatic brain 
and skull injuries are more likely.7 Traumatic brain injuries are more 
common in patients >50 years of age,16 those with injuries sustained 
from road traffic accidents, and those in association with combined 
maxillary and mandibular fractures.17
Dural tears and cerebrospinal ﬂuid leaks
This can occur with fractures involving the midface and superior 
structures. Signs of a CSF leak include otorrhoea and rhinorrhoea. 
Presentation may be delayed initially owing to initial tissue 
swelling, which then subsides to reveal a fluid leak. Leaks often 
resolve around the time of fracture reduction and stabilization; 
however, persistent cases require neurosurgical repair. Clinical 
diagnosis of a CSF leak can be challenging due to the similarity in 
appearance to a mixture of blood and saliva (known as the ‘target 
sign’).18 Clinical features of a persistent CSF leak include postural 
headache (with improvement in symptoms in the supine position), 
neck pain, visual disturbance, tinnitus, and cranial nerve palsies. 
For radiological identification and localization, high- resolution 
CT or magnetic resonance imaging is used.19 Antibiotic prophy-
laxis is often administered to reduce the risk of meningitis, al-
though its effectiveness is still considered controversial and may 
be associated with antibiotic resistance.18 Although possible CSF 
contamination can occur with nasal intubation, a nasotracheal 
tube is preferable during surgical correction of some facial injuries 
(specialist advice should be sought from neurosurgical colleagues 
if there is any doubt).
Cervical spine injury
Cervical spine trauma must also be considered in the context of 
maxillofacial trauma. The reported incidence varies in the literature 
between 2% and 4%, with up to 25% delayed diagnosis in patients 
presenting with severe maxillofacial trauma.20,27 In any obtunded 
patient presenting with severe maxillofacial trauma, radiological 
evaluation of the cervical spine is required. Given the high risk of 
associated injuries, airway management should routinely include 
manual cervical spine immobilization, as part of ATLS principles.
Oesophageal injury
Oesophageal injury, including perforation, is associated with very 
high morbidity and a mortality of up to 20%. Trauma- related in-
juries to the oesophagus are most commonly located in the proximal 
oesophagus and can result from both penetrating (most commonly, 
including iatrogenic injury) and blunt injuries.21,22 Signs include 
odynophagia and dysphagia, as well as persistent vomiting and dys-
pnoea when eating. There may also be the presence of craniofacial 
emphysema and pneumomediastinum, causing retrosternal chest 
pain and dyspnoea.11 If suspected, radiological evaluation (utilizing 
CT imaging, with water- soluble contrast for swallow studies in order 
to minimize the risk of mediastinitis), as well as oesophagoscopy, is 
warranted.22 Surgical correction, along with antibiotics and inser-
tion of a neck drain, is usually required, together with parenteral 
nutrition. Voice quality, including hoarseness, may indicate con-
comitant laryngeal injury.
Ocular injury
The incidence of ocular injury associated with maxillofacial trauma 
is variably reported in the literature, with an incidence of up to 
70%.23 It is commonly associated with frontal bone fractures. Any 
suspicion of globe rupture, retinal detachment, penetrating injuries, 
reduced visual acuity, corneal injury, or pupillary deformity requires 
urgent assessment by an ophthalmologist.20
Iatrogenic trauma
Iatrogenic trauma includes dental damage or avulsion from an-
aesthetic or surgical airway management,24 ocular injuries (typic-
ally from mask ventilation), airway soft tissue injuries from throat 
pack insertion, and epistaxis (usually from nasotracheal intubation). 
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction from direct laryngoscopy 
and/ or jaw thrust manoeuvre has also been reported,24,25 as well as 
jaw dislocation from the use of supraglottic airway devices (SADs). 
Diagnostic and therapeutic interventions can also result in oesopha-
geal rupture.21
Emergency airway management
ATLS principles should apply when managing maxillofacial trauma, 
including undertaking a structured primary survey. Early airway as-
sessment and establishing a secure airway (with appropriate cervical 
spine stabilization) are essential. A relatively low number of patients 
require emergency airway management in the context of maxillo-
facial trauma (reported in one study as <2% of cases10). The assess-
ment and optimization of respiratory function, followed by control 
of haemorrhage and optimization of coagulation should also take 
place. Utilizing the standardized ATLS approach assists in system-
atically identifying and treating potentially life- threatening injuries, 
since severe maxillofacial injuries are rarely in isolation. These as-
sessments should be undertaken simultaneously as part of a well- 
drilled multidisciplinary trauma team. Management of maxillofacial 
trauma may warrant specialist input in the emergency setting, in-
cluding otolaryngology, maxillofacial surgery, ophthalmology, and 
neurosurgery.
Trauma
148
Recognition of acute airway obstruction 
in maxillofacial trauma
There are specific injuries in the context of maxillofacial trauma that 
should be identified as posing an immediate risk to airway patency, 
as described by Hutchinson et al.9 Tongue base prolapse, caused by 
bilateral mandibular body fractures, can be fatal if unrecognized, 
particularly in the context of reduced consciousness in the supine 
patient. Maxillary prolapse posteriorly and inferiorly can also cause 
nasopharyngeal obstruction. Direct tracheal or laryngeal trauma 
can result in cervical airway obstruction, through displacement and 
swelling of structures. Structures may be difficult to identify, and tra-
cheal intubation may be extremely difficult, regardless of whether 
direct laryngoscopy is possible.9 The presence of foreign bodies, 
blood, vomitus, bony fragments, and fractured teeth can also cause 
direct airway obstruction.9 Haemorrhage can directly cause airway 
obstruction, but also contributes to the difficulty in airway manage-
ment through difficult mask ventilation and difficult direct and in-
direct laryngoscopy (fibreoptic and videolaryngoscopic views can 
be significantly impaired in the presence of bleeding). Haemorrhage 
also provides additional challenges of potential circulatory collapse 
at induction of anaesthesia and coagulopathy.9 Soft tissue oedema 
can cause delayed airway obstruction and should be considered 
when deciding whether emergency tracheal intubation is indicated, 
and in the assessment of suitability for extubation of the trachea after 
surgical correction.9
Additional considerations in emergency 
airway management
Full stomach
All trauma patients should be considered to have a full stomach. 
Gastric emptying is impaired in the context of acute trauma, pain, 
and opioid administration. Blood and secretions are also likely to 
have been swallowed by the patient. Rapid sequence induction with 
cricoid pressure is therefore recommended by ATLS.26
Cervical spine injury
Studies have shown a 2– 4% incidence of cervical spine fractures in 
patients sustaining blunt maxillofacial trauma.27 Cervical spine im-
mobilization, through manual in- line stabilization, should be per-
formed until the cervical spine can be cleared radiologically and 
clinically.
Conscious level
There is an association between traumatic brain injury and max-
illofacial trauma. Patients may have a reduced Glasgow Coma Score 
(GCS) from traumatic brain injury, or from hypoxia due to airway or 
respiratory compromise. Traumatic brain injury itself may warrant 
tracheal intubation to minimize secondary brain injury. A GCS of 
≤8 warrants the establishment of a secure airway.
Level of experience and difﬁcult airway 
equipment availability
Communication issues, lack of preparation, and human factors con-
tinue to play a significant role in airway- related critical incidents, 
such as those identified in the UK Fourth National Audit Project.28 
Senior clinicians should provide support in the management of a po-
tentially difficult airway. Clinicians should also use equipment they 
are familiar with to minimize possible adverse effects or complica-
tions. A clear escalation plan for the management of failed tracheal 
intubation should be defined and preparations for airway rescue 
should be undertaken prior to induction of anaesthesia, following 
established algorithms such as those proposed by the Difficult 
Airway Society (DAS).29 If techniques required for airway manage-
ment are beyond the scope of the attending anaesthetist, expert help 
should be sought prior to induction of anaesthesia.26
Options for emergency airway management
Direct conventional laryngoscopy
Direct conventional laryngoscopy is still the most common method 
employed to secure the airway, as part of a rapid sequence induction, 
with the use of cricoid pressure to reduce the risk of aspiration of 
gastric contents. Manual in- line stabilization, as part of ATLS prin-
ciples, must be performed as part of securing the airway to reduce 
cervical spinal injury.
Fibreoptic tracheal intubation
Fibreoptic scopes offer an indirect view of the vocal cords to facili-
tate tracheal intubation. However, with the presence of severe airway 
haemorrhage or foreign bodies, this technique is not always appro-
priate in maxillofacial trauma. Adequate local anaesthetic topical-
ization can also be difficult to achieve in the presence of secretions 
and blood in the airway. An awake technique may also not be toler-
ated in the obtunded patient with traumatic brain injury or in the 
intoxicated patient.
Nasotracheal intubation
Nasotracheal intubation may be required, particularly in the con-
text of persistent trismus post- induction (discussed in detail later in 
the preoperative assessment and planning section). However, cau-
tion should be applied with nasotracheal intubation in patients with 
midface fractures or fractures of the base of the skull.30 Case reports 
have described the inadvertent placement of nasotracheal tubes 
intracranially, though this is extremely rare.31 A fibreoptic- assisted 
technique for nasotracheal intubation confers the advantages of a 
port for suctioning and for local anaesthetic administration; how-
ever, the scope must be the appropriate length to facilitate guiding 
the tracheal tube into the trachea.
Videolaryngoscopy
Videolaryngoscopy is increasingly being used in emergency airway 
management, particularly as cervical spinal movements should be 
minimized in the trauma patient, and this can be achieved with 
videolaryngoscopy.32 There are several different models available 
and it is important for anaesthetists to familiarize themselves with 
the specific equipment in their local emergency department and 
operating theatres. Studies have demonstrated success rates >90% 
during first intubation attempts. Rigid stylets specific to the blade 
can be used to increase manoeuvrability and to aid tracheal intub-
ation (although the gum elastic bougie can still be used).
Supraglottic airway devices
In the emergency setting, SADs are often used as bridging tech-
niques to provide oxygenation and ventilation in the event of 
failed tracheal intubation. The DAS has emphasized the benefits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Airway guidelines and maxillofacial trauma
149
of second- generation SADs, which have been found to provide a 
more effective supraglottic seal with lower ventilatory pressures.29 
Some SADs also provide an additional port for the placement of an 
orogastric tube, to enable suctioning of gastric contents to minimize 
pulmonary aspiration risk. The SAD can also serve as a conduit for 
tracheal intubation. The use of SADs in maxillofacial trauma may 
not always be appropriate, however. They do not provide protection 
from pulmonary aspiration and the presence of foreign bodies may 
preclude their use. The nature of some maxillofacial injuries may 
also affect the ease of insertion of the device, while fixed restriction 
of mouth opening may preclude their insertion entirely. Therefore, 
not all stages of the DAS failed intubation algorithm may be applic-
able in maxillofacial trauma, such that airway strategy and planning 
may include support from surgical colleagues at the outset, with an 
emphasis on prioritizing oxygenation of the patient at all times.
Combitubes
These are double- lumen tubes designed to be inserted blindly into 
the oesophagus and trachea. They have been associated with se-
vere injuries to local structures, causing considerable morbidity, in-
cluding mediastinitis,26 and are not recommended in this context.
Front of neck airway
A front of neck airway is often performed as an emergency, in the 
event of failed tracheal intubation and failed oxygenation. The most 
recent DAS guidelines support the use of a scalpel cricothyroidotomy 
(scalpel– bougie– tube) as a standardized approach that requires min-
imal expertise and utilizes readily available equipment.29 Certain 
clinical presentations may warrant the formation of a surgical trache-
ostomy under local anaesthesia, performed by surgical teams prior 
to induction of anaesthesia, although this may not always be possible 
in the trauma setting due to reduced consciousness and inability to 
cooperate under local anaesthesia, cardiovascular instability, or lack 
of availability of the necessary surgical expertise.
Airway guidelines and maxillofacial trauma
The updated DAS guidelines were published in 2015 to reflect chan-
ging and emerging strategies in the management of difficult airways 
and failed tracheal intubation. Some of the key changes are relevant 
to maxillofacial trauma, where difficulties in airway management 
must be anticipated. The ‘ABCD’ algorithm reflects the need to have 
a structured approach to management of the unanticipated diffi-
cult airway. Two key aspects are emphasized in greater detail in the 
updated guideline— adequate planning and preparation as part of 
plan A is essential, and that oxygenation must be prioritized at all 
stages of management. Videolaryngoscopy should be utilized if ap-
propriate in plan A. The use of second- generation SADs (that pro-
vide a better seal at higher ventilatory pressures, provide a conduit 
for subsequent intubation, and sometimes a port for insertion of a 
gastric drainage tube) should be utilized in plan B. Cricoid pressure 
is still recommended in emergency airway management, although 
in the event of difficult SAD insertion or difficult mask ventilation, 
cricoid pressure should be released or removed completely. Gentle 
mask ventilation with ongoing cricoid pressure is now considered 
appropriate if the risk of aspiration of gastric contents is deemed to 
be low.29
There are important caveats in the context of maxillofacial 
trauma— the use of SADs, mask ventilation, and videolaryngoscopy 
may not be possible in the presence of marked deformity, haemor-
rhage, or oedema. A front of neck airway may be the most appro-
priate first- line option to secure the airway in this context. These 
options are explored in more detail below.
Videolaryngoscopy
Videolaryngoscopy is increasingly utilized across anaesthesia, 
emergency medicine, and intensive care, both as a first- line airway 
management technique and as a rescue technique, following failed 
direct laryngoscopy. A retrospective analysis of >340,000 patients 
demonstrated increasing use of videolaryngoscopy after failed 
direct laryngoscopy, being used in 80% of cases in 2012 com-
pared with 30% in 2004.33 The C- MAC® (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, 
Germany) has also been shown to be more successful as a rescue 
device relative to direct laryngoscopy following failed tracheal in-
tubation in the emergency department.32 A Cochrane systematic 
review found an improved glottic view and decreased incidence of 
failed tracheal intubation, particularly in patients with predicted 
difficult airways (although the number of tracheal intubation at-
tempts, and time for successful intubation were not known).34 
An improved glottic view with videolaryngoscopy may be of par-
ticular benefit in maxillofacial trauma patients with cervical spine 
immobilization. However, an adequate view does not necessarily 
correlate with ease of tracheal intubation or time to intubation, 
as described in a quantitative review and meta- analysis by Mihai 
et al.35 Success rates also rely upon operators having reasonable ex-
perience of videolaryngoscopy.36 Although improved intubation 
success rates with videolaryngoscopy are apparent, there is not yet 
enough evidence for them to be considered a first- line technique in 
emergency airway management. A comprehensive airway assess-
ment must still be performed when utilizing videolaryngoscopy, 
as successful tracheal intubation still relies upon the patient 
having adequate mouth opening (and other favourable anatom-
ical features). The presence of blood or foreign bodies may also 
preclude their use in significant maxillofacial trauma, due to the 
glottic view being obscured (as with fibreoptic scopes). A recent 
systematic review and meta- analysis identified that anaesthetists 
experienced in the use of videolaryngoscopy were more successful 
at securing difficult airways,10 therefore it is important that anaes-
thetists gain experience through frequent use of the specific type 
of videolaryngoscope available at their institution to gain mastery 
and to minimize complications.
Front of neck airway
The DAS guidelines from 2015 identified scalpel cricothyroidotomy 
(scalpel– bougie– tube) as the preferable technique to needle 
cricothyroidotomy in the management of the ‘can’t intubate, 
can’t oxygenate’ scenario. Difficult airway equipment should be 
readily accessible during emergency airway management and hos-
pitals should conduct regular training in how to perform scalpel 
cricothyroidotomy, to increase familiarity with the technique. The 
DAS has introduced a four- step approach to emergency front of 
neck airways. The equipment required is a scalpel, bougie, and size 
6.0 cuffed tracheal tube. Using a ‘laryngeal handshake’, the crico-
thyroid membrane is first identified. Standing on the patient’s 
left side (for right- handed operators), a horizontal stab incision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trauma
150
is made at the cricothyroid membrane, after which the scalpel is 
rotated through 90°. A bougie is then inserted into the trachea 
and scalpel removed. The tracheal tube is then railroaded over 
the bougie. In patients with a high body mass index, where front 
of neck anatomy may not be easily palpated, a vertical skin inci-
sion should first be made in order to facilitate identification of the 
cricothyroid membrane. Additionally, in non- emergency situ-
ations, ultrasound may be used to assess and mark the cricothyroid 
membrane prior to intravenous anaesthetic induction, as part of 
‘planning for failure’.29
Anaesthetic management of maxillofacial trauma
Preoperative assessment and planning
Timely and thorough anaesthetic assessment should be under-
taken to identify patients with actual or potential airway com-
promise. Factors to consider include indicators of potentially 
difficult bag mask ventilation, difficult tracheal intubation, and 
difficult mechanical ventilation, as well as the requirements for 
impending surgery.
Conscious level
As per ATLS guidelines, a patient with a GCS of ≤8 warrants 
securing and protection of the airway, as they have lost their airway 
protective reflexes and may also be at risk of hypoventilation. In the 
context of major maxillofacial trauma, and significantly reduced 
conscious level, it is also likely that traumatic brain injury has oc-
curred. Tracheal intubation to facilitate controlled ventilation and 
optimization of oxygenation and carbon dioxide clearance will also 
help to minimize secondary brain injury.
Spontaneous ventilation and hypoxia
As described previously, compromised ventilation in the presence of 
reduced conscious level should be identified. Thoracic injuries such 
as a flail segment, multiple rib fractures, or haemopneumothoraces 
can severely compromise ventilation. Patients with dyspnoea, tra-
cheal deviation, or subcutaneous emphysema involving the neck 
and chest should be identified rapidly.
Extent of facial injuries and markers of difﬁculty
A standard anaesthetic airway assessment should be undertaken, 
with mouth opening, Mallampati score, jaw protrusion, and 
thyromental distance assessed where possible. Airway obstruc-
tion may already be apparent and neck mobility may be impaired. 
The presence of drooling, stridor, odynophagia or dysphagia, tra-
cheal deviation, hoarseness of voice, or airway haemorrhage gener-
ally indicates the need for urgent/ immediate airway management. 
Similarly, the presence of significant orofacial burns, gunshot 
wounds, or unstable facial fractures will expedite the need for de-
finitive airway intervention. General predictors of difficult bag mask 
ventilation (as seen in the general population, e.g. the presence of a 
beard or high body mass index) should not be forgotten during the 
airway assessment. If difficult airway management is anticipated, an 
examination of the front of neck (including ultrasound assessment, 
when time permits) should be performed in order to identify the 
relevant anatomical structures. Experienced help should be sought 
and, if necessary, marking and local anaesthetic infiltration (in prep-
aration for rescue front of neck access) should be undertaken prior 
to intravenous anaesthetic induction.
Trismus
Reduced mouth opening may not improve after administration 
of general anaesthesia (or muscle relaxation) in certain injuries. 
Delayed presentations with increased swelling will reduce mouth 
opening, therefore the age of the fracture should be determined. 
Reduced mouth opening associated with infections, abscesses, 
or temporomandibular joint pathologies (including dislocation; 
Fig. 13.4) are unlikely to improve after anaesthetic induction. A frac-
tured zygoma that interrupts the coronoid process of the mandible 
will also result in a fixed restricted mouth opening. Options for man-
agement include consideration of a regional anaesthetic technique, 
flexible fibreoptic tracheal intubation, supraglottic airway insertion 
as a conduit for tracheal intubation, tracheal intubation with a rigid 
fibrescope (e.g. Bonfils),37 or retrograde tracheal intubation. Mouth 
opening <2.5 cm is unlikely to result in successful direct laryn-
goscopy. In patients presenting with a degree of restricted mouth 
opening relating to pain alone, this is almost always overcome fol-
lowing induction of general anaesthesia.
Fig. 13.4 Characteristic open- mouthed appearance of an anteriorly dislocated mandible.
Deangelis AF, Barrowman RA, Harrod R, Nastri AL. Maxillofacial injuries: Dentoalveolar and temporomandibular joint trauma. Emergency Medicine Australasia. 2014;26:439– 445.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anaesthetic management of maxillofacial trauma
151
Haemorrhage
Life- threatening haemorrhage associated with maxillofacial trauma 
is rare, although the polytrauma patient may present with haemo-
dynamic instability through other injuries. Stabilization of the 
patient should occur prior to induction of anaesthesia. Specific 
techniques used to manage bleeding associated with maxillofacial 
trauma include posterior packing13 or arterial embolization,14 as dis-
cussed previously. Basic management strategies include the timely 
cross- matching of blood products, correction of coagulopathy, 
treatment of acidosis, and prevention or correction of hypothermia.
Preparation for surgery
The type of tracheal tube used can impact upon surgical access. 
South- facing oral Ring– Adair– Elwyn (RAE) tubes are usually used 
for zygomatic or orbital fractures. Nasotracheal tubes are used for 
fractures involving the mandible, most Le Fort fractures, and those 
causing malocclusion. Alternatives to oral or nasotracheal intub-
ation include tracheostomy or submental intubation. The choice 
of airway management should be discussed with the surgical team 
prior to induction of anaesthesia, along with the requirement for 
a throat pack, intermaxillary fixation, or the need for facial nerve 
monitoring.
Intraoperative management
The shared airway
As with all oromaxillofacial surgery, appreciation of the ‘shared 
airway’ is vital for safe anaesthetic management of the patient. 
Appropriate communication and teamwork are invaluable. Tracheal 
tubes and circuits should be thoroughly checked and secured prior 
to preparation of the surgical field and application of surgical drapes, 
with similar care taken on removal of drapes at the end of surgery to 
avoid inadvertent tube dislodging or circuit disconnections.
Oral tracheal tubes
Orotracheal intubation via direct laryngoscopy remains the most 
common technique used to secure the airway in maxillofacial 
trauma.10 This can be utilized if the patient is considered appropriate 
for tracheal extubation at the end of surgery and the orotracheal tube 
is not interfering with surgical access intraoperatively. Options gen-
erally include RAE tubes or reinforced tracheal tubes that can be 
safely secured away from the operative field or side of surgery.
Nasotracheal tubes
Operations requiring maxillomandibular fixation generally require 
nasotracheal tubes.10 Preformed curved nasotracheal tubes can be 
placed away from the operative field. Specific contraindications to 
nasotracheal intubation include fractures to the midface and base 
of skull fractures. Awake nasotracheal intubation techniques can 
be particularly challenging in the maxillofacial trauma patient. 
Cooperation is often impaired due to concomitant confusion, and 
foreign bodies and obstructions can result in inadequate local anaes-
thetic topicalization, as well as potentially obscuring the glottic view.
Tracheostomies
Patients may come to theatre for surgery with a tracheostomy or 
surgical cricothyroidotomy already created (either pre- hospital, 
or in the emergency department— having been involved in major 
trauma with significant orofacial injuries or impending airway com-
promise). Formation of an intraoperative tracheostomy should also 
be considered for patients undergoing maxillofacial trauma surgery 
whose trachea has been difficult to intubate prior to surgery or in 
those with previously failed tracheal intubation attempts (with the 
expectation that, in the context of increased oedema after surgery, 
the trachea may be impossible to reintubate in the event of airway 
or respiratory compromise). A tracheostomy may also be indicated 
if a period of prolonged postoperative ventilation is expected, as 
this will facilitate respiratory weaning and aid with suctioning of se-
cretions. A tracheostomy may also be necessitated in patients with 
extensive panfacial fractures, where alternative means of securing 
the airway that allows surgery to proceed are precluded (e.g. com-
minuted mandibular fractures or fractures that preclude the use of 
nasal intubation).42 Complications of tracheostomy formation in-
clude haemorrhage, and damage to airway structures including the 
trachea (with subsequent stenosis), vocal cords, recurrent laryngeal 
nerves, or oesophagus.43
Throat packs
A throat pack may be required. This requirement should be estab-
lished during the theatre team brief, including specifically identi-
fying who is responsible for its insertion and removal. The processes 
surrounding safe throat pack management are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 10.
Postoperative ﬁxation devices
Postoperative intermaxillary fixation may be required. This has a 
significant impact upon the decision- making surrounding suit-
ability for tracheal extubation and the chosen extubation strategy 
at the end of surgery. Tracheal extubation may be more challenging, 
and the presence of a fixation device is also likely to affect the ease 
of reintubation if difficulties are encountered. Sometimes, the risk 
of tracheal extubation immediately following surgery is deemed too 
great, and continued invasive ventilation in the critical care unit is 
necessitated. In some cases, for example, severe oedema associated 
with panfacial trauma, a tracheostomy may be performed in order 
to create a safe stable airway, regardless of the presence of fixation 
devices. The development of rigid surgical plating techniques has 
superseded the requirement for postoperative rigid fixation devices 
in many cases.4
Nerve monitoring
The requirement for facial nerve monitoring will impact the use of 
neuromuscular blocking agents. In this context, tracheal intubation 
can often be achieved without the use of any muscle relaxant (e.g. by 
judicious use of a potent opioid); however, this should not impact 
safe airway management. Should airway management difficulties 
arise in the absence of muscle relaxation, a neuromuscular blocking 
agent should be administered. Of course, an appropriate dose of a 
short- acting muscle relaxant would be preferable in these circum-
stances, and repeat dosing should be avoided. Close communication 
with the surgical team is advised.
Intraoperative tube changes
Intraoperative tracheal tube changes may be necessary in the surgical 
correction of panfacial fractures (involving the naso- orbitoethmoidal 
complex and mandibular structures), as nasotracheal tubes can 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trauma
152
interfere with the surgical correction. Clear communication be-
tween team members is essential, and distractions in the operating 
theatre must be minimized prior to undertaking a tube exchange. 
Preoxygenation on 100% oxygen and the administration of a neuro-
muscular blocking agent prior to tube exchange are also advocated. 
The formation of a surgical tracheostomy may be preferred in order 
to avoid the risks associated with tube exchanges, particularly when 
bleeding and oedema may lead to the loss of a previously secure 
airway.4
Submental and retromolar intubation
Tracheal tube exchanges can be minimized by employing a 
retromolar or more commonly a submental technique for tracheal 
intubation, as these can enable surgical access to both the oral and 
nasal cavities.10 Submental intubation (Fig. 13.5) can be used in pa-
tients with comminuted fractures of the midface or the nose, where 
nasal intubation is contraindicated, and where tracheal extubation 
is expected to be possible at the end of surgery.38 Like tracheosto-
mies, submental intubation provides an unobstructed surgical field, 
but the surgical scar is generally aesthetically superior43,44 and there 
may be fewer long- term complications, such as subglottic stenosis. 
It is, however, contraindicated in the presence of comminuted man-
dibular fractures, and is not without complication, for example, 
bleeding, skin infections,10 salivary fistulae,39 or damage to the lin-
gual nerve, the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve, or 
the submandibular gland. Conversely, retromolar intubation is con-
sidered the technique with the least associated morbidity when com-
pared with submental intubation or tracheostomy formation, but it 
relies upon the presence of sufficient retromolar space and some-
times may not enable full dental occlusion (and therefore is not al-
ways possible).10,40
Other intraoperative considerations
High- dose steroids (such as 8 mg dexamethasone) can be used to 
minimize postoperative oedema and is administered at the start 
of surgery and often continued postoperatively in the short term. 
Prophylactic antibiotic administration of variable duration is also 
likely to be required. Eye protection using eye tapes and pads are 
often used. Awareness of the oculocardiac reflex (profound vagal 
stimulation produced via a reflex arc involving the trigeminal and 
vagus nerves and the brainstem) is important. This can be associated 
with orbital and maxillofacial injury, producing severe hypotension 
and bradycardia.41
Surgical factors
Maxillofacial surgery may be very prolonged, and a period of post-
operative invasive ventilation may be required due to the duration of 
anaesthesia alone. Airway oedema, relating to the initial traumatic 
injuries or the resultant surgery, is likely to worsen immediately 
postoperatively and may precipitate airway obstruction, therefore 
continued tracheal intubation and postoperative lung ventilation 
may be required to allow some of this oedema to subside, enabling 
safe tracheal extubation further down the line. It is critical that a 
multidisciplinary discussion occurs between surgeon and anaes-
thetist that specifically addresses the potential risk of postoperative 
airway- related complications. In the polytrauma patient, there may 
also be ongoing surgical requirements, with further staged operative 
procedures necessitated. Clear communication of the ongoing sur-
gical plan should be relayed before the end of surgery so that this can 
inform decisions on the most appropriate postoperative destination 
for the patient.
Anaesthetic factors
Acute postoperative pain can be particularly challenging to manage 
in the polytrauma patient, and a level two postoperative care facility 
can often provide better and safer acute pain management for these 
patients initially. Major perioperative haemorrhage, associated with 
the initial traumatic injuries or surgical correction, may also warrant 
critical care admission for further stabilization, cardiovascular sup-
port, ongoing blood product administration, and correction of the 
metabolic derangement.
Patient factors
Other traumatic injuries, in addition to the maxillofacial pathology, 
may require ongoing airway protection and invasive ventilation, for 
example, patients with traumatic brain injury or severe thoracic in-
juries. In this respect, attention to patients’ GCS prior to induction 
of general anaesthesia is crucial as a reduced GCS may well preclude 
safe tracheal extubation at the end of surgery. Patient comorbidities 
may also be important, as pre- existing respiratory, cardiovascular, 
or endocrine disease may be exacerbated in the context of major 
trauma, requiring additional invasive support postoperatively.
Tracheal extubation
If it is deemed clinically appropriate to wake the patient up at the 
end of surgery, general considerations to optimize conditions for 
smooth emergence and tracheal extubation should be employed.29 
Anaesthetic skill mix and level of seniority and experience must be 
considered when undertaking tracheal extubation in patients with 
complex airway pathology, and appropriate assistance should be 
Fig. 13.5 Submental intubation— tracheal tube secured submentally 
with sutures and tape.
Amin M, Dill- Russell P, Manisali M, Lee R, Sinton I. Facial fractures and submental 
intubation. Anaesthesia. 2002;57:1195– 1212.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion
153
sought if required (especially if there are other confounding factors, 
such as high body mass index). Difficult airway equipment must be 
immediately available, along with emergency drugs and drugs for 
reintubation of the trachea.
Patients should be placed in an upright sitting position (where 
possible), with neuromuscular blocking agents fully reversed. Prior 
to tracheal extubation, the anaesthetist should inspect the oro-
pharynx and suction the upper airway under direct vision. A ‘check- 
laryngoscopy’ can also be performed, as the grade of laryngoscopy is 
now likely to be higher than at initial intubation due to the presence 
of oedema, blood, and secretions. Patients should be fully awake 
and following commands before extubation of the trachea in max-
illofacial trauma. If there are specific surgical concerns regarding 
bleeding and haematoma development, or suture disruption (ap-
plicable to flap surgery), smooth tracheal extubation can be facili-
tated using a low- dose remifentanil target- controlled infusion.
A bite block may be used to prevent biting and occlusion of the 
tracheal tube during emergence. Other airway adjuncts such as 
specially designed ‘staged extubation’ flexible wires and paediatric 
airway exchange catheters can be used— these are well tolerated by 
awake patients, and can provide a conduit for tracheal reintubation 
if required. Suction catheters have also been used for this purpose, 
particularly in the paediatric population.
Following tracheal extubation, if there are concerns regarding 
adequacy of oxygenation postoperatively (despite provision of 
standard nasal or face mask supplementary oxygen), continuous 
positive airway pressure masks should generally be avoided as they 
cause direct pressure on suture lines, potentially causing disrup-
tion or bleeding. Instead, high- flow humidified nasal oxygenation 
(Optiflow™; Fisher & Paykel Healthcare, Auckland, New Zealand) 
can be considered. Some positive effects on oxygenation, airway pa-
tency, and carbon dioxide clearance have been demonstrated using 
this technique in apnoeic patients at induction of anaesthesia, so- 
called ‘THRIVE’ (transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventila-
tory exchange),45,46 and similar advantages may be conferred in the 
spontaneously breathing patient postoperatively. For patients suit-
able for discharge to a postoperative ward rather than critical care 
facility, a minimum monitoring requirement of continuous pulse 
oximetry is advocated in order to identify ventilatory insufficiency 
as quickly as possible.
Postoperative considerations
Planning and preparation for potential airway emergencies is vital 
(‘preparing to fail’). In the event of a failed tracheal extubation, 
emergency reintubation can be very challenging in these patients. 
Attention should focus upon a structured escalation plan, with ap-
propriate airway equipment and personnel to deal with anticipated 
emergencies. Use of an airway exchange device may be considered 
to facilitate reintubation of the trachea. A senior maxillofacial sur-
geon should also remain present in the operating theatre during 
emergence from anaesthesia to assist in the event of any airway 
compromise.
Delayed airway or respiratory compromise can also occur, often 
due to worsening oedema or bleeding. Regular postoperative ster-
oids can reduce some of this oedema. However, stitch cutters must 
be immediately available in the postoperative care unit and beside 
the patient on the ward/ critical care unit, so that sutures can be re-
leased in the event of an expanding haematoma causing acute airway 
obstruction. In these circumstances, it is important to consider the 
site of the haematoma and its anatomical relations, as this will af-
fect the subsequent management. For example, mandibular surgery 
is most likely to cause sublingual, submandibular, and submental 
haematomas, causing airway obstruction by displacing the tongue 
upwards and backwards. In this context, if an emergency front of 
neck airway is required, the trachea is still likely to be in the midline, 
as the haematoma is superior to the hyoid, and a standard approach 
to emergency front of neck airway formation can be utilized.
Conclusion
Maxillofacial trauma can result in complex injuries that require 
urgent anaesthetic involvement and stabilization. A thorough ap-
proach to assessment, an awareness of the potential for other sig-
nificant injuries, and early multidisciplinary involvement are key. 
A systematic approach to emergency airway management, with a 
clear airway strategy, a plan for failure, and familiarity with advanced 
airway techniques (for both tracheal intubation and extubation) will 
result in safe and effective care of these high- risk patients.
REFERENCES
 1. Shahim FN, Cameron P, McNeil JJ. Maxillofacial trauma in major 
trauma patients. Aust Dent J. 2006;51(3):225– 230.
 2. Al Khawalde M. Maxillofacial fractures in Jordan; a 5 year 
retrospective review. Oral Surg. 2011;4(4):161– 165.
 3. Kirkpatrick N. Facial and orbital injuries. Surgery. 2004;22(8): 
186– 190.
 4. Gassner R, Tuli T, Hachl O, Ulmer H. Cranio- maxillofacial 
trauma: a 10 year review of 9543 cases with 21 067 injuries.  
J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2003;31(1):51– 61.
 5. Hutchinson IL, Magennis P, Shepherd JP, Brown AE. The BAOMS 
United Kingdom survey of facial injuries. Part 1: aetiology and 
the association with alcohol consumption. Br J Oral Maxillofac 
Surg. 1998;36(1):3– 13.
 6. Fama F, Cicciu M, Sindoni A, Nastro- Siniscalchi E, Falzea 
R, Cervino G, et al. Maxillofacial and concomitant serious 
injuries: an eight- year single center experience. Chin J 
Traumatol. 2017;20(4):4– 8.
 7. Scherbaum Eidt JM, De Conto F, De Bortoli MM, Engelmann 
JL, Rocha FD. Associated injuries in patients with maxillofacial 
trauma at the Hospital Sao Vincent de Paulo, Passo Fundo, Brazil. 
J Oral Maxillofac Res. 2013;4(3):e1.
 8. Morosan M, Parbhoo A, Curry N. Anaesthesia and common oral 
and maxilla- facial emergencies. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care 
Pain. 2012;12(5):257– 262.
 9. Hutchinson I, Lawlor M, Skinner D. ABC of major trauma. 
Major maxillofacial injuries. BMJ. 1990;301(6752):595– 599.
 10. Kellman RM, Losquadro WD. Comprehensive airway 
management of patients with maxillofacial trauma. 
Craniomaxillofac Trauma Reconstr. 2008;1(1):39– 48.
 11. Houghton D, Sidebottom AJ. Pneumomediastinum following 
zygomatic fracture— an uncommon but potentially life- 
threatening complication. Oral Surg. 2012;5(4):198– 200.
 12. Mittal G, Mittal RK, Katyal S, Uppal S, Mittal V. Airway management 
in maxillofacial trauma: do we really need tracheostomy/ submental 
intubation. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014;8(3):77– 79.
 
 
 
Trauma
154
 13. Cogbill TH, Cothren CC, Ahern MK, Cullinane DC, Kaups 
KL, Scalea TM, et al. Management of maxillofacial injuries 
with severe oronasal haemorrhage: a multicentre perspective. J 
Trauma. 2008;65(5):994– 999.
 14. Noy D, Rachmiel A, Emodi O, Amsalem Y, Israel Y, Nagler 
RM. Transarterial embolization in maxillofacial intractable 
potentially life- threatening haemorrhage. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2017;75(6):1223– 1231.
 15. Ibraheem K, Kyan M, Rhee P, Azim A, O’Keeffe T, Tang A, 
et al. “No zone” approach in penetrating neck trauma reduces 
unnecessary computerised tomography angiography and 
negative explorations. J Surg Res. 2018;221:113– 120.
 16. Zhou H- H, Liu Q, Yang R- T, Li Z, Li ZB. Traumatic head injuries 
in patients with maxillofacial fractures: a retrospective case- 
control study. Dent Traumatol. 2015;31(3):209– 214.
 17. Adams CD, Januszkiewicz JS, Judson J. Changing patterns of 
severe craniomaxillofacial trauma in Auckland over eight years. 
Aust NZ J Surg. 2000;70(6):401– 404.
 18. Oh J- W, Kim S- H, Whang K. Traumatic cerebrospinal fluid 
leak: diagnosis and management. Korean J Neurotrauma. 
2017;13(2):63– 67.
 19. Bell RB, Dierks EJ, Homer L, Potter BE. Management of 
cerebrospinal fluid leak associated with craniomaxillofacial 
trauma. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2004;62(6):676– 684.
 20. Lynham AJ, Hirst JP, Cosson JA, Chapman PJ, McEniery P. 
Emergency department management of maxillofacial trauma. 
Emerg Med Australas. 2004;16(1):7– 12.
 21. Abdulrahman H, Ajaj A, Shunni A, El- Menyar A, Chaikhouni 
A, Al- Thani H, et al. Blunt traumatic esophageal injury: unusual 
presentation and approach. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2014;5(1):16– 18.
 22. Graciano AJ, Stockler Schner AM, Fischer CA. Esophageal 
perforation in closed neck trauma. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol. 
2013;79(1):121.
 23. Tuckett JW, Lynham A, Lee GA, Perry M, Harrington U. 
Maxillofacial trauma in the emergency department: a review. 
Surgeon. 2014;12(2):106– 114.
 24. Deangelis AF, Barrowman RA, Harrod R, Nastri AL. 
Maxillofacial injuries: dentoalveolar and temporomandibular 
joint trauma. Emerg Med Australas. 2014;26(5):439– 445.
 25. Aiello G, Metcalf I. Anaesthetic implications of 
temporomandibular joint disease. Can J Anaesth. 
1992;39(6):610– 616.
 26. Krausz AA, Abu el- Naaj I, Barak M. Maxillofacial trauma 
patient: coping with the difficult airway. World J Emerg Surg. 
2009;4:21.
 27. Krausz AA, Krausz MM, Picetti E. Maxillofacial and neck 
trauma: a damage control approach. World J Emerg Surg. 
2015;10:31.
 28. Royal College of Anaesthetists. 4th National Audit Project: Major 
Complications of Airway Management in the UK. London: Royal 
College of Anaesthetists; 2011. http:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ NAP4
 29. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath 
R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
 30. Hall CEJ, Shutt LE. Nasotracheal intubation for head and neck 
surgery. Anaesthesia. 2003;58(3):249– 256.
 31. Paul M, Dueck M, Kampe S, Petzke F, Ladra A. Intracranial 
placement of a nasotracheal tube after transnasal trans- 
sphenoidal surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2003;91(4):601– 604.
 32. Sackles JC, Mosier JM, Patanwalab AE, Dicken JM, Kalin L, 
Javedani PP. The C- MAC® video laryngoscope is superior to 
the direct laryngoscope for the rescue of failed first- attempt 
intubations in the emergency department. J Emerg Med. 
2015;48(3):280– 286.
 33. Aziz MF, Brambrink AM, Healy DW, Willett AW, Shanks A, 
Tremper T, et al. Success of intubation rescue techniques after 
failed direct laryngoscopy in adults: a retrospective comparative 
analysis from the multicentre perioperative outcomes group. 
Anaesthesiology. 2016;125(4):656– 666.
 34. Lewis SR, Butler AR, Parker J, Cook T, Cook TM, Schofield- 
Robinson OJ, Smith AF. Videolaryngoscopy versus 
direct laryngoscopy for adult patients requiring tracheal 
intubation: a Cochrane Systematic Review. Br J Anaesth. 
2017;119(3):369– 383.
 35. Mihai R, Blair E, Kay H, Cook TM. A quantitative review 
and meta- analysis of performance of non- standard 
laryngoscopes and rigid fibreoptic intubation aids. Anaesthesia. 
2008;63(7):745– 760.
 36. Healy DW, Maties O, Hovord D, Kheterpal S. A systematic 
review of the role of videolaryngoscopy in successful orotracheal 
intubation. BMC Anesthesiol. 2012;12(32):32.
 37. Shollik NA, Ibrahim SM, Ismael A, Agnoletti V, Piraccini 
E, Corso RM. Use of Bonfils Intubation Fiberscope in 
patients with limited mouth opening. Case Rep Anaesthesiol. 
2012;2012:297306.
 38. Kita R, Kikuta T, Takahashi M, Ootani T, Takaoka M, Matsuda M, 
et al. Efficacy and complications of submental tracheal intubation 
compared with tracheostomy in maxillofacial trauma patients. J 
Oral Sci. 2016;58(1):23– 28.
 39. Pieters BMA, Maas EHA, Knape JTA, van Zundert 
AAJ. Videolaryngoscopy vs. direct laryngoscopy use by 
experienced anaesthetists in patients with known difficult 
airways: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Anaesthesia. 
2017;72(12):1532.
 40. Jaisani MR, Pradhan L, Bhattarai B, Sagtani A. Intubation 
techniques: preferences of maxillofacial trauma surgeons. J 
Maxillofac Oral Surg. 2015;14(2):501– 505.
 41. Pham CM, Couch SM. Oculocardiac reflex elicited by orbital 
floor fracture and inferior globe displacement. Am J Ophthalmol 
Case Rep. 2017;6:4– 6.
 42. Barak M, Bahouth H, Leiser Y, Abu El- Naaj I. Airway 
management of the patient with maxillofacial trauma: review of 
the literature and suggested clinical approach. BioMed Res Int. 
2015;2015:724032.
 43. Amin M, Dill- Russell P, Manisali M, Lee R, Sinton I. 
Facial fractures and submental intubation. Anaesthesia. 
2002;57(12):1195– 1212.
 44. Eipe N, McGuire T. Submental intubation: another anaesthetic 
option for maxillofacial trauma. Paediatr Anaesth Correspond. 
2012;22(5):494– 496.
 45. Patel A, Nouraei SAR. Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation 
ventilatory exchange (THRIVE): a physiological method 
of increasing apnoea time in patients with difficult airways. 
Anaesthesia. 2015;70(3):323– 329.
 46. Booth AWG, Vidhani K, Lee PK, Thomsett C- M. SponTaneous 
Respiration using IntraVEnous anaesthesia and Hi- flow nasal 
oxygen (STRIVE- Hi) maintains oxygenation and airway patency 
during management of the obstructed airway: an observational 
study. Br J Anaesthesia. 2017;118(3):444– 451.
14
Burns and inhalational injury
Caroline A. R. Nicholas and Tim N. Vorster
Introduction
This chapter focuses on the anaesthetic management of oral and fa-
cial burns, thermal airway burns, and inhalation injury. It provides 
a brief overview of general burns management and the principles 
of burns resuscitation; however, there are alternative resources1 and 
courses available for a more generalized perspective of severe burns 
management.2
The surgical aims of treating oral and facial burns are identical to 
the treatment of burns elsewhere on the body— to excise non- viable 
tissue, to allow viable tissue to heal in a time frame that reduces scar-
ring, and to cover debrided areas with skin grafts or skin substitutes 
in order to improve cosmetic and functional results. Conversely, 
the anaesthetic challenges are quite unique. Oral and facial burns 
are seldom an isolated injury and are often associated with other 
immediately life- threatening injuries. Acute thermal airway burns 
are usually encountered with a facial burn and other aspects of the 
‘smoke inhalation complex’ are commonly involved, requiring rapid 
assessment and appropriate treatment prior to transfer to a specialist 
burns unit.
Epidemiology
Although minor cutaneous burns are extremely common, deaths 
from burns are rare in the UK.3 In the US, with a population of 
300 million, the American Burn Association estimated that 500,000 
burns patients were seen in their emergency departments each year, 
of whom 40,000 were admitted as inpatients and 25,000 went to 
specialized burn centres. Approximately 2500 of these patients had 
burns >30% of total body surface area (TBSA), and there were 4000 
deaths, with 75% of deaths occurring prior to hospital arrival.4
Inhalation injury occurs in approximately 10– 20% of patients ad-
mitted to burn centres, increasing in frequency as the size of burn 
increases. Inhalation injury, age, and burns size are the three most 
cited predictive factors for prolonged ventilator dependence, hos-
pital stay, and death.5– 8 Though not all patients with facial burns 
will have an associated inhalation burn, the vast majority of pa-
tients with inhalation injury will have a facial burn. The presence 
of a full- thickness facial burn has been shown to be an independent 
prognostic indicator for significantly increased risk of death, when 
compared with similar size burns elsewhere on the body.9 It is pro-
posed that this is due to the close association between this type of 
burn and an inhalation injury. Facial burns are often just a fraction 
of the overall burn seen in patients with massive thermal injuries— 
a significant number of burn victims will have other injuries and 
coexisting pathologies that will need to be appropriately treated. 
Isolated inhalation injury, or inhalation injury with a minor cu-
taneous burn, has a mortality rate of 0.3– 5%.10,11 However, the 
American Burn Association National Burn Repository database 
shows that the presence of an inhalation injury increases the risk 
of death in patients <60 years of age with burns <20% TBSA by 15 
times.12 With increasing age and burn size, the mortality increases 
dramatically, such that a patient aged >60 years with a burn >40% 
TBSA and an inhalation injury has a predicted mortality of 90%.10 
This compares with a predicted mortality of 30% in the absence of 
an inhalation element.
Burns occurring at the extremes of age are more likely a ‘symptom’ 
of other pathologies. Toddlers with colds are more likely to be seen 
with scalds than well children. Burns in the elderly may be caused 
by underlying cardiac or neurological events. The burn in these pa-
tients, especially if minor, may be the least important factor in their 
prognosis.
Chemical burns represent 3– 5% of burns injuries but have a 
high mortality rate, particularly if there is associated ingestion of 
the agent.
The emergency department acute major 
burn admission
The acute major burn patient can be exceptionally emotive for 
the receiving hospital staff involved. Their injuries may be visu-
ally dramatic, overwhelming to the olfactory senses, and the se-
vere pain experienced by the patient can be particularly distressing 
to witness. Regardless of seniority and experience, it is easy to be 
distracted by these aspects and fail to manage the patient in the 
systematic way we would approach other trauma victims. Injuries 
seldom overlooked in other trauma situations such as cervical 
spine instability, thoracic emergencies, abdominal crises, long bone 
 
 
 
 
Burns and inhalational injury
156
fractures, myocardial ischaemia, or concurrent drug overdose, have 
all anecdotally been missed.
Cutaneous burns are left to the secondary survey of any major 
burn assessment. Obtaining a quick history from the patient (where 
possible), relatives, or ambulance staff, and ensuring the team com-
plete a full Advanced Trauma Life Support trauma survey in a 
stepwise manner are paramount. The presence of immediate life- 
threatening injuries, in addition to the burn, must be sought and ex-
cluded before treating a patient as an isolated burn, as 7% of all burns 
admissions are reported to have associated polytrauma.13 Though 
uncommon, some suicide attempts may involve self- immolation, 
therefore this should also be considered. Paracetamol and salicylate 
levels should be taken routinely. An initially overlooked drug over-
dose in a burn patient can still have the same outcome if detected 
and treated promptly.
Resuscitation
Airway (and cervical spine protection)
Apnoeic patients and those with decreased consciousness are unable 
to maintain their own airway safely and, therefore, require tracheal 
intubation. Impending airway compromise due to inhalation injury 
must be considered and re- evaluated regularly. All burns patients 
should initially receive 100% oxygen via a non- rebreathing mask. 
Cervical spine protection is mandatory until a neck injury has been 
formally excluded. The presence of hypoxia, hypercapnia, deep facial 
burns, circumferential neck burns, and/ or oropharyngeal oedema 
warrants tracheal intubation. Early tracheal intubation is advisable 
where the progression of significant oedema is anticipated. The use of 
suxamethonium is safe in the first 24 hours following a burn injury; 
thereafter, the risk of precipitating hyperkalaemic cardiac arrest (due 
to uncontrolled potassium release from extra- junctional acetylcho-
line receptors) precludes its subsequent use for up to 2 years. Air flow 
through a tracheal tube or tracheostomy is mainly laminar (Fig. 14.1) 
and, therefore, regulated by the Hagen– Poiseuille equation14:
Flow
pressure
radius
/
length of the tube
viscos
Q
P
r
l
( ) =
( )×
( ) ×
( )×
4
π
ity
8
η
( )×
The radius of the tracheal tube has a significant impact on gas flow 
and lung ventilation. The larger the tracheal tube diameter, the greater 
the gas flow that can be delivered (reducing work of breathing), as 
well as facilitating airway toileting and suctioning, and enabling the 
frequently performed bronchoscopy and bronchiolar lavage to be 
undertaken with greater ease. In patients with a thermal insult, the 
direct and indirect chemical injury to the respiratory tract can lead 
to profound mucus membrane disturbance, and activation of the in-
flammatory cascade, resulting in increased capillary permeability, 
loss of intrinsic cilia, and diffuse exudative production. Secretion 
load can be heavy, potentiating bronchospasm, hypoxia, atelectasis, 
loss of hypoxic vasoconstriction, airway obstruction, and infection.
Breathing
Full exposure of the chest and neck are required for examination. 
A history of a blast injury or other trauma will make intrathoracic 
damage more likely. Inhalation injury may show limited early clin-
ical signs but may exacerbate existing pulmonary pathology. A high 
respiratory rate is concerning and pulse oximetry should be under-
taken and corroborated later with an arterial blood gas sample. Full- 
thickness burns to the torso will cause the skin to lose its elasticity 
and the ability to expand, impacting significantly on breathing. 
Oedema formation around the injury site may also lead to compres-
sion of the structures within the neck, causing airway obstruction. 
This is of particular relevance in children, who have smaller diam-
eter airways. Compliance, and subsequently pulmonary ventilation, 
may be reduced with circumferential burns of the chest. In children, 
(predominantly abdominal breathers), this can occur with just iso-
lated anterior burns of the chest and upper abdomen. An urgent 
escharotomy may be required to avoid airway obstruction, alleviate 
respiratory distress/ failure, or prevent iatrogenic barotrauma sec-
ondary to mechanical ventilation.
Circulation
Tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, or tachypnoea may be early 
signs of cardiovascular impairment. Hypotension is a late sign. 
Circulatory impairment may be secondary to the burn but other 
causes must be excluded.
Disability
Alcohol and/ or drug intoxication are common causes of accidents 
leading to burns. Carbon monoxide poisoning, shock due to other 
causes, and head injuries must be excluded in all obtunded patients.
Exposure
All patients must be fully exposed and examined (Fig. 14.2). 
However, burns victims lose heat rapidly and, therefore, all means 
possible should be employed to maintain normothermia.
Fluid resuscitation
Fluid resuscitation is recommended in adult burns >15% TBSA, and 
in children with burns >10% TBSA. Burn size can be calculated from 
the ‘Rule of Nines’ or from a burn body chart. In the acute burn, fluids 
should be started at the time of the primary survey and formally cal-
culated when appropriate. The subsequent fluid requirements can ap-
pear excessive, especially in children, and these should be reviewed 
and agreed by the regional specialist burns unit, confirming the 
percentage of the burn involved and the fluid resuscitation volumes 
Fig. 14.1 Laminar ﬂow in the airways.
Reproduced with permission from Gilbert- Kawai, E., & Wittenberg, M. (2014). Reynold’s 
number (and turbulent ﬂow). In Essential Equations for Anaesthesia: Key Clinical 
Concepts for the FRCA and EDA (pp. 21– 23). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
doi:10.1017/ CBO9781139565387.013
Secondary survey
157
required. Ideally, two large- bore intravenous cannulae should be 
sited through unburnt skin. In very large burns, this may be difficult, 
and central venous access via the groin (often spared) is a useful al-
ternative. Depending upon the site of the burn, vascular access via 
the subclavian or internal jugular veins may be possible. Vascular 
access devices are known to be a major cause of hospital- associated 
infections and bloodstream bacteraemias so adhering to all aspects 
of safe insertion and maintenance of these devices, in addition to 
timely removal when no longer required, greatly reduce the risk of 
infection. The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
provides comprehensive guidelines on real- time ultrasound- guided 
central venous access,15 and the benefits of ultrasonography for per-
ipheral venous access should also be recognized. If peripheral or cen-
tral intravenous access is not achievable, surgical venous cut down, 
though rare, remains an alternative when other methods have failed,16 
with intraosseous access also providing another life- saving option in 
such situations.17 Both would be considered ‘bridging methods’ until 
formal intravenous access can be achieved.
The standard intravenous fluid regimen in the UK is based on the 
Parkland formula. Fluid resuscitation is calculated as 3– 4 mL/ kg/ 
% TBSA of burn. The first half of the calculated volume is admin-
istered in the first 8 hours (from the time of injury) and the second 
half is given over the next 16 hours. Children weighing <25 kg, with 
a greater surface area to mass ratio, should receive additional main-
tenance fluid (e.g. Parkland plus maintenance fluid for the first 8 
hours, then 50% of Parkland plus normal maintenance fluids for 
the following 16 hours). Any additional fluid requirements may be 
met with judicious use of colloids. The efficacy of fluid resuscita-
tion should be monitored clinically, principally by observing urine 
output. Urinary catheterization is, therefore, mandatory in large 
burns, with the aim of achieving a urine output of 0.5 mL/ kg/ hr in 
adults and 1 mL/ kg/ hr in children. The exception to this is patients 
with haemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria, where the aim should be 
to achieve 1– 2 mL/ kg/ hr urine output (utilizing sodium bicarbonate 
and mannitol).
Inhalation injury, in addition to a cutaneous burn, is associated 
with an increased fluid resuscitation requirement. However, fur-
ther fluid should be given cautiously as concerns exist with over- 
resuscitation resulting in lung and tissue oedema.
Pain management
Pain should be treated with titrated intravenous opioids. The intra-
muscular route should not be used, as the peripheral circulatory 
changes associated with burns render this route of absorption 
unpredictable.
Radiology/ imaging
A ‘trauma series’ including cervical spine, chest, and pelvis should 
be undertaken.
Secondary survey
History
An ‘AMPLE’ history (Allergies, Medical history, Past illnesses, Last 
meal, Events/ Environment relating to the injury) should be obtained 
from the patient (where possible). The burn history should also in-
clude duration of exposure, type of clothing worn, temperature and 
nature of fluid if scalded, and adequacy of first aid measures. An 
inhalation history should also be taken, as well as any other relevant 
history of blast, ejection, assault, or other trauma.
Examination
A full body examination is required, including the eyes, ears, and 
back (commonly overlooked). All limbs need to be evaluated for 
escharotomy requirement, looking for circumferential burns and any 
signs of reduced limb perfusion— pain, paraesthesia, pulselessness, 
and paralysis.
Monitoring
Continuous pulse oximetry, electrocardiography, blood pressure 
monitoring, fluid balance recording and assessment, and tempera-
ture monitoring are minimum standards. Invasive vascular moni-
toring and cardiac output monitoring are common, and routinely 
used in the burns critical care unit.
Temperature regulation
Normothermia is desirable but is often difficult to achieve and is 
also often overlooked. A burns victim may have had cooling first 
aid, or had their clothes removed or burned off, and undergone sig-
nificant exposure. Loss of skin integrity and evaporation of exudate 
also causes heat loss. Core temperature may be further reduced by 
the vasodilatory effects of any general anaesthetic agents required. 
Hypothermia has significant deleterious effects, including increased 
risk of infection and cardiovascular impairment, as well as negative 
effects more specific to the burn, such as vasoconstriction and re-
duced blood supply. Patients should be actively warmed where ne-
cessary and methods to reduce heat loss should be employed.
Burn wounds
Burns are initially sterile, but ultimately provide an ideal medium for 
bacterial colonization and growth. Initially, they should be wrapped 
in a plastic cling film layer until advice is sought from the regional 
burns unit. Tetanus prophylaxis should be given routinely to pa-
tients not fully immunized.
Referral to a specialist burns unit
The National Burn Care Group and British Burn Association have 
identified the following injuries as those requiring referral to a spe-
cialist unit18:
Fig. 14.2 A patient with major burns being fully exposed to ensure all 
injuries are identiﬁed and assessed.
Courtesy of Dr Ali Diba, Consultant Anaesthetist, Queen Victoria Hospital, East 
Grinstead.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Burns and inhalational injury
158
 • Burn >10% TBSA in adults.
 • Burn >5% TBSA in children.
 • Burns of special areas— face, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum, and 
major joints.
 • Full- thickness burns >5% TBSA.
 • Electrical burns.
 • Chemical burns.
 • Burns with associated inhalation injury.
 • Circumferential burns of the limbs or chest.
 • Burns at the extremes of ages.
 • Burn injury in patients with pre- existing medical disorders 
which could complicate management, prolong recovery, or affect 
mortality.
 • Any burn patient with associated trauma.
Transfer of unstable patients can be hazardous, should be planned 
carefully, and undertaken by adequately trained personnel with 
appropriate patient monitoring, emergency drugs, and equipment 
available. The main concern is maintenance of a protected airway, 
which should be secured prior to transfer if there is any doubt of de-
terioration during transfer. Intravenous access should be in situ and 
secured thoroughly.
Inhalation injury
Inhalation injury is caused by either direct thermal damage to the 
airway, the effects of the products of combustion, or both. The 
products of combustion can be categorized into those due to toxic 
non- particulate gases, and those due to particulate smoke. These 
give rise to the ‘smoke inhalation complex’, a triad consisting of 
direct thermal injury, injury above the cords, and injury below the 
cords. While some patients may only suffer one aspect, others will 
have a range of symptoms and signs involving at least two of these 
elements.
Diagnosis of inhalation injury
Mechanism of the burn
A flame, blast, or steam injury may lead to an inhalation injury. 
Conversely, a scald is very unlikely to have an inhalation element, 
unless associated with a significant steam injury. Nonetheless, a 
full- thickness scald to the neck can still precipitate airway ob-
struction, due to loss of skin elasticity and oedema, particularly 
in children.
Burn environment
A history of fire or smoke in an enclosed space should raise suspi-
cion of an inhalational injury. The longer the duration of entrapment 
in such an environment, the stronger the suspicion should be. Petrol 
immolation and prolonged burning of clothing may also increase 
the risk.
Level of consciousness at the scene
Unconsciousness should raise suspicion that the patient may have 
suffered a significant inhalation injury. An unconscious patient loses 
the protective ability to breath- hold, and is also, obviously, unable to 
extricate themselves quickly from the toxic environment.
Signs of inhalation injury
Burns around the face and mouth, and singed nasal hairs indicate 
proximity to a heat source and are strongly associated with a thermal 
airway inhalation injury. They also have the potential to increase the 
difficulty of tracheal intubation. The oedema associated with facial 
burns can be significant in the initial phase and if tracheal intubation 
is warranted, it should be done expeditiously. Exceptions include, 
facial scalds (without a significant steam injury, or oral ingestion of 
burning liquids) and ‘flash flame’ burns— if the patient provides a 
satisfactory history of these and there is sparing of the ‘smile lines’ 
and nasolabial folds, an associated airway injury is unlikely.
The presence of soot in the mouth and/ or nose are suggestive 
of smoke inhalation. Blistering, oedema, or burns within the oral 
cavity should be taken extremely seriously. A ‘brassy’ cough, wheeze, 
tachypnoea, altered/ hoarse voice, or dysphagia are all signs indi-
cative of an inhalation injury. A conscious patient complaining of 
an altered voice, especially when subjectively describing deterior-
ation in voice quality, should be taken seriously. Carbonaceous se-
cretions should be regarded as sign of exposure, but nothing more. 
Dyspnoea, wheeze, cyanosis, inspiratory stridor, and increased 
respiratory rate are rare presenting signs, but must be acted upon 
quickly. Confusion and restlessness, may indicate hypoxia necessi-
tating urgent treatment.
An arterial blood gas sample and carboxyhaemoglobin levels are 
mandatory to evaluate any degree of carbon monoxide poisoning 
and can be extrapolated to the time of injury using a nomogram. 
A chest X- ray should also be taken.
Systemic gaseous toxins
At the scene of a fire, it is unlikely that victims are killed directly by 
the smoke, but instead die of hypoxia. The hypoxia is due to a de-
creased availability of oxygen that occurs during a fire, with oxygen 
concentrations decreasing to 10– 15%19,20 of normal levels. In add-
ition, gaseous systemic toxins (principally carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen cyanide) lead to histotoxic hypoxia.
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide poisoning causes up to 80% of smoke- related 
deaths.21,22 It has an affinity with haemoglobin 210 times that of 
oxygen, reducing oxygen carriage and delivery23 and shifting the 
oxygen dissociation curve to the left. The affinity of carbon mon-
oxide for myoglobin causes myocardial depression, hypotension, 
and arrhythmias.24 It also binds to hepatic and other cytochrome en-
zymes causing peroxidation of cerebral lipids.23 Neurological signs 
include confusion, disorientation, visual changes, syncope, seizures, 
and coma. Arrhythmias and myocardial infarction may be pro-
voked in those with coronary heart disease. The extent of injury is 
dependent on the concentration of carbon monoxide, the duration 
of exposure, and pre- existing comorbidities. Neuropsychiatric im-
pairment is a serious long- term complication for survivors.19
Normal carboxyhaemoglobin levels are <5% (up to 9% in a 
smoker). Serious toxicity is often associated with levels >25%, and 
the risk of death is high at >70%. However, no consistent dose– 
response effect has been found between measured levels and clinical 
effects,25 such that carboxyhaemoglobin levels provide an indicator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thermal injury to the airway
159
of level of exposure rather than reliably predicting clinical course 
or outcome.26 Normal pulse oximeters cannot distinguish between 
oxyhaemoglobin and carboxyhaemoglobin and should not be relied 
upon until carboxyhaemoglobin levels have been restored to the 
normal range.
The half- life of carboxyhaemoglobin is 320 minutes breathing 
room air at sea level. This is reduced to 80 minutes with the adminis-
tration of 100% oxygen.27 Therefore, all suspected or confirmed cases 
of carbon monoxide poisoning should have high- flow (humidified) 
oxygen via a tight- fitting non- rebreathing mask. Tracheal intubation 
is required in those with thermal damage to the upper airway or in 
those unable to maintain their own airway safely.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been used to treat carbon mon-
oxide poisoning and may result in even faster displacement of 
carbon monoxide from the blood. At three atmospheres of oxygen, 
the half- life of carboxyhaemoglobin is 23 minutes. If commenced 
>6 hours after exposure, however, it is likely to be ineffective.28 
Currently, six randomized control trials of hyperbaric oxygen 
therapy for carbon monoxide poisoning exist. A Cochrane review 
showed that four of these did not demonstrate an improved long- 
term benefit and there was no evidence of reduction in neurological 
sequelae.29 Nevertheless, hyperbaric oxygen may have a place in the 
management of severe carbon monoxide poisoning, and it should be 
considered for patients with a carboxyhaemoglobin level >40% (or 
20% in pregnant women).
Supportive therapy may be required to manage the sequelae of 
carbon monoxide poisoning, and long- term neuropsychiatric prob-
lems may occur in up to 30% of these patients.30
Hydrogen cyanide
Oral cyanide poisoning leads rapidly to coma, apnoea, cardiac dys-
function, and severe lactic acidosis and is associated with a high 
mixed venous oxygen and low arteriovenous oxygen content differ-
ence.31 There is controversy surrounding whether cyanide toxicity 
has any role in the morbidity and mortality of fire victims.32 Those 
opposing the cyanide poisoning theory of smoke inhalation allude 
to low cyanide levels obtained in simulated fires,33 the presence of 
cyanide as a physiological metabolite,34,35 its release by many organs 
after death,35 and the great variability in data on the levels causing 
death.36,37 Proponents highlight the presence of cyanide in smoke 
and in the blood of fire victims,38– 42 and that oral cyanide poisoning 
replicates the metabolic acidosis seen in some fire victims. In any 
event, cyanide poisoning would be synergistic with concurrent 
carbon monoxide poisoning and the hypoxic gas mixture breathed 
during a fire, which may explain why sublethal levels of carbon mon-
oxide and cyanide are found in some victims.
Blood levels can be measured, but unfortunately there is no rapid 
test available, such that it serves only to inform at postmortem and 
for research purposes. A severe metabolic acidosis, high venous 
oxygen saturation, and a narrow arteriovenous oxygen gradient may 
be signs of potential poisoning. Importantly, a burn patient with a 
metabolic acidosis should first be assumed to be under- fluid resus-
citated, to have carbon monoxide poisoning, or have unrecognized 
concomitant trauma, and these must be excluded before considering 
the possibility of cyanide poisoning.
Supportive therapy is the mainstay of treatment. ‘Antidotes’ are 
available, but they are not without their own, occasionally fatal, 
side effects. Administration of these agents in an inhalation injury 
should only be undertaken on the advice of the regional burns unit. 
Hydroxocobalamin is now being used in the UK in circumstances 
where initial resuscitation does not immediately correct metabolic 
imbalances.
Thermal injury to the airway
The thermal injury element of the smoke inhalation triad has the 
potential to develop into a ‘can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate’ event. It 
is caused by direct heat injury from hot air, gases, or vapours to the 
oropharynx and upper airway. Because the heat exchange capabil-
ities of the upper airway are so efficient, even super- heated air is 
rapidly cooled before reaching the lower respiratory tract, such that 
this is often referred to as injury above the vocal cords. The extent 
of thermal damage to the airway depends upon the heat capacity 
characteristics of the gas or vapour and the duration of exposure. 
Dry gases cause less damage than saturated vapours at the same tem-
perature. Burns below the glottis are extremely rare, and only occur 
if super- heated soot particles or steam are inhaled. Thermal injury 
produces immediate damage to the mucosa, causing oedema, ery-
thema, and ulceration. Oedema forms rapidly due to a combination 
of altered hydrostatic pressures, increased vascular permeability, 
and release of cytokines and free radicals.43– 50 Though oedema will 
form spontaneously, it may be accelerated by fluid resuscitation. 
Anecdotal evidence from un- intubated patients received at the 
Royal Darwin Hospital (Darwin, Australia) >24 hours following the 
Bali bombings of 2002, suggested that suboptimal (under- ) fluid re-
suscitation may have been advantageous in maintaining the airway 
patency in several patients with airway burns. Once more aggressive 
fluid resuscitation was implemented, there was an increase in associ-
ated airway oedema, and the requirement for airway intervention.51 
Nevertheless, intravenous fluids should not be withheld, as delayed 
fluid resuscitation has been shown to increase the rates of sepsis, 
renal failure, cardiac arrest, multiorgan failure, and death.52
Airway oedema may not be maximal until 24 hours but will usu-
ally manifest itself within 2– 6 hours of injury. Airway obstruction 
caused by intraoral and laryngeal oedema is often complicated by 
anatomical distortion of the face and neck. Oral oedema will also 
lead to a decreased ability to clear secretions and impaired protec-
tion from aspiration.
Signs of impending airway obstruction include erythema and 
oedema of the mucosa in the mouth, significant facial burns, car-
bonaceous sputum, singed nasal hairs, and an altered or hoarse 
voice. Stridor, dyspnoea, laboured breathing, tracheal tug, inter-
costal recession, paradoxical breathing pattern, or cyanosis are often 
preterminal indicators.
Potential airway obstruction must be continually considered. 
High- dose humidified oxygen should be administered in an envir-
onment where urgent tracheal intubation can be safely performed. 
Change in voice quality may be a sign of progressive oedema and 
should be closely monitored. These patients should have gentle 
examination of the oropharynx to exclude and assess erythema, oe-
dema, or blistering. Flexible nasendoscopy under topical local an-
aesthesia allows visualization of the posterior oropharynx and may 
need repeated assessment depending on the clinical status.
If there are major suspicions or signs of a direct thermal burn, the 
treatment of choice is early, semi- elective tracheal intubation. A ‘wait 
 
 
 
Burns and inhalational injury
160
and see’ approach is only justifiable in those where a true airway burn 
is believed to be unlikely. This is particularly important in patients 
being transferred to regional burns centres— safe, planned tracheal 
intubation is preferable prior to transfer if there are any concerns at 
all regarding the safety of a patient’s airway.
Tracheal intubation
A large- diameter uncut tracheal tube should be inserted to secure 
the airway, facilitate airway toileting, and optimize management of 
secretions. Where possible, the patient should be allowed a few mo-
ments with family members prior to this intervention as the gravity 
of the situation should not be underestimated.
Videolaryngoscopy is recommended when undertaking antici-
pated difficult airway management as it allows superior visualiza-
tion of the supraglottic and glottic structures, for both the operator 
and the supporting team. It also permits improved documentation 
of airway damage and images taken at the time of tracheal intub-
ation may well form part of a patient’s notes routinely soon. Awake 
fibreoptic tracheal intubation must always be considered in these 
situations, although un- swallowed secretions, oedema, and anatom-
ical distortion can make any chosen technique challenging. In such 
cases, a nasotracheal tube may sometimes be necessitated.
Prognosis of airway burns
Airway oedema, though maximal at 24 hours, will usually take 3– 
5 days to resolve. During this time, the tracheal tube should be left 
in situ. Tracheal extubation should only be considered when the 
patient’s vital signs and ventilation are stable and satisfactory and after 
the airway has been evaluated, and an adequate leak is demonstrable 
around the tracheal tube.53 Again, videolaryngoscopy is particularly 
useful for visualizing the glottis and supraglottic structures and can be 
utilized for serial assessments to inform tracheal extubation planning.
Smoke injury to the lungs
Inhalation of particulate smoke beyond the vocal cords comprises 
the third element of the inhalation injury complex, also referred to 
as injury below the cords.
The carbonaceous material present in the smoke particles is not 
thought to be directly responsible for the damage but rather serves 
as a carrier for other agents.54 The exact nature of the associated 
toxic products depends upon the materials incinerated. Common 
materials such as cotton and polyvinyl chloride produce multiple 
toxic compounds,55,56 which can cause redox reactions, chemical 
tracheobronchiolitis, and local or systemic cytokine release, resulting 
in oedematous tracheobronchial mucosa, de-epithelialization, shed-
ding of the epithelial lining, and formation of pseudomembranous 
casts (Fig. 14.3).57 These casts are composed of mucous, cellular 
debris, fibrinous exudates, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and 
clumps of bacteria. In these circumstances, pulmonary compliance 
is markedly decreased58 and surfactant is inactivated, causing micro- 
atelectasis and ventilation– perfusion inequality.
Even though pathological changes occur almost immediately fol-
lowing inhalation of smoke, hypoxia, rales, rhonchi, and wheeze are 
seldom present on admission. Chest radiographs are almost always un-
remarkable on day 1, although two- thirds of patients develop evidence 
of diffuse or focal infiltrates, or pulmonary oedema by days 5– 10.59
Diagnosis is based upon clinical suspicion, and confirmed pre-
dominantly by bronchoscopic findings of soot (Fig. 14.4), mucosal 
necrosis, airway oedema, and inflammation.60,61 Xenon scanning 
can be used to evaluate true parenchymal damage not identified on 
bronchoscopy.62
Supportive therapy including humidified oxygen and nebulizers 
are the mainstay of treatment. Chest physiotherapy should be in-
stigated early. Despite minimal trial evidence, pharmacological 
reasoning exists to support the use of nebulizers. Most centres use 
salbutamol and either heparin, N- acetylcysteine, or sodium bicar-
bonate.63 Salbutamol relieves the bronchospasm resulting from 
chemical bronchitis, especially in those with pre- existing reactive 
airways disease although its role in inhalational injury is not well 
established, with two large randomized controlled trials showing no 
benefit.64,65 Heparin breaks down fibrin, a major component of the 
cast- like plugs that can obstruct the respiratory bronchioles. Evidence 
for its use in burns is largely based upon animal models of smoke 
inhalation.66 One systematic review demonstrated that inhaled anti-
coagulants have a positive effect on survival.67 N- acetylcysteine is a 
Fig. 14.3 Pathology specimen, showing the larynx, trachea, bronchi, 
and lungs, from a patient who suffered moderate smoke inhalational 
injury. There was injury above and below the vocal cords, with 
soot deposition within the trachea and bronchi. Diffuse pulmonary 
parenchymal hyperaemia and haemorrhagic changes are visible, as well 
as cast deposition (particularly in the right main bronchus).
Courtesy of Dr Ali Diba, Consultant Anaesthetist, Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead.
 
 
 
Other considerations in patients with airway burns 
161
mucolytic and free radical scavenger. Unfortunately, it is also po-
tentially an irritant to the respiratory tract and may cause broncho-
spasm. Sodium bicarbonate is also mucolytic but has the additional 
property that it may buffer some of the toxic compounds within the 
smoke, decreasing the inflammatory cascade produced by the redox 
reactions.
Chemical burns
Chemical burns most commonly affect the face and limb extremities 
and can result from domestic/ commercial acids, bleach, ammonia, 
and chlorination products. Duration of hospital stay is often pro-
longed, with a delayed and protracted healing process. Severity of 
the burn depends on a variety of factors, including duration of ex-
posure to the chemical, concomitant inhalation or ingestion of the 
chemical, location of the insult, and the quantity, strength, and state 
of the chemical agent (gas/ liquid/ solid).
Symptoms can be wide ranging, including irritation, redness, 
burning, discolouration of skin, or numbness of the affected area. 
Facial swelling and loss of vision can also occur. Some patients may 
suffer coughing and dyspnoea (which may progress to airway ob-
struction), difficulty swallowing, headache, dizziness, seizures, car-
diac arrhythmias, and loss of consciousness.
Management includes removal of the offending chemical, irriga-
tion of the affected area, assessment of systemic and metabolic dis-
turbances, and thermoregulation. A prompt airway assessment is 
paramount and tracheal intubation may well be required.
Other considerations in patients with  
airway burns
Selective decontamination of the digestive tract should be con-
sidered in the critically ill patient to reduce hospital- acquired 
infections. Despite some favourable evidence, there remains consid-
erable apprehension surrounding this intervention.
The most frequent complication following an inhalational in-
jury is pneumonia. Mixed opinion exists in relation to the routine 
prescribing of prophylactic antimicrobial agents for inhalational 
injury.68 Evidence is lacking to support the use of prophylactic anti-
biotics on admission and there are concerns regarding the global 
issue of antibiotic resistance.69,70
Particulate smoke inhalation victims without any associated upper 
airway thermal burn and with a normal conscious level, do not need 
or benefit from immediate tracheal intubation. Non- invasive ven-
tilation options can be considered initially; however, a high level of 
suspicion for upper airway burn must be maintained. These patients 
should be closely monitored. Deterioration in serial blood gases and 
an increasing requirement for supplemental oxygen indicate the 
need for rapid, semi- elective, tracheal intubation (Box 14.1).
Though often unavoidable, tracheal intubation and prolonged 
mechanical ventilation have been identified as bad prognostic in-
dicators. There is a vast increase in pneumonia, acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, septicaemia, and organ failure in those mechan-
ically ventilated for >4 days.5 While this does not distinguish be-
tween cause and effect, it is well known that mechanical ventilation 
and ventilator- acquired pneumonia are associated with a higher 
mortality in all patients. Thus, if tracheal intubation can be avoided, 
it should be. The majority of patients with significant cutaneous 
burns complicating an inhalation injury will need a prolonged pe-
riod of mechanical ventilation with lung protective strategies, as 
described by the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network 
multicentre trial.71 Supplementary strategies such as high- frequency 
ventilation, administration of nitric oxide and lung surfactant, prone 
positioning, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation can also be 
considered.72 A ventilator care bundle approach, with 30° head- up 
nursing, and regular sedation holds should be employed. An early 
tracheostomy should also be considered as the benefits of improved 
Fig. 14.4 Bronchoscopy image of soot deposition within the 
bronchial tree.
Box 14.1 Important considerations when undertaking tracheal 
intubation in the burns patient
 • If in doubt, intubate the patient’s trachea. Early tracheal extubation is 
preferable to undertaking an emergency tracheal intubation in an un-
stable patient, with potentially a very difﬁcult airway.
 • Allow the patient time to speak with relatives ﬁrst, if possible.
 • A patient with stridor or other signs of respiratory distress should be 
considered a difﬁcult airway until proven otherwise.
 • Tracheal intubation should be performed quickly, by an appropriately 
trained anaesthetist, and with the full range of difﬁcult airway equip-
ment available.
 • A rapid sequence induction is usually indicated.
 • Suxamethonium can be used in the ﬁrst 24 hours after injury.
 • The tracheal tube should never be cut. This is especially important 
in facial burns, which can swell dramatically, almost obliterating the 
tracheal tube.
 • Always document the grade of tracheal intubation (or ease of 
videolaryngoscopy), any evidence of soot, oedema, or other airway 
abnormality. This will be particularly helpful to any receiving hospital 
in planning further interventions/ treatments.
 • Tracheal tubes are precious and should be ﬁrmly secured with either a 
tube tie (not impairing venous return) or dental wire.
 
 
Burns and inhalational injury
162
comfort, reduced sedation, improved communication, earlier mo-
bilization, and reduced airway resistance are well recognized.
Early tracheal extubation should always remain the main goal, but 
it must be noted that many of the airway burns patients also suffer 
from significant cutaneous burns. The treatment of the latter vastly 
complicates the treatment of the inhalation element. The patients 
often require multiple skin debridement and grafting procedures, and 
regular dressing changes over a prolonged period, making the timing 
of tracheal extubation particularly challenging. Prolonged mechanical 
ventilation, blood transfusion, and sepsis inevitably contribute to the 
increased mortality seen in these patients with increasing size of burn.
A stepwise approach to tracheal extubation is advisable. The 
Difficult Airway Society, UK, provides comprehensive extubation 
guidelines for both the ‘low- risk’ and ‘high- risk’ patient. Burns pa-
tients may have had prolonged periods of mechanical ventilation, 
associated with multiple respiratory insults, from infection, inflam-
mation, and/ or oedema. Patients should fulfil baseline criteria to be 
considered suitable for tracheal extubation or decannulation of their 
tracheostomy:
 • Resolution/ stabilization of underlying disease process.
 • Acceptable gas exchange.
 • Minimal ventilatory support.
 • Spontaneous respiration.
 • Effective cough/ gag reflex.
 • Haemodynamic stability.
 • Conscious and neurologically intact.
A thorough assessment of the predicted ease of oxygenating, bag 
mask ventilating, and reintubating the trachea must be undertaken. 
Traditionally, the ‘cuff leak test’ has provided some useful informa-
tion in this regard and a videolaryngoscope can also provide an easy 
means of assessing residual airway oedema.
Prognosis in the airway burns patient
Deaths are invariably due to multiorgan failure, preceded by sepsis.73 
Deaths show a bimodal distribution of early (within a week) and late 
(weeks to months). The early group of patients often die of rapid 
overwhelming sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome, 
and multiorgan failure. The late group of patients show a steadier 
decline in overall organ function, associated with several septic epi-
sodes interspersed with periods of clinical improvement. Survivors 
can be left with chronic problems secondary to their inhalation in-
jury. Chronic airway disease is relatively rare in adults,74,75 but chil-
dren may show decreased pulmonary function for up to 10 years 
after injury.76 Subglottic tracheal stenosis can occur in those who 
required prolonged tracheal intubation but can be reduced by min-
imizing cuff pressures of the tracheal or tracheostomy tubes.
Critical care therapy
Intensive care treatment of major burns patients is similar to ‘normal’ 
intensive care patients, but with a special emphasis on:
 • Early nutritional support.
 • Stress ulcer prophylaxis, until full enteral feeding is established.
 • Micronutrient support.
 • Thromboprophylaxis.
 • Mandatory patient isolation.
 • Increased awareness of infection risk.
 • Thermoregulation.
 • Early psychological input for patients and relatives.
 • Acute and chronic pain management.
Immediate major burn debridement
Early debridement of major burns is now standard practice. The 
aim is to debride and graft the burn wound as quickly and efficiently 
as possible, while maintaining a physiologically stable patient. 
Full- thickness excision of wounds is aimed at decreasing cytokine 
production, reducing wound infection, and improving overall mor-
bidity and mortality. There is reduced blood loss when compared 
with late debridement.77 Blood loss can be rapid and extensive, and 
must be specifically planned for. The wound is covered with auto-
graft, allograft (cadaveric skin), a synthetic skin substitute, or other 
dressing. Once healed, skin can be re- harvested from existing donor 
sites and applied to areas only temporarily dressed. Fine judgement 
is often required in optimizing the timing of operations and must be 
tailored to the individual patient.
General considerations in burns anaesthesia
The majority of burn patients have smaller burns that are not com-
plicated by inhalation, thermal, or lung smoke injury. Patients at the 
extremes of age suffer proportionally more burns than the general 
population, as do those with pre- existing comorbidities such as epi-
lepsy, alcohol or drug dependence, and/ or mental health problems. 
Some adults with burns (but more commonly children) are the vic-
tims of non- accidental injury.
The airway should be evaluated for predictors of difficult mask 
ventilation and tracheal intubation. Acute burns to the face will 
cause mask ventilation and, potentially, tracheal intubation to be 
more challenging. A chronic burn to the face and neck may result 
in limited mouth opening and reduced neck extension, making tra-
cheal intubation predictably more difficult. Re- evaluating the airway 
each time long- stay patients present for surgery is important, with 
some requiring awake tracheal intubation prior to induction of 
anaesthesia.
Good intravenous access is essential prior to undertaking burns 
debridement but the usual sites, including central access, are fre-
quently burned, or no longer viable having being obliterated during 
the resuscitation phase. Femoral access is often possible when other 
sites are not available.
Standard anaesthetic monitoring of burns patients can be difficult 
depending on the site and size of the burn. Certain adaptations may 
be required:
 • Electrocardiogram monitoring may require skin staples to be 
placed through the electrode, or via direct attachment to a staple 
or wire suture.
 • Pulse oximetry can normally be achieved using an ear probe, 
which can be applied to the cheek or even tongue if necessary.
 
 
 
 
Burns pharmacology
163
 • Non- invasive blood pressure cuffs can be difficult to place 
and an arterial line may be needed for relatively small surgical 
procedures.
 • Capnography often assumes greater importance in the face of the 
above- mentioned difficulties.
 • Temperature monitoring is very important.
 • Urinary catheters are required in all major cases, and a urometer 
is essential for continuous accurate fluid balance monitoring.
 • Central venous and arterial pressure monitoring are routine for 
all major burn excisions.
 • Cardiac output monitors are a useful adjunct in patients under-
going major debridement where blood loss can be difficult to cal-
culate accurately.
Blood loss can be a significant problem during burns surgery. 
Predicted blood loss can be very roughly estimated at 100 mL for 
every 1% TBSA excised. With improved surgical techniques and 
meticulous thermoregulation, blood transfusion is rare for minor 
burns debridement. Nevertheless, patients should be cross- matched 
for all but the smallest excisions and early consideration should be 
given to the need for platelets, fresh frozen plasma, or factor concen-
trate when significant bleeding does occur. Thromboelastometry is 
a useful viscoelastic method for haemostasis testing in whole blood. 
Despite appropriate planning and intraoperative patient manage-
ment, major blood loss and/ or coagulopathy can still be a problem 
in major burns debridement and may necessitate suspension of sur-
gery to enable physiological stability to be restored.
Heat loss occurs quickly due to a combination of radiation and 
evaporation from the wound, compounded by the skin prepar-
ation used prior to surgery, the exposure of large surface areas, 
the prolonged duration of operations, the loss of core– periphery 
homeostasis caused by anaesthetic agents, and the large volumes of 
intravenous fluids often required. Hypothermia further increases 
the high metabolic rate, surgical bleeding, and the risk of wound 
and pulmonary infection, and impairs cardiac function. Core tem-
perature should be monitored meticulously in all but the shortest 
operations, and all measures taken to maintain a ‘normal’ core 
temperature. The ambient theatre temperature should be main-
tained at >27°C, and body areas not being operated on should be 
covered. Forced air warming devices, warming mattresses, over-
head radiant heaters, and central venous heat exchangers should 
be used as appropriate. All intravenous fluids must be adminis-
tered via a fluid warmer. Prewarming of patients prior to surgery 
is recommended.
All major surgical debridement procedures should be treated in 
a high dependency or intensive care setting postoperatively. Good 
analgesia is essential, and feeding should be resumed as early as pos-
sible. For a summary of the key considerations in burns anaesthesia 
see Box 14.2.
Burns pharmacology
Pathophysiological changes following a burn injury alter a patient’s 
normal pharmacokinetics. Absorption, bioavailability, protein 
binding, volume of distribution, and drug clearance are all affected 
to a certain degree,78 dependent on the size and duration since the 
burn.79 Initially, hypovolaemia leads to a hypoperfusion state, and 
absorption of drugs given by any route other than intravenous is im-
paired and unpredictable.80 Albumin levels decrease, increasing free 
fraction of certain drugs.81 Fluid loss through the burn wound and 
generalized oedema accumulation can decrease plasma concentra-
tions of many drugs. Most anaesthetic agents are not protein bound 
and the clinical effect of most agents is largely unaltered.
After this initial phase, a hyperdynamic circulation develops, 
where there is increased blood flow to the kidneys and liver, and 
increased drug clearance.82 Such changes in pharmacokinetics have 
a wide patient- to- patient variability and may require adjustment in 
the dosing of various drugs (in particular, antimicrobials) tailored to 
the individual patient.83
Suxamethonium
Suxamethonium is safe to use in the first 24 hours after a major burn, 
after which it is contraindicated due to the risk of potentiating life- 
threatening hyperkalaemia, resulting from proliferation of extra- 
junctional acetylcholine receptors, which also causes resistance to 
non- depolarizing muscle relaxants.84 The magnitude of the effect 
is proportional to the total burns surface area. The greatest risk of 
hyperkalaemia is from about day 5 to 70 days after injury and may 
be further prolonged if there is delayed healing due to persistent in-
fection. It is unclear exactly how long suxamethonium should be 
avoided; however, from 9 months to up to 2 years have been quoted 
by some sources.
Non- depolarizing muscle relaxants
All non- depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents have been 
used successfully in burns patients. The effective dose for 50% of the 
population is increased proportionally to the size of the burn. If pro-
found muscle paralysis is required for surgery, quantitative neuro-
muscular monitoring is advocated. A modified ‘rapid sequence 
induction’ can be achieved with a dose of 1.5 mg/ kg of rocuronium.85
General anaesthetic agents
The choice of anaesthetic agents does not appear to influence the 
outcome from anaesthesia for burn surgery. Sevoflurane is the vola-
tile of choice for inhalational induction. The dose requirements 
are generally increased due to the hypermetabolism. Minimum al-
veolar concentration values are raised, and the duration of action is 
decreased.
Box 14.2 Key considerations in burns anaesthesia
 • The burns surgical case mix is not representative of the general 
population.
 • Intravenous access and physiological monitoring can be particularly 
challenging.
 • Difﬁculty in airway management should be anticipated in patients 
with facial and neck burns, with a clear airway strategy devised and 
communicated.
 • Blood loss during surgery can be signiﬁcant and must be planned for 
accordingly.
 • Hypothermia must be avoided, and strategies to minimize heat loss 
and actively warm patients should be employed.
 • Good postoperative care, in an appropriately staffed and equipped 
environment, is vital.
 • There is altered drug pharmacokinetics associated with large burns.
 
 
 
 
 
Burns and inhalational injury
164
Opioids
Opioids, given in conjunction with paracetamol and non- steroidal 
anti- inflammatory agents (where appropriate), are the mainstay of 
analgesia. Opioid tolerance can develop quickly and, together with 
the hypermetabolism associated with large burns, opioid require-
ments can be huge. Tramadol, with its additional effects on nor-
adrenaline and serotonin, can be a particularly useful adjunct. All 
critical care patients receiving regular opioids should also be admin-
istered regular prophylactic aperients.
Long- term considerations
Patients who have suffered major burns often endure years of cor-
rective surgery and are also just as likely as anyone else to require 
urgent or elective surgery. Special consideration of any potential 
difficult airway should be noted. Facial and neck burns can lead to 
reduced mouth opening and neck contractures. Specifically, assess-
ment of neck extension is vital, with a low threshold for awake intub-
ation. Vascular access may be a significant problem in some patients 
and may necessitate central venous access.
Conclusion
Orofacial burns patients, especially those with other large burns 
or associated inhalation injuries, require referral and transfer to a 
regional burns centre, where they can benefit from the specialist 
knowledge, skills, experience, and expertise provided by a vast team 
of multidisciplinary professionals. However, these patients must first 
rely upon the staff at the receiving hospital to assess and manage 
them effectively in a logical stepwise approach. Timely, systematic 
interventions are likely to be critical in those at risk of impending 
airway obstruction from thermal airway burns.
REFERENCES
 1. Herndon DN. Total Burn Care, 5th ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier 
Saunders; 2018.
 2. British Burn Association. Homepage. 2020. http:// www.bri tish 
burn asso ciat ion.co.uk
 3. Goldacre M, Duncan M, Cook- Mozaffari P, Davidson M, 
McGuiness H, Meddings D. Burns in England 1996 to 2004. 
Mortality trends. Unit of HealthCare Epidemiology, Oxford 
University, and South- East England Public Health Observatory. 
2006. https:// www.uhce.ox.ac.uk/ Atla ses/ Tre nds/ Engl and/ 
Burns_ Engl and.pdf
 4. American Burn Association. Burn incident fact sheet and national 
burn repository. 2008. http:// www.amerib urn.org/ reso urce s_ fa 
ctsh eet.php
 5. Smith DL, Cairns BA, Ramadan F, Dalston JS, Fakhry SM, 
Rutledge R, et al. Effect of inhalation injury, burn size, and age on 
mortality: a study of 1447 consecutive burn patients. J Trauma. 
1994;37(4):655– 659.
 6. Shirani KZ, Pruitt BA Jr, Mason AD Jr. The influence of 
inhalation injury and pneumonia on burn mortality. Ann Surg. 
1987;205(1):82– 87.
 7. Sellersk BJ, Davis BL, Larkin PW, Morris SE, Saffle JR. Early 
prediction of prolonged ventilator dependence in thermally 
injured patients. J Trauma. 1997;43(6):899– 903.
 8. Wachtel TL, Frank DH, Frank HA. Management of burns of the 
head and neck. Head Neck Surg. 1981;3(6):458– 474.
 9. Tredget EE, Shankowshy HA, Taerum TV, Moysa GL, Alton 
JD. The role of inhalation injury in burn trauma. A Canadian 
experience. Ann Surg. 1990;212(6):720– 727.
 10. Ryan CM, Schoenfeld DA, Thorpe WP, Sheridan RL, Cassem EH, 
Tompkins RG. Objective estimates of the probability of death 
from burn injuries. N Engl J Med. 1998;338(6):362– 366.
 11. Edelman DA, White MT, Tyburski JD, Wilson RF. Factors 
affecting prognosis of inhalation injury. J Burn Care Res. 
2006;27(6):848– 853.
 12. Miller SF, Bessey P, Lentz CW, Jeng JC, Schurr M, MD, Browning 
S, from the ABA NBR Committee, National Burn Repository 
2007 Report: A Synopsis of the 2007 Call for Data. J Burn Care 
Res. 2008;29(6):862– 870.
 13. Dougherty W, Waxman K. The complexities of managing 
severe burns with associated trauma. Surg Clin N Am. 
1996;76(4):923– 958.
 14. O’Callaghan DJP, Wyncoll D. What size tube doctor? Bigger may 
be better— at least for weaning. Crit Care. 2013;17(2):422.
 15. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Guidance on 
the use of ultrasound locating devices for placing central venous 
catheters. 2002. https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guida nce/ ta49/ resour 
ces/ guida nce- on- the- use- of- ult raso und- locat ing- devi ces- for- 
plac ing- cent ral- ven ous- cathet ers- 229458 5518 021
 16. Chappell S, Vilke GM, Chan TC, Harrigan RA, Ufberg JW. 
Peripheral venous cutdown. J Emerg Med. 2006;31(4):411– 416.
 17. De Caen A. Venous access in the critically ill child: when 
the peripheral intravenous fails. Paediatr Emerg Care. 
2007;23(6):422– 424.
 18. British Burn Association. National Burn Care Group referral 
guidance. 2012. https:// www.bri tish burn asso ciat ion.org/ natio 
nal- burn- care- refer ral- guida nce
 19. Cohen MA, Guzzardi LJ. Inhalation products of combustion. Ann 
Emerg Med. 1983;12(10):628– 632.
 20. Gill P, Martin RV. Smoke inhalation injury. BJA Education. 
2015;15(3):143– 148.
 21. Ernst A, Zibrak JD. Carbon monoxide poisoning. N Engl J Med. 
1998;339(22):1603– 1608.
 22. Raub JA, Mathieu- Nolf M, Hampson NB, Thom SR. Carbon 
monoxide poisoning— a public health perspective. Toxicology. 
2000;145(1):1– 14.
 23. Weaver LK. Carbon monoxide poisoning. Crit Care Clin. 
1999;15(2):297– 317.
 24. Ganong WF. Review of Medical Physiology. East Norwalk, 
CT: Appleton and Lange; 1995.
 25. Hardy KR, Thom SR. Pathophysiology and treatment of carbon 
monoxide poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1994;32(6):613– 629.
 26. Scheinkestel CD, Bailey M, Myles PS, Jones K, Cooper DJ, Millar 
IL, et al. Hyperbaric or normobaric oxygen for acute carbon 
monoxide poisoning: a randomised controlled clinical trial. Med 
J Aust. 1999;170(5):203– 210.
 27. Peterson JE, Stewart RD. Absorption and elimination of 
carbon monoxide in inactive young men. Arch Environ Health. 
1970;21(2):165– 171.
 28. Goulon M, Barios A, Rapin M. Carbon monoxide poisoning and 
acute anoxia due to breathing of hydrocarbons. Ann Med Interne 
(Paris). 1969;120(5):335– 349.
Conclusion
165
 29. Juurlink DN, Buckley NA, Stanbrook MB, Isbister GK, Bennett 
M, McGuigan MA. Hyperbaric oxygen for carbon monoxide 
poisoning. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;1(1):CD002041.
 30. Weaver LK, Hopkins RO, Howe S, Larson- Lohr V, Churchill 
S. Central nervous system oxygen toxicity during hyperbaric 
treatment of patients with carbon monoxide poisoning. Undersea 
Hyperb Med. 1996;23:215– 219.
 31. Klaassen CD. Casarett and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic Science of 
Poisons, 5th ed. New York: McGraw- Hill; 1996.
 32. Barillo DJ. Diagnosis and treatment of cyanide toxicity. J Burn 
Care Res. 2009;30(1):148– 151.
 33. Davies JWL. Toxic chemicals versus lung tissue— an 
aspect of inhalation injury revisited. J Burn Care Rehabil. 
1986;7(3):213– 222.
 34. Anderson RA, Harland WA. Fire deaths in the Glasgow area. III. 
The role of hydrogen cyanide. Med Sci Law. 1982;22(1):35– 40.
 35. Symington IS, Anderson RA, Thomson I, Oliver JS, Harland WA, 
Kerr JW. Cyanide exposure in fires. Lancet. 1978;2(8080):91– 92.
 36. Curry AS, Price DE, Rutter ER. The production of cyanide in post 
mortem material. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol. 1967;25(3):339– 344.
 37. Caravati EM, Litovitz TL. Pediatric cyanide intoxication 
and death from an acetonitrile- containing cosmetic. JAMA. 
1988;260(23):3470– 3472.
 38. Silverman SH, Purdue GF, Hunt JL, Bost RO. Cyanide toxicity in 
burned patients. J Trauma. 1988;28(2):171– 176.
 39. Clark CJ, Campbell D, Reid WH. Blood carboxyhaemoglobin and 
cyanide levels in fire survivors. Lancet. 1981;1(8234):1332– 1335.
 40. Whetherell HR. The occurrence of cyanide in the blood of fire 
victims. J Forensic Sci. 1966;11(2):167– 173.
 41. Barillo DJ, Goode R, Rush BF, Lin RL, Freda A, Anderson EJ. 
Lack of correlation between carboxyhemoglobin and cyanide in 
smoke inhalation injury. Curr Surg. 1986;43(5):421– 423.
 42. Barillo DJ, Rush BF, Goode R, Lin RL, Freda A, Anderson EJ. Is 
ethanol the unknown toxin in smoke inhalation injury? Am Surg. 
1986;52(12):641– 645.
 43. Lund T, Wiig H, Reed RK. Acute post burn edema: role of 
strongly negative interstitial fluid pressure. Am J Physiol. 
1988;255(5 Pt 2):H1069– H1074.
 44. Arturson G. Microvascular permeability to macromolecules after 
thermal injury. Acta Physiol Scand Suppl. 1979;2:111– 122.
 45. Lund T, Onarkeim H, Reed R. Pathogenesis of edema formation 
in burn injuries. World J Surg. 1992;16(1):2– 9.
 46. Lund T, Reed RK. Microvascular fluid exchange following 
thermal skin injury in the rat: changes in extravascular colloid 
osmotic pressure, albumin mass water content. Circ Shock. 
1986;20(2):91– 104.
 47. Matsuda T, Tanaka H, Reyes HM, Richter HM, Hanumadass 
MM, Shimazaki S, et al. Antioxidant therapy using high 
dose vitamin C: reduction of post resuscitation fluid volume 
requirements. World J Surg. 1995;19(2):287– 291.
 48. Yoshioka T, Monafo W, Ayvazian VH, Deeitz F, Flynn D. 
Cimetidine inhibits burn edema formation. Am J Surg. 
1978;136(6):C81– C85.
 49. Nwariaku FE, Sikes PJ, Lightfoot E, Mileski WJ, Baxter C. Effect 
of a bradykinin antagonist on the local inflammatory response 
following thermal injury. Burns. 1996;22(4):324– 327.
 50. Barrow R, Ranwiez R, Zhang X. Ibuprofen modulates tissue 
perfusion in partial thickness burns. Burns. 2000;26(4):341– 346.
 51. Palmer DJ, Stephens D, Fisher DA, Spain B, Read DJ, Notaras L. 
The Bali bombing: the Royal Darwin Hospital response. Med J 
Aust. 2003;179(7):358– 361.
 52. Barrow RE, Herndon DN. Early fluid resuscitation improves 
outcomes in severely burned children. Resuscitation. 
2000;45(2):91– 96.
 53. Sturgess DJ, Greenland KB, Senthuran S, Ajvadi FA, van Zundert 
A, Irwin MG. Tracheal extubation of the adult intensive care 
patient with a predicted difficult airway— a narrative review. 
Anaesthesia. 2017;72(2):248– 261.
 54. Zikria BA, Budd DC, Floch F, Ferrer JM. What is clinical smoke 
poisoning? Ann Surg. 1975;181(2):151– 156.
 55. Dowell AR, Kilburn KH, Pratt PC. Short- term exposure to 
nitrogen dioxide. Effects on pulmonary ultrastructure, compliance, 
and the surfactant system. Arch Intern Med. 1971;128(1):74– 80.
 56. Einhorn IN. Physiological and toxicological aspects of smoke 
produced during the combustion of polymeric materials. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1975;11:163– 189.
 57. Walker HL, McLeod CG, McManus WF. Experimental inhalation 
injury in the goat. J Trauma. 1981;21(11):962– 964.
 58. Nieman GF, Clark WR, Wax SD, Webb SR. The effect of 
smoke inhalation on pulmonary surfactant. Ann Surg. 
1980;191(2):171– 181.
 59. Putman CE, Loke J, Matthay RA, Ravin CE. Radiographic 
manifestations of acute smoke inhalation. Am J Roentgenol. 
1977;129(5):865– 870.
 60. Wanner A, Cutchavaree A. Early recognition of upper airway 
obstruction following smoke inhalation. Am Rev Respir Dis. 
1973;108(6):1421– 1423.
 61. Moylan JA, Adib K, Birnbaum M. Fibreoptic bronchoscopy 
following thermal injury. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 
1975;140(4):541– 543.
 62. Moylan JA, Wilmore DW, Moulton DE, Pruitt BA. Early 
diagnosis of inhalation injury using 133 xenon lung scan. Ann 
Surg. 1972;176(4):477– 484.
 63. Prior K, Nordmann G, Sim K, Mahoney P, Thomas R. 
Management of inhalational injuries in UK burns centers— a 
questionnaire survey. J Intens Care Soc. 2009;10(2):141– 144.
 64. Budinger GRS. β2- agonists in respiratory distress syndrome. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014;189(6):624– 625.
 65. Bassford CR, Thickett DR, Perkins GD. The rise and fall of β- 
agonists in the treatment of ARDS. Crit Care. 2012;16(2):208.
 66. Brown M, Desai M, Traber LD, Herndon DN, Traber DL. 
Dimethylsulfoxide with heparin in the treatment of smoke 
inhalation. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1988;9(1):22– 25.
 67. Miller AC, Elamin EM, Suffredini AF. Inhaled anticoagulation 
regimes for the treatment of smoke inhalation- associated 
acute lung injury: a systematic review. Crit Care Med. 
2014;42(2):413– 419.
 68. Francis JJ, Duncan EM, Prior ME, Maclennan GS, Dombrowski 
S, Bellingan GU, et al. Selective decontamination of the digestive 
tract in critically ill patients treated in intensive care units: a 
mixed- methods feasibility study (the SuDDICU study). Health 
Technol Assess. 2014;18(25):1– 170.
 69. Avni T, Levcovish A, Ad- El D, Leibovici L, Paul M. Prophylactic 
antibiotics for burns patients: systematic review and meta- 
analysis. BMJ. 2010;340:c241.
 70. Liodaki E, Kalousis K, Schopp BE, Mailander P, Stang F. 
Prophylactic antibiotic therapy after inhalational injury. Burns. 
2014;40(8):1476– 1480.
 71. The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. Ventilation 
with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal 
volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress 
syndrome. N Eng J Med. 2000;342(18):1301– 1308.
Burns and inhalational injury
166
 72. Asmussen S, Maybauer DM, Fraser JF, Jennings K, George S, 
Keiralla A, et al. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in burn 
and smoke inhalational injury. Burns. 2013;39(3):429– 435.
 73. Saffle, JR, Sullivan JJ, Tuohig GM, Larson CM. Multiple organ failure in 
patients with thermal injury. Crit Care Med. 1993;21(11):1673– 1683.
 74. Demling RH. Smoke inhalation injury. Postgrad Med. 
1987;82(1):63– 68.
 75. Cahalane M, Demling RH. Early respiratory abnormalities from 
smoke inhalation. JAMA. 1984;251(6):771– 773.
 76. Mlcak R, Desai MH, Robinson E, Herndon DN. Inhalation injury and 
lung function— a decade later. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2000;21(1):S156.
 77. Desai MH, Herndon DN, Broemeling L, Barrow RE, Nichols RJ, 
Rutan R. Early burn wound excision significantly reduces blood 
loss. Ann Surg. 1990;211(6):753– 762.
 78. Martyn JA. Clinical pharmacology and drug therapy in the 
burned patient. Anesthesiology. 1986;65(1):67– 75.
 79. Jaehde U, Sorgel F. Clinical pharmacokinetics in patients with 
burns. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1995;29(1):15– 28.
 80. Ziemniak JA, Watson WA, Saffle JR, Russo J Jr, Warden GD, 
Schentag JJ. Cimetidine kinetics during resuscitation from burn 
shock. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1984;36(2):228– 233.
 81. Martyn JA, Abernethy DR, Greenblatt DJ. Plasma protein 
binding of drugs after severe burn injury. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
1984;35(4):535– 539.
 82. Bonate PL. Pathophysiology and pharmacokinetics following 
burn injury. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1990;18(2):118– 130.
 83. Boucher BA, Hickerson WL, Kuhl DA, Bombassaro AM, Jaresko 
GS. Imipenem pharmacokinetics in patients with burns. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 1990;48(2):130– 137.
 84. Marathe PH, Dwersteg JF, Pavlin EG, Haschke RH, Heimbach 
DM, Slattery JT. Effect of thermal injury on the pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of atracurium in humans. Anesthesiology. 
1989;70(5):752– 755.
 85. Han TH, Martyn JAJ. Onset and effectiveness of rocuronium for 
rapid onset of paralysis in patients with major burns: priming or 
large bolus. Br J Anaesth. 2009;102(1):55– 60.
15   
 Malignancy
Michelle Gerstman, Orla J. Lacey, and Cyrus Kerawala
Introduction
Anaesthesia for oromaxillofacial and head and neck tumour sur-
gery requires particular attention to the location of the tumour and 
any distortion of airway structures, as well as any previous surgery 
and radiotherapy. In addition to the routine anaesthetic airway as-
sessment, the anaesthetist needs to assess the mobility and pliability 
of the tissues affected, review any recent radiological scans of the 
airway and nasendoscopy findings, and consider the feasibility of 
front of neck access.
There are >500,000 new cases of head and neck cancer worldwide 
per annum,1 with approximately 11,400 being diagnosed in the UK 
in 2014.2 This number has increased by nearly 100% over the last 
50 years and is expected to continue to grow. Oral cancer is more 
common in men and older patients. There is, however, an increasing 
number of younger patients with head and neck cancer largely due 
to human papillomavirus.
Squamous cell carcinoma accounts for >90% of head and neck 
cancers with the remaining 10% being made up of a number of rarer 
tumour types such as sarcoma. The most common locations are the 
tongue, oropharynx, and larynx. Staging in oromaxillofacial and 
head and neck tumours uses the TNM classification.
Anatomical distribution of malignancy
The common locations of head and neck cancers include (Fig. 15.1)3:
 • Oral cavity— lips, anterior tongue, floor of mouth, hard palate, and 
gingiva.
 • Nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses.
 • Pharynx— nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx.
 • Larynx— supraglottic, glottis, and subglottic.
 • Salivary glands.
Risk factors for malignancy
Smoking tobacco (cigarettes, cigars, and pipe) and smokeless 
tobacco (chewing tobacco and snuff) are risk factors for malig-
nancy, with a dose– response relationship. Alcohol is also a dose- 
dependent risk factor, and there is a synergistic effect between 
tobacco and alcohol. Viral infections, particularly human pap-
illomavirus, account for the increasing number of younger non- 
smokers and non- drinkers being diagnosed with oropharyngeal 
cancer. Epstein– Barr virus is also a risk factor for nasopharyngeal 
cancers. Other predisposing factors include immunodeficiency, 
betel nut chewing, occupational exposure, radiation, diet, and 
genetic factors.1
Types of surgical procedures
Oromaxillofacial and head and neck cancer patients will require an 
anaesthetic for a variety of different procedures (each of which pose 
their own unique challenges):
 • Biopsy and tissue diagnosis, including lymph node biopsy, where 
the primary tumour site may not be known.
 • Resection of tumour or locoregional recurrence, and recon-
structive surgery, possibly requiring a free flap.
 • Neck dissection, either as sole procedure or in combination with 
resection of a tumour.
 • Complications of radiotherapy, including osteoradionecrosis, 
tissue fibrosis, and tissue breakdown with fistulation or arterial 
‘blow out’.
 • Complications of chemotherapy, including osteonecrosis from 
bisphosphonates and tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
 • Complications of surgery, including voice restoration, vocal cord 
implants or cordotomy, stenoses, and revision of reconstructive 
surgery.
 • Airway emergencies, often with stridor and impending loss of 
airway.
 • Resection of glandular tissues, including thyroid, parathyroid, 
and salivary glands.
 • Tracheal resection.
 • Oral surgery for dental care.
Treatment options
Initially a tissue biopsy will be required, as well as cancer staging 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Malignancy
168
needle aspiration cytology or biopsy will be performed, often under 
ultrasound guidance.
Tissue diagnosis and staging not uncommonly necessitates sur-
gical examination and biopsies under general anaesthesia. Staging 
is generally completed with computed tomography, magnetic reson-
ance imaging, and/ or positron emission tomography scanning. As 
part of their workup, patients will have undergone outpatient fibre-
optic endoscopy, usually nasal.
Depending on the site of the tumour, early- stage disease may be 
amenable to treatment with simple resection, laser microsurgery, 
or radiotherapy alone. Larger tumours generally require more ex-
tensive surgery and possible tissue reconstruction. Selective neck 
dissection is often required. In more advanced disease, surgical 
debulking and chemoradiation may be palliative in nature, rather 
than curative. Management options should be discussed in a multi-
disciplinary team meeting. Anaesthetic input into the multidis-
ciplinary team meeting is very useful, especially in the context of 
significant comorbidities.
Most commonly, patients with oral cavity tumours will be treated 
primarily with surgery. Postoperative radiotherapy is employed if sub-
sequent pathology confirms close or positive margins, bony involve-
ment, or disease in more than one cervical node. Chemotherapy is 
not the mainstay of treatment for most oromaxillofacial or head and 
neck cancers but platinum- based drugs do offer survival benefit in 
the adjuvant setting for a well- defined group of patients, namely those 
<70 years of age with positive margins or extracapsular lymph node 
involvement. Primary radiotherapy is delivered at certain anatomical 
sites where organ preservation is key, for example, laryngeal disease.4
OROPHARYNX
FLOOR OF MOUTH
(Under the tongue)
GUM
PALATE
TONSIL
LIP
BASE OF 
TONGUE
OTHER AND UNSPECIFIED
PARTS OF TONGUE
HYPOPHARANX
PIRIFORM
OTHER, UNSPECIFIED
PARTS OF MOUTH
AND ILL-DEFINED LIP,
CAVITY AND PHARYNX
SINUS
6%
8%
4%
8%
6%
9%
20%
14%
5%
5%
13%
7%
18%
25%
8%
4%
6%
4%
3%
3%
12%
16%
M
F
Fig. 15.1 Anatomical site and incidence of oral cancers.
Source: Cancer Research UK, https:// www.cance rres earc huk.org/ hea lth- profe ssio nal/ can cer- sta tist ics- for- the- uk
Anaesthetic assessment
169
Anaesthetic assessment
Comorbidities and preoperative assessment
Although there is an increasing number of younger patients pre-
senting on oromaxillofacial and head and neck operating lists, the 
older patient with a history of smoking and alcohol consumption 
still remains the most typical. These patients are also more likely to 
have comorbidities, such as chronic airways disease and ischaemic 
heart disease. It may be necessary to organize investigations such as 
pulmonary function tests, echocardiography, and stress testing, as 
well as make referrals to respiratory and cardiology colleagues for 
their specialist input. These additional investigations and opinions 
must be balanced against the likely delay associated and the need for 
expedient surgery. Comorbidities will inevitably have some impact 
on the surgical techniques employed and may even channel discus-
sions towards non- surgical options. In patients with cancer of the 
hypopharynx, recurrent aspiration pneumonia must be considered.4 
Oromaxillofacial and head and neck cancer patients are also at risk 
of malnutrition from both dysphagia and lifestyle factors such as 
chronic alcohol intake.
Airway examination
When examining any patient, but particularly oromaxillofacial and 
head and neck cancer patients, the following questions should be 
considered, with full regard of the 2015 Difficult Airway Society 
(DAS) unanticipated difficult intubation guidelines5:
 1. Will face mask ventilation be difficult?
 2. Will placing a supraglottic airway device be difficult?
 3. Will direct laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation be difficult?
 4. Is anterior neck access feasible?
If face mask ventilation is not assured and/ or anterior neck access 
is not feasible, then the tenet of safe oxygenation under general an-
aesthesia is not assured. In these circumstances, an awake airway 
intervention should be considered.
Head and neck patients generally have higher rates of difficult 
tracheal intubation than the general population (7.4– 12.6%).6,7 Of 
all head and neck patients, the rate of difficult tracheal intubation 
is much higher in cancer populations than non- cancer populations 
(12.3– 26.3%).8,9 Thirty- nine per cent of the airway cases reported 
to the fourth National Audit Project (NAP4) had head and neck 
pathology.10
Risk factors for difficult tracheal intubation in head and neck pa-
tients include6,8:
 • Previous known difficult tracheal intubation.
 • Pathology associated with difficult tracheal intubation (particu-
larly a vocal cord mass).
 • Interincisor gap <5 cm.
 • Poor mandibular or tongue protrusion.
 • Short, thick neck.
 • Thyromental distance <6.5 cm.
 • Limited neck movement.
 • Mallampati score of III or IV.
Just as is the case in the general surgical population, each test on its 
own has limited use but it is the consideration of all measurements 
together which is particularly valuable.
It is important to also review all available radiological imaging 
and to liaise with the surgical team about any nasendoscopy findings 
from the outpatient clinic. Be mindful that these examinations do 
not specifically assess for any reduced head and neck tissue pliability.
Airway ultrasound is being used increasingly to help identify the 
difficult airway. It has been found to image structures as reliably as 
computed tomography scans.11 Inability to visualize the hyoid bone 
using sublingual ultrasound predicts difficult intubation with high 
sensitivity and specificity.12 The hyomental distance ratio (distance 
between the hyoid bone and the mentum in the neutral versus 
hyperextended position), as well as anterior neck thickness, have 
also been found to help predict difficult tracheal intubation.13
Radiotherapy
In some cases, the effects of radiotherapy can be very obvious, 
with clear signs of non- pliable neck tissues (sometimes described 
as ‘woody’), and a fixed immobile larynx. In the context of radio-
therapy, it must be remembered that these patients may be difficult 
to facemask ventilate, as well as intubate, due to the potential lack of 
mobility and fixed nature of laryngeal structures, including the epi-
glottis, base of tongue, and neck tissues.
Other patients, who have also undergone radiotherapy, may not 
have any classical signs of a predicted difficult tracheal intubation; 
nevertheless, their history of radiotherapy to the head and neck 
structures should be treated with a high index of suspicion. Even 
the placement of a supraglottic airway device may be unsuccessful 
with a fixed epiglottis. Many experienced anaesthetists have been 
caught out in these circumstances. In these particular patients, the 
key to predicting if the airway will be difficult is the quality of the 
neck structures. The following factors are likely to lead to difficult 
tracheal intubation:
 • Inability to protrude the tongue (fixed, immobile).
 • Firm, indurated tissues, ‘woody neck’.
 • Immobile larynx (identified by palpating the anterior neck), due 
to the anatomical connection of the epiglottis to the larynx. If the 
larynx is immobile, the epiglottis is also likely to have reduced 
mobility, such that it will be difficult to lift the epiglottis when 
performing direct laryngoscopy.
Tumour location
Distortion, invasion, and compression of tissues is common in 
airway malignancies and it is essential to review any available radio-
logical imaging. The specific location of the mass is very important. 
For example, up to 50% of patients with a vocal cord mass may 
subsequently have a difficult tracheal intubation.6 In obstructive 
lesions, it is important to quantify the degree of narrowing as well 
as the location— oral cavity, base of tongue, supraglottic, glottic, or 
infraglottic. Figs 15.2 and 15.3 demonstrate two cases which had 
relatively normal routine external airway examinations, but imaging 
revealed masses which necessitated awake interventions to secure 
their airway.
 
 
 
 
 
Malignancy
170
Previous surgery
Any surgical intervention can make airway management more 
complicated. Scarring and recent surgery can affect head and neck 
tissue mobility and pliability making laryngoscopy more difficult. 
Attention to the nature and position of the previous surgery is para-
mount. In addition, most patients with local recurrence are also 
likely to have undergone radiotherapy. In some cases, prior surgery 
may in fact result in airway management becoming simpler, such as 
those patients with a tracheostome following laryngectomy.
Fourth National Audit Project
Thirty- nine per cent of major airway management complications 
reported in NAP4 occurred in acute or chronic pathologies of the 
head, neck, or trachea. Seventy per cent of these cases occurred in 
patients with obstructive lesions within the airway. Issues with as-
sessment, planning, and communication within teams were identi-
fied in one- third of these cases. NAP4 demonstrated that the friable, 
necrotic, and oedematous nature of head and neck tumours can 
cause dramatic deterioration in the airway from just a single attempt 
at laryngoscopy (and even worse after multiple attempts). A large 
proportion of events were represented by patients who were kept 
spontaneously ventilated utilizing an inhalational induction tech-
nique. It was also noted that awake and asleep fibreoptic techniques 
are not infallible and a backup plan must be in place. Over half of 
cannula cricothyroidotomy attempts in NAP4 failed due to mis-
placement, inability to place, fracture, kinking, blockage, dislodge-
ment, and barotrauma. One- third of all events in NAP4 occurred 
during emergence or recovery.14
Difﬁcult Airway Society 2015 guidelines
In 2015, the DAS released an updated version of the adult difficult 
tracheal intubation guidelines.5 One of the major changes was the 
suggestion of using a scalpel– bougie– tube technique rather than 
needle cricothyroidotomy (with the caveat that needle techniques 
remain an option for the anaesthetist who is skilled with this tech-
nique). Other important recommendations included:
 • Limiting the number of interventions (change something with 
each attempt).
 • Ensuring adequate neuromuscular blockade.
 • Using second- generation supraglottic airway devices for airway 
rescue.
 • Avoidance of blind tracheal intubations.
 • Planning, education, and training.
Awake airway management techniques
The first decision to be made is whether an awake or asleep tech-
nique is required for airway management. Where there is any doubt 
about the ability to face mask ventilate or the feasibility of anterior 
neck access, an awake technique is often safer.
Remifentanil target- controlled infusions have increased patient 
tolerance and comfort of awake techniques. Safe and careful admin-
istration of remifentanil can provide adequate patient comfort while 
still ensuring airway patency, spontaneous ventilation, and an ability 
to follow commands. The effects may also potentially be reversed 
using naloxone. Dexmedetomidine is also gaining favour as an ef-
fective drug for facilitating awake techniques.
The more recent ‘Awake Tracheal Intubation’ guidelines, pub-
lished by DAS (2019), are a very useful resource and set out a safe 
approach to awake fibreoptic and videolaryngoscopic tracheal in-
tubation, including recommendations for oxygenation, sedation, 
topicalization, and performance.
Fig. 15.2 Melanoma deposit ﬁlling oropharynx (white arrow).
Fig. 15.3 Tumour of the epiglottis (white arrow).
 
 
 
 
 
Awake airway management techniques
171
Awake ﬂexible ﬁbreoptic tracheal intubation 
(+ / − awake airway wire placement)
Fibreoptic tracheal intubation
It is useful to think about fibreoptic intubation in two main cat-
egories. Firstly, the airway with normal oropharyngeal and laryngeal 
anatomy, but with abnormal tissue mobility (e.g. trismus, cervical 
spine pathology, and/ or radiotherapy). Fibreoptic views and pas-
sage through the laryngeal inlet are generally more straightforward. 
Secondly, the airway with abnormal oropharyngeal or laryngeal 
anatomy (e.g. due to tumour masses, previous surgery, and/ or radio-
therapy). In these cases, it is prudent to consider an awake technique 
and recognize that the passage of the fibreoptic scope through ab-
normal, bulky, and sometimes friable tissue will be more challenging.
Fibreoptic intubation using an airway wire
This technique is generally reserved for the anatomically abnormal 
or stenotic airway.
In some cases of severe airway narrowing, a microlaryngoscopy 
tube may be too large (a size 4.0 mm microlaryngoscopy tube has 
an external diameter of 5.6 mm). There are a number of poten-
tial options in this scenario. In cases of extreme narrowing, a jet 
ventilation catheter can be used. As the jet ventilation catheter is 
too narrow to pass over a fibreoptic scope, an airway wire such 
as that from the Cook® Staged Extubation Set (Cook Medical, 
Bloomington, IN, USA) (Figs 15.4 and 15.5) can be inserted via 
the working channel of the bronchoscope, and placed safely in the 
awake, spontaneously breathing, patient. This can then be used as a 
conduit for insertion of a larger tube. The Cook® staged reintubation 
catheter (14 French, 4.7 mm external diameter) can be inserted 
over the wire in most cases, but in the extremely narrowed airway, 
a 2 mm jet ventilation catheter can be passed over the airway wire. 
Oxygenation can then be achieved via jet ventilation, enabling the 
surgeons to perform airway dilatation procedures. Fig. 15.6 shows 
severe airway narrowing in a patient with osteochondrosarcoma, 
which necessitated such a technique. Awake fibreoptic tracheal in-
tubation was performed on several occasions to facilitate balloon 
dilatation procedures. Depending on the degree of narrowing at 
presentation, oxygenation was achieved via the bronchoscope it-
self or via a jet ventilation catheter. An airway wire was then left in 
place during the dilatations to ensure oxygenation could be main-
tained after the dilatation was completed. It was not possible to 
insert an airway transtracheal cannula due to the ossification of 
the airway tissues.
Awake videolaryngoscopy- assisted 
tracheal intubation
This technique has gained increasing popularity recently, due 
to most anaesthetists’ greater familiarity and comfort with 
videolaryngoscopy compared with flexible fibreoptic tech-
niques. When used in patients with a predicted difficult airway, 
videolaryngoscopy has been shown to result in fewer intubation 
failures,21 and the awake technique has been demonstrated safely 
Fig. 15.4 The wire from the Cook® Staged Extubation Set, passed via the 
working channel of a ﬂexible bronchoscope, to be used as a conduit for 
tracheal intubation.
Fig. 15.5 The wire from the Cook® Staged Extubation Set, with the 
reintubation catheter in place.
 
 
 
 
Malignancy
172
in patients with oropharyngeal cancer.22,23 A meta- analysis of 
awake videolaryngoscopy versus awake fibreoptic bronchoscopy 
demonstrated shorter intubation times for videolaryngoscopy, 
with a similar safety profile.24 Of course, awake videolaryngoscopy 
requires a degree of mouth opening, which may limit its use in 
some oromaxillofacial/ head and neck patients.
Awake transtracheal cannula
This technique may be preferred in cases where there is a glottic or 
supraglottic lesion, or where there is a high risk of airway bleeding 
from a tumour if a fibreoptic scope is passed. The cannula can be 
inserted electively under local anaesthetic (as opposed to an emer-
gency needle cricothyroidotomy). This allows the placement to occur 
in a calm, stress- free environment. Ultrasound has been found to 
be useful in aiding identification of the cricothyroid membrane and 
tracheal cartilage.13 If this technique is to be used, it is important to 
consider the location of the lesion (ultrasound can also aid with this) 
and insert the cannula distally, either via the cricothyroid membrane 
or between the upper tracheal rings. Once the cannula is placed, the 
position should be checked by both aspirating air and confirming the 
presence of carbon dioxide with capnography. It is also important to 
insert the transtracheal cannula all the way to the hilt at the skin to 
avoid kinking. Once the position has been confirmed, gentle passive 
oxygenation can be delivered via the transtracheal cannula (apnoeic 
oxygenation) or jet ventilation can be initiated while a definitive 
airway is being secured.
Awake tracheostomy
This may be useful in an acute airway emergency where a fibreoptic 
intubation is likely to be difficult either due to an obstructed or 
stenotic airway lesion or where there is already soiling or bleeding 
in the airway.
Oxygenation techniques
Adequate oxygenation of the patient is the priority at all times. 
Special consideration should be given to optimizing this aspect in 
all patients, but especially in those with abnormal airways (given the 
anticipated difficulties and predisposition to airway compromise 
and hypoxia), so that airway manoeuvres (awake or asleep), in-
duction of anaesthesia, and surgery can be undertaken in the safest 
manner possible. There have been significant advances in this area 
in recent times.
Preoxygenation
In its simplest form, preoxygenation can be undertaken via 
a traditional face mask, with the optional application of con-
tinuous positive airway pressure and pressure support. In the 
predicted difficult airway, adequate preoxygenation should also 
be combined with per- oxygenation (apnoeic oxygenation) where 
possible.
Transnasal high- ﬂow humidiﬁed oxygenation
This technique can be utilized prior to induction of anaesthesia, 
during awake airway management techniques, as well as post induc-
tion prior to definitive securing of the airway. In the awake, spon-
taneously ventilating patient, 20– 30 L/ min of humidified oxygen 
can be delivered (Optiflow™, Fisher & Paykel Healthcare, Auckland, 
New Zealand),15 and up to 70 L/ min following induction of an-
aesthesia (transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventilatory ex-
change, known as ‘THRIVE’). Apnoeic oxygenation has been used 
to increase the safe apnoea time in patients with difficult airways, 
prolonging the time to desaturation, allowing more time to safely es-
tablish a definitive airway.15 Crucially, the THRIVE technique relies 
on a patent airway being maintained, and may not be appropriate in 
circumstances where this is not possible due to collapse of the airway 
after induction of anaesthesia or secretions blocking an already nar-
rowed airway.16
Oxygenation via the ﬁbreoptic scope
Oxygenation can occur via the bronchoscope itself, by delivering 
oxygen through the working channel, and may be of benefit during 
an awake fibreoptic intubation.
Jet ventilation
Where high pressure ventilation is necessitated due to the require-
ment for a narrow diameter tube or during suspension laryngos-
copy, jet ventilation can be particularly useful. Jet ventilation causes 
air to be entrained, in addition to the tidal volume delivered by the 
high- pressure source. Expiration is then passive and requires a pa-
tent airway.17 Jet ventilation can be supraglottic, transglottic, or 
infraglottic:
 • Supraglottic jetting is achieved via suspension laryngoscopy. This 
avoids obstruction of the surgical view with a tube. It is also par-
ticularly useful in laser surgery as it removes the ‘fuel’ from the 
fire triad.
 • Transglottic jetting is generally undertaken via a 13- gauge 
transtracheal needle.
 • Infraglottic jetting is achieved via a jet ventilation catheter.
Fig. 15.6 Image demonstrating signiﬁcant airway narrowing in a patient 
with osteochondrosarcoma who presented for recurrent dilatation 
procedures.
Anaesthesia and perioperative care
173
Jet ventilation can be delivered at either a low frequency or high 
frequency. Low- frequency jet ventilation can be readily achieved 
using a hand- held device such as a Sanders injector (Manujet III™, 
VBM Medical, Sulz, Germany). This is usually reserved for short 
procedures and can also be used for rescue oxygenation via a crico-
thyroid needle puncture. In low- frequency jet ventilation, the in-
flation time and the ventilation rate are manually controlled by the 
operator. It is important to ensure that there is adequate time for 
expiration. Where a manual jet ventilator is used, the delivered 
fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) will be approximately 0.8– 0.9, 
due to entrainment of air. The driving pressure is also chosen by the 
operator.17 High- frequency jet ventilation requires an automated 
ventilator machine, for example, the Monsoon III Jet Ventilator 
(Acutronic®, Hirzel, Switzerland), which comes with advantageous 
safety features such as high- pressure alarms and a pause pressure 
facility. The pause pressure is typically set at 15 or 20 millibar such 
that the ventilator will not deliver the next jetted breath if pressures 
exceed this preset limit. High- frequency jet ventilation enables 
finer control of the ventilation parameters. The FiO2 can be ad-
justed, although it is generally prudent to leave this at 1.0. Typical 
settings may include an inspiratory time set at 35– 50%, a pause 
pressure set at 15– 20 millibar, and a ventilator frequency in the 
range of 100– 120 per minute. The driving pressure depends on the 
body dimensions of the patient as well as their pulmonary com-
pliance. Infraglottic jet ventilation will typically require a driving 
pressure of 0.6– 1.2 atmospheres and supraglottic jetting between 
1.5 and 2.5 atmospheres.
Carbon dioxide levels are difficult to accurately measure when 
jetting. The driving pressure has a larger impact on carbon dioxide 
than ventilator frequency. It is important to allow sufficient expira-
tory time (determined by both frequency and inspiratory time) for 
carbon dioxide to be expired and to avoid excessive intrinsic posi-
tive end- expiratory pressure. In practical terms, the driving pressure 
should be approximated to the body mass of the patient and then ad-
justed by observing diaphragm excursion. It is important to be able 
to visualize chest movement and to utilize the minimum driving 
pressure to achieve this.
Jet ventilation equipment should be thoroughly checked prior 
to use, along with the standard anaesthetic machine and ventilator, 
which may be required as back- up. Operators should be familiar 
with the jet ventilation equipment at their particular hospital (and 
the associated safety features), as well as the potential complications 
of jet ventilation and how to avoid them.
Airway devices
As in any case with a ‘shared airway’, it is important to select an ap-
propriate device that optimizes the surgical team’s view and access to 
the surgical field, while not compromising other important patient 
safety aspects. A good working relationship between anaesthetist 
and surgeon is essential to achieve this endpoint.
Tracheal tubes
 • Reinforced tracheal tubes are often useful as they are more easily 
secured away from the surgical field without kinking. A smaller 
diameter tube may be necessary as the reinforcement results in 
a larger external diameter for the same internal diameter. This 
is particularly relevant when performing an awake tracheal 
intubation.
 • A microlaryngoscopy tube may be required when the surgical 
field includes the laryngeal inlet. This smaller diameter tube im-
proves the surgical view, while still providing a seal with an adult 
trachea due to its relatively larger cuff size. Placing the cuff just 
below the cricoid enables better surgical views with improved 
subglottic visualization.
 • Laser- compatible tubes may be required for laser airway surgery, 
and these should be employed along with other standard strat-
egies to reduce the risk of an airway fire.
 • North- or South- facing Ring– Adair– Elwyn tracheal tubes are 
particularly useful in oromaxillofacial and head and neck cancer 
surgery, but may be more difficult to introduce over a fibreoptic 
scope due to their preformed nature.
Supraglottic airway devices
The laryngeal mask airway is less bulky and less prominent, there-
fore potentially more suited to oromaxillofacial and head and neck 
surgical access requirements than second- generation supraglottic 
airway devices. However, selection is also based on similar factors 
affecting the choice of device in any other surgical specialties, such 
as patient body mass index and duration of intended surgery. For 
minor, superficial oromaxillofacial or head and neck tumour sur-
gery, however, the reinforced or flexible laryngeal mask airway offers 
the added advantage of being able to be secured away from the sur-
gical field, optimizing surgical access, which can be particularly 
useful for some oral cavity and nasal procedures.
Laryngectomy and tracheostomy tubes
Tracheostomes (after laryngectomy) are generally easy to intubate 
due to the tract being surgically formed. A laryngectomy tube can 
be used for this purpose. Preoxygenation and ventilation can be 
achieved with a paediatric face mask or laryngeal mask airway (with 
cuff slightly inflated) placed over the stoma.
Conversely, if a tracheostomy needs to be reintubated, it is vital to 
determine how long the tracheostomy has been in place. Long- term 
tracheostomies are generally easy to reintubate; however, recently 
formed tracheostomies may be significantly more challenging since 
the tract may not have formed yet.
Anaesthesia and perioperative care
Induction of anaesthesia
Where an asleep induction of anaesthesia is planned, the choice 
must be made between an inhalational or intravenous induction 
technique. Historically, inhalational induction, with a spontan-
eously ventilating patient, was preferred over intravenous induc-
tion for patients with anticipated difficult airway management; 
however, recent evidence suggests this may not be preferable. 
Notably, Nouraei et al. compared flow– volume loops in patients 
with tracheolaryngeal stenosis while spontaneously ventilating 
prior to induction and after induction with muscle relaxation and 
positive pressure ventilation.18 They showed a decrease in inspira-
tory airway obstruction with positive pressure ventilation. When 
a patient is spontaneously ventilating, a negative intrathoracic 
Malignancy
174
pressure occurs during inspiration. This causes non- rigid com-
ponents of the trachea to collapse resulting in narrowing of the 
airway, thus worsening any obstruction. When a patient is face 
mask hand- ventilated or mechanically ventilated, the ventilation 
creates a positive intrathoracic pressure for inhalation, which helps 
to splint the airway open, potentially improving airway flow in a 
patient with an obstructed airway.18 Current recommendations 
for extrathoracic subglottic lesions therefore now recommend 
intravenous induction with muscle relaxation and positive pres-
sure ventilation.18 The DAS difficult tracheal intubation guidelines 
(2015) also promote the use of neuromuscular blocking agents in 
difficult tracheal intubation situations.5
Maintenance of anaesthesia
A total intravenous anaesthesia technique is generally preferred in 
‘shared airway’ cases in order to ensure continuous delivery of an-
aesthesia, where inhalational techniques may incur interruptions, 
particularly during unavoidable manipulation of the airway and/ or 
airway device. Retrospective analysis has also shown some positive 
associations between total intravenous anaesthesia and survival in 
cancer surgery,19,20 with further randomized controlled trials ex-
pected in this area.
Perioperative emergencies
In oromaxillofacial and head and neck malignancy surgery, signifi-
cant occult blood loss can occur, with blood pooling in the surgical 
drapes in particular, therefore constant vigilance is required.
Venous air embolism is a rare, and very serious complication, 
which these patients are at an increased risk of due to the standard 
reverse Trendelenburg (elevated head) positioning on the op-
erating table— it requires a high index of suspicion and rapid 
treatment.
Baroreceptor reflexes and parasympathetic surgical stimulation 
can cause profound bradycardic responses, including asystole. In 
most cases, these episodes will resolve within 20– 30 seconds fol-
lowing cessation of the surgical stimulus. Where repeated episodes 
occur with ongoing surgical stimuli in the same site, local anaes-
thesia can sometimes be used to attenuate the response.
Analgesia
Pain following minor oromaxillofacial malignancy surgery is usu-
ally mild to moderate intensity and can generally be controlled with 
simple analgesia, particularly when combined with generous peri-
operative local anaesthetic infiltration (some institutions also utilize 
locoregional blocks to reduce intra- and postoperative analgesic re-
quirements). Non- steroidal anti- inflammatory agents are generally 
avoided, unless the risk of bleeding is very low. Caution should be 
taken with excessive opioid administration in this patient cohort, 
given the prevalence of difficult airways and the potential for respira-
tory compromise (careful titration is recommended). Nevertheless, 
in most of the major tumour resection (and/ or reconstructive) cases, 
opioid patient- controlled analgesia is often required. In those pa-
tients who have undergone free flap surgery, it is frequently the 
donor site (particularly if bone is harvested) that is more painful 
than the reconstruction site. Some oromaxillofacial and head and 
neck cancers can be associated with pain syndromes, particularly 
from nerve/ muscle tumour infiltration (pain may sometimes be the 
presenting symptom) — these patients may have complex analgesic 
requirements and specialist acute and chronic pain team input is 
essential.
Tracheal extubation techniques
For all surgery, but particularly for oromaxillofacial and head and 
neck malignancy surgery, a clear tracheal extubation plan is essen-
tial, and should always include a reintubation strategy. Tracheal 
extubation is a high- risk phase of anaesthesia associated with sig-
nificant complications in the general population, never mind the 
oromaxillofacial cancer patient.
Consideration must be given to the optimum timing and best en-
vironment for tracheal extubation to be undertaken— at the end of 
the surgical procedure or in the critical care unit. After major com-
plex cancer resection and reconstruction, the anaesthesia and sur-
gical team must discuss the relative merits and risks of immediate 
postoperative emergence and tracheal extubation versus delayed 
extubation and ongoing sedation and ventilation. This discussion 
needs to take into consideration anaesthetic, patient, and surgical 
factors. Avoidance of further sedation/ anaesthesia may reduce vaso-
pressor requirements and potentially improve flap/ tissue perfusion. 
However, patients with an extensive history of cigarette smoking, al-
cohol consumption, and/ or recreational drug use may benefit from 
a slower more gradual emergence and delayed tracheal extubation. 
An airway wire can sometimes be used to facilitate an early tracheal 
extubation in patients where there is some concern over ease of 
reintubation. It can be placed prior to tracheal extubation and can 
be secured to the patient’s cheek following extubation (the wire is 
easily coiled, and can be taped conveniently to the side of the face). 
They are well tolerated by most patients and can be left in situ for sev-
eral hours (see manufacturer’s recommendations). The airway wire 
can facilitate reintubation of the trachea using the specially designed 
Cook® reintubation catheter, which can be used for immediate oxy-
genation, or can be used as a conduit over which a larger diameter 
reinforced tracheal tube can be passed. While an airway wire can 
represent part of the contingency plan in some cases, where there 
is particular concern regarding postoperative airway management 
(usually relating to the presence of significant airway oedema), an 
initial period of ongoing sedation and ventilation in the critical care 
unit may be the safest option (to allow the oedema to subside).
If the decision is made to keep the patient’s trachea intubated and 
to transfer the patient to the critical care unit, a management strategy 
for the potential loss of the existing secure airway must be formu-
lated, clearly documented, and communicated to the staff respon-
sible for their postoperative care. This must include answers to the 
same questions posed prior to anaesthesia and surgery— expected 
ease of bag mask ventilation, insertion of a supraglottic airway de-
vice, reintubation of the trachea, or anterior neck access. These elem-
ents may have changed significantly since the surgical intervention; 
therefore, each aspect must be considered carefully.
Following oromaxillofacial and head and neck cancer recon-
structive surgery, patients may or may not require a tracheostomy— 
a decision that should be jointly made by the anaesthesia and surgical 
teams. A tracheostomy may be necessary due to the specific location 
of the resection, the extent of the surgery, or patient factors such as 
underlying respiratory disease (or a combination of factors). Scoring 
systems have been developed specifically to help determine this 
Range of procedures
175
requirement, and include tumour location (such as the oropharynx), 
bilateral neck dissection, particularly if the internal jugular veins are 
sacrificed, and the need for reconstruction.35– 37
In patients not requiring a tracheostomy, but requiring ongoing 
sedation and ventilation, a tube exchange may be necessary at the 
end of surgery. Flexible reinforced tracheal tubes are often used 
intraoperatively, and these should ideally be exchanged for a trad-
itional non- reinforced tracheal tube. Many reinforced tubes lack a 
Murphy’s eye and are therefore at an increased risk of becoming ob-
structed by secretions. A reinforced tube is also potentially at risk 
of obstruction in the event of the patient biting down on it at tra-
cheal extubation/ under light sedation (due to the reinforcing wires 
becoming compressed). These advantages of changing the tracheal 
tube must be weighed up against the problems of undertaking a tube 
exchange immediately after surgery, potential loss of a secure airway, 
and risk of failure to reintubate. The decision to perform a tube ex-
change should be discussed with the surgical team, and they should 
remain in the operating theatre while the tube is being changed.
The DAS extubation guidelines provide a very good resource, 
comprising simple algorithms for aiding tracheal extubation, with 
consideration of the important factors involved in the decision- 
making process.38
Range of procedures
Laser surgery
The main concern with the use of lasers is patient safety, and the 
safety of staff members. Prevention of an airway fire is of paramount 
importance. A fire requires three essential components— a fuel 
(such as a tracheal tube), oxygen, and an ignition source (such as the 
laser). A laser- compatible tracheal tube should be selected (there are 
a number of laser- safe tracheal tube designs available, either com-
posed of laser- resistant material or requiring specialist foil wrapping 
25), or supraglottic jet ventilation can be employed to obviate the fuel 
component of the fire triad entirely. The FiO2 should be reduced to 
the minimum required for adequate oxygenation. Hospitals where 
laser surgery is undertaken should have laser surgery protocols in 
place, which will include the use of wavelength- specific laser pro-
tective eyewear, laser- in- use signs, and the appropriate equipment to 
extinguish a fire if it occurs (sterile water immediately available on 
the scrub trolley, and carbon dioxide fire extinguishers). In the event 
of an airway fire, any airway device should be removed immediately, 
delivery of oxygen ceased, and the fire extinguished with water, after 
which airway management should be re- established (laser safety is 
also discussed extensively in Chapter 9).
Selective neck dissection
In addition to resection of the primary tumour, sentinel lymph node 
biopsy and resection of lymph nodes may be required. Cervical 
lymph nodes are divided into six levels. The greater the number 
of levels needing to be explored/ removed, the longer the duration 
of the operation and the higher the risk of damage to underlying 
structures. Due to the proximity of large blood vessels, major haem-
orrhage may occur during neck dissection, in particular dissection 
at levels 2, 3, and 4, therefore large- bore intravenous access should 
always be placed. Breach of the internal jugular vein may also result 
in air embolism, and stimulation of local structures such as carotid 
bodies can cause profound bradycardia. The recurrent laryngeal 
nerve is also at risk of damage during a level 6 dissection, such that 
nerve monitoring is generally required.
Laryngectomy surgery
Tracheal intubation for patients requiring a laryngectomy can be 
challenging. The principles discussed in the anaesthesia assess-
ment section are crucial in this group of patients. Where tumour 
size allows, a reinforced tracheal tube is often used. The tracheal 
tube must be withdrawn when the trachea is resected from the 
larynx and the tracheostome is formed. A laryngectomy tube is 
then inserted via the tracheostome for the remainder of the surgery. 
Generally, a tracheostomy tube is then inserted postoperatively (for 
the first 24 hours) to allow for easier suctioning and prevention of 
aspiration of blood.26
Tracheal resection
Evaluation of the tumour generally occurs using fibreoptic or rigid 
laryngoscopy. A reinforced tracheal tube should then be inserted, 
with the aim of it sitting just above the carina. The larynx will need 
to be mobilized, the extent of which will depend on the size of the 
lesion. Postoperatively, the trachea may need to be kept intubated 
and the patient sedated with their neck in a flexed position for 2– 
3 days. When tracheal extubation is undertaken, a staged extubation 
strategy is often appropriate utilizing an exchange catheter or 
airway wire.
Robotic and endoscopic surgery
Robotic and endoscopic surgery is becoming more common across 
all surgical specialities, and oromaxillofacial surgery is no exception. 
One of the major advantages in this particular area is avoidance of 
the need to ‘split’ the mandible. However, the robot certainly adds an 
additional level of complexity to the ‘shared airway’. A tracheal tube 
is placed orally or nasally, depending on tumour site and surgical 
preference, and then a retractor is used to allow access for the robot 
arms, which precludes easy access to the airway and necessitates me-
ticulous securing of the tube. In the event of an airway emergency, 
the robot must un- dock before being able to be removed, there-
fore this process should be practised regularly by the relevant team 
members. A continuous infusion of a neuromuscular blocking agent 
may be used to help avoid any coughing or any other unintentional 
motor responses while the robot is in place.
Resection of rarer tumours
There are a number of rare tumours which can occur in the 
oromaxillofacial and head and neck region, each with their own 
specific issues. Sarcomas, for example, are associated with massive 
haemorrhage, and neuroendocrine tumours may cause marked 
intraoperative cardiovascular instability. Consequently, such tu-
mours should be managed in specialist centres.
Reconstructive surgery following resection
Reconstruction aims to restore appearance, form, and functions 
such as speech, mastication, swallowing, airway protection, nutri-
tion, and protection of local structures (e.g. carotid tree/ internal 
jugular vein).27,28 Plastic surgeons should follow the ‘reconstructive 
ladder’ in order to decide on the most appropriate reconstructive 
Malignancy
176
modality for a particular defect, with the aim of minimizing donor 
site morbidity. Options for surgical closure of a defect or wound post 
resection include27,28:
 • Primary closure (or delayed primary closure).
 • Skin graft (split thickness or full thickness).
 • Tissue expansion.
 • Local flap (e.g. nasolabial advancement flap).
 • Pedicled flap (e.g. pectoralis major flap).
 • Free flaps.
 • Prosthetic reconstruction (e.g. obturators used for maxillectomy 
defects).
Primary closure, skin grafts, and local flaps may be appropriate for 
smaller lesions. Skin grafts are at risk of forming contractures. Free 
flaps will give better functional outcomes for larger lesions; however, 
the duration of surgery is considerably longer. Prosthetic devices 
have the inconvenience of daily cleaning and periodic adjustment, 
but may be appropriate for patients with limited defects and signifi-
cant comorbidities, which have cause to limit the duration of anaes-
thesia and surgery. The pectoralis major pedicled flap was once the 
most commonly used flap, but it is now mainly reserved for patients 
whose comorbidities preclude free tissue transfer. Pedicle flap pro-
cedures tend to be shorter procedures as there is no need for micro-
vascular surgery; however, the functional/ cosmetic results may be 
inferior to a free flap reconstruction.
Free ﬂap reconstruction
Free flap procedures can be considered as a separate entity, given the 
complexities of the surgery and anaesthesia, and the intricacies of 
perioperative management. There are three main groups of free flap28:
 • Fasciocutaneous— skin, subcutaneous tissue, and supportive 
fascia (e.g. radial forearm, anterolateral thigh).
 • Myocutaneous— muscle, subcutaneous tissue, and skin (e.g. rectus 
abdominis, latissimus dorsi).
 • Osteocutaneous (e.g. fibular, deep circumflex iliac artery).
The choice of reconstructive technique depends on tumour- related 
factors (size and location of the defect), patient factors (fitness 
for long operations, anatomy of the planned flap donor site), and 
surgical factors (surgical experience and preference). The most 
commonly performed free flaps are radial, fibular, anterolateral 
thigh, and deep circumflex iliac artery,29,30 and the specifics of each 
are discussed in Table 15.1. Jejunal free flaps were more common 
previously, but have fallen out of favour due to their relatively high 
failure rate.
Bone flaps can either be non- vascularized or vascularized depend-
ing on the indication. Non- vascularized bone, such as from the rib or 
iliac crest, may be suitable for defects <5 cm but cannot be used when 
pre- or postoperative radiotherapy is required. Vascularized flaps are 
the gold standard for oncological reconstruction.27 Where a bone 
flap has been used, a supportive cast will generally be placed over the 
donor site postoperatively (fibular and radial).
Anaesthesia for free flap surgery is based on the general principles 
of avoidance of hypothermia, avoidance of vasoconstriction, avoid-
ance of acidosis, and a neutral fluid balance. In addition to standard 
anaesthetic monitoring, an arterial catheter should be inserted to 
enable meticulous blood pressure monitoring and control, as well 
as for regular blood gas sampling. Central venous access is advised 
where vasopressor use is expected. The proposed site of any arterial 
and venous cannulae should be discussed with the surgical team; 
for example, a radial forearm flap will commonly preclude cannula 
placement in the non- dominant arm. Central venous access is gen-
erally placed in the femoral vein. Cardiac output monitoring may 
also be of use in oromaxillofacial and head and neck flap surgery— 
oesophageal Doppler is rarely possible due to the proximity to the 
surgical field and the restricted access to adjust the probe place-
ment, therefore other haemodynamic monitoring systems such as 
LiDCOrapid™ (LiDCO, London, UK) are more commonly used.
There are three distinct phases to free flap surgery: the dissection 
stage/ elevation of the flap, often incorporating tourniquet control; 
the period of ischaemia following flap division; and the anastomosis 
of the blood vessels (+ / − nerves). During the dissection stage, con-
trolled hypotension may be requested to decrease blood loss and im-
prove the surgical field.31 This needs to be balanced against the risk 
of ischaemia in other organ systems, and, generally, it is therefore 
recommended to keep the blood pressure in the low normal range 
for the patient. A tourniquet will be used during the dissection stage 
for certain donor sites (radial, fibula). Tourniquet occlusion time 
should be limited to 90– 120 minutes, and where ongoing dissection 
is still required, the tourniquet should be released to allow reper-
fusion of the limb prior to reinflation. Extended tourniquet times 
Table 15.1 Speciﬁcs relating to common free ﬂap procedures
Type of free ﬂap
Indications and details of harvest
Advantages and disadvantages
Radial forearm (RFFF)
Used for soft tissue reconstructions, such as for intraoral 
lesions (thin, pliable skin). The long reliable pedicle 
allows anastomoses to be performed on the ipsilateral or 
contralateral neck
Bone stock is poor, and the harvest can be associated with morbidity 
(prophylactic plating of residual radial bone is advised)
Fibular (FFF)
Used for total/ subtotal mandibular reconstructions, where 
up to 25 cm of bone can be harvested
Preoperative imaging (such as computed tomography angiography) 
is necessary to determine if there is anatomically appropriate vascular 
supply (three- vessel run off)
Anterolateral thigh (ALT)
This is a reliable soft tissue ﬂap. Large paddles of skin can 
be harvested with little need for subsequent grafting of the 
donor site
The ﬂap can be precluded by body habitus (high body mass index). 
This ﬂap permits two teams to be operating simultaneously, and no 
preoperative ﬂap investigations are necessary
Deep circumﬂex iliac  
artery (DCIA)
This provides good- quality bone that can be subsequently 
implanted
Bone stock can be tailored to the recipient site. The ﬂap can be 
transferred with the internal oblique muscle to provide mucosal 
reconstruction
 
Conclusion
177
can result in significant hypertension and tachycardia (which can be 
impossible to ameliorate), and may also result in significant undesir-
able sequelae on tourniquet deflation as anaerobic metabolites enter 
the systemic circulation.
The use of vasopressors in flap surgery has been controver-
sial. Systemic blood pressure should be maintained at such a level 
that there is adequate perfusion pressure/ blood supply to the flap; 
however, opinions as to the best method of achieving this vary. 
Historically, there has been some concern regarding the use of 
vasopressors and the potential for peripheral vasoconstriction to 
negatively affect blood supply to the flap. An intensive care study 
investigating the effects of catecholamines on postoperative free flap 
blood flow found norepinephrine and dobutamine to increase flap 
blood flow compared with epinephrine and dopexamine which de-
creased flap flow (norepinephrine provided the greatest increase in 
flow).32
There are several potential causes of free flap failure. Although is-
chaemic time is kept to a minimum after reperfusion, an inflamma-
tory cascade does occur,33 resulting in a reduction in blood flow for 
the first 8– 12 hours. Flaps are particularly vulnerable to interstitial 
oedema, due to the lack of a lymphatic drainage system. The trans-
planted blood vessels do not have sympathetic innervation, but they 
are vulnerable to physical stimuli such as cold and physical hand-
ling, which may cause vasospasm. Nevertheless, flap failure is most 
commonly due to thrombus formation. Postoperative flap moni-
toring is essential, although the exact technique varies depending on 
surgeon preference and available equipment (implantable Doppler 
probes are commonly used).34
Conclusion
As part of the preoperative evaluation of patients undergoing sur-
gery for oromaxillofacial malignancy, it is essential to review re-
cent radiology and/ or views on nasendoscopy as part of the airway 
assessment. A high index of suspicion of potential airway issues 
should be retained in any patients who have had radiotherapy, even 
with an apparently normal airway examination. The airway man-
agement strategy must be discussed thoroughly and agreed by the 
anaesthetist and surgeon prior to the onset of the case. Planning for 
failure is essential. A clear strategy for rescue oxygenation must be in 
place, and where there is any doubt over the feasibility of bag mask 
ventilation or front of neck access, an awake airway management 
technique should be considered.
REFERENCES
 1. Stenson K. Epidemiology and risk factors in head and neck cancer. 
UpToDate. 2021. https:// www.uptod ate.com/ conte nts/ epide miol 
ogy- and- risk- fact ors- for- head- and- neck- can cer
 2. Cancer Research UK. Head and neck cancer statistics. 2021. 
https:// www.cance rres earc huk.org/ hea lth- profe ssio nal/ can cer- sta 
tist ics/ sta tist ics- by- can cer- type/ head- and- neck- canc ers/ incide 
nce- qdlbb seom M4Pk OxD.99
 3. Poon S. Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck 
cancer. UpToDate. 2021. http:// www.uptod ate.com/ conte nts/ overv 
iew- of- the- diagno sis- and- stag ing- of- head- and- neck- can cer
 4. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Cancer of the 
upper aerodigestive tract: assessment and management in people 
aged 16 and over. NICE guideline NG36. 2016. https:// www.nice.
org.uk/ guida nce/ ng36
 5. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath 
R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
 6. Karakus O, Kaya C, Ustun FE, Koksal E, Ustun YB. Predictive 
value of preoperative tests in estimating difficult intubation in 
patients who underwent direct laryngoscopy in ear, nose, and 
throat surgery. Rev Bras Anestesiol. 2015;65(2):85– 91.
 7. Wong P, Iqbal R, Light KP, Williams E, Hayward J. Head and neck 
surgery in a tertiary centre: predictors of difficult airway and 
anaesthetic management. Proc Singapore Healthc. 2015;25(1):1– 8.
 8. Arne J, Descoins P, Fusciardi J, Ingrand P, Ferrier B, Boudigues 
D. Preoperative assessment for difficult intubation in general and 
ENT surgery: predictive value of a clinical multivariate risk index. 
Br J Anaesth. 1998;80(2):140– 146.
 9. Bhatnagar S, Mishra S, Jha RR, Singhal AK. Predicting difficult 
laryngoscopy in oral cancer patients: a prospective study. Indian J 
Anaesth. 2005;49(5):413– 416.
 10. Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C. The NAP4 Report: Major 
Complications of Airway Management in the United Kingdom. 
London: Royal College of Anaesthetists; 2011. https:// www.niaa.
org.uk/ NAP4_ h ome
 11. Prasad A, Yu E, Wong DT, Karkhanis R, Gullane P, Chan VW. 
Comparison of sonography and computed tomography as 
imaging tools for assessment of airway structures. J Ultrasound 
Med. 2011;30(7):965– 972.
 12. Hui CM, Tsui BC. Sublingual ultrasound as an assessment 
method for predicting difficult intubation: a pilot study. 
Anaesthesia. 2014;69(4):314– 319.
 13. Osman A, Sum KM. Role of upper airway ultrasound in airway 
management. J Intensive Care. 2016;4:52.
 14. Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C; Fourth National Audit 
Project. Major complications of airway management in the 
UK: results of the Fourth National Audit Project of the Royal 
College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society. 
Part 1: anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 2011;106(5):617– 631.
 15. Patel A, Nouraei SA. Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation 
ventilatory exchange (THRIVE): a physiological method 
of increasing apnoea time in patients with difficult airways. 
Anaesthesia. 2015;70(3):323– 329.
 16. Rummens N, Ball DR. Failure to thrive. Anaesthesia. 
2015;70(6):752– 753.
 17. Evans E, Biro P, Bedforth N. Jet ventilation. Cont Educ Anaesth 
Crit Care Pain. 2007;7(1):2– 5.
 18. Nouraei SA, Giussani DA, Howard DJ, Sandhu GS, Ferguson C, 
Patel A. Physiological comparison of spontaneous and positive- 
pressure ventilation in laryngotracheal stenosis. Br J Anaesth. 
2008;101(3):419– 423.
 19. Wigmore TJ, Mohammed K, Jhanji S. Long- term survival 
for patients undergoing volatile versus IV anesthesia for 
cancer surgery: a retrospective analysis. Anesthesiology. 
2016;124(1):69– 79.
 20. Soltanizadeh S, Degett TH, Gögenur I. Outcomes of cancer 
surgery after inhalational and intravenous anesthesia: a 
systematic review. J Clin Anesth. 2017;42:19– 25.
 21. Lewis SR, Butler AR, Parker J, Cook TM, Schofield- Robinson 
OJ, Smith AF. Videolaryngoscopy versus direct laryngoscopy 
Malignancy
178
for adult patients requiring tracheal intubation: a Cochrane 
Systematic Review. Br J Anaesth. 2017;119(3):369– 383.
 22. Mahran EA, Hassan ME. Comparative randomised study of 
GlideScope. Indian J Anaesth. 2016;60(12):936– 938.
 23. Gaszyński T. The use of the C- MAC videolaryngoscope for 
awake intubation in patients with a predicted extremely difficult 
airway: case series. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2018;14:539– 542.
 24. Alhomary M, Ramadan E, Curran E, Walsh SR. 
Videolaryngoscopy vs. fibreoptic bronchoscopy for awake 
tracheal intubation: a systematic review and meta- analysis. 
Anaesthesia. 2018;73(9):1151– 1161.
 25. Kitching E. Lasers and surgery. BJA CEPD Rev. 
2003;8(5):143– 146.
 26. Stephens M, Montgomery J, Urquhart CS. Management of 
elective laryngectomy. BJA Educ. 2017;17(9):306– 311.
 27. Hanasono MM. Reconstructive surgery for head and neck cancer 
patients. Adv Med. 2014;2014:795483.
 28. Ng W. Reconstructive options in head and neck surgery. H K Med 
Diary. 2007;12(7):14– 16.
 29. Kerawala C, Newlands C. Oxford Specialist Handbooks in Oral 
and Maxillofacial Surgery, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; 2014.
 30. Chim H, Salgado CJ, Seselgyte R, Wei FC, Mardini S. Principles 
of head and neck reconstruction: an algorithm to guide flap 
selection. Semin Plast Surg. 2010;24(2):148– 154.
 31. Adams C, Charlton P. Anaesthesia for microvascular free tissue 
transfer. BJA CEPD Rev. 2003;3(2):33– 37.
 32. Eley KA, Young JD, Watt- Smith SR. Epinephrine, 
norepinephrine, dobutamine, and dopexamine effects on free flap 
skin blood flow. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;130(3):564– 570.
 33. Siemionow M, Arslan E. Ischemia/ reperfusion 
injury: a review in relation to free tissue transfers. Microsurgery. 
2004;24(6):468– 475.
 34. Carroll WR, Esclamado RM. Ischemia/ reperfusion injury in 
microvascular surgery. Head Neck. 2000;22(7):700– 713.
 35. Lee HJ, Kim JW, Choi SY, Kim CS, Kwon TG, Paeng JY. The 
evaluation of a scoring system in airway management after oral 
cancer surgery. Maxillofac Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015;37(1):19.
 36. Cameron M, Corner A, Diba A, Hankins M. Development of 
a tracheostomy scoring system to guide airway management 
after major head and neck surgery. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2009;38(8):846– 849.
 37. Coyle MJ, Shrimpton A, Perkins C, Fasanmade A, Godden D. 
First do no harm: should routine tracheostomy after oral and 
maxillofacial oncological operations be abandoned? Br J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 2012;50(8):732– 735.
 38. Difficult Airway Society Extubation Guidelines Group, Popat M, 
Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, Swampillai C, et al. Difficult Airway 
Society Guidelines for the management of tracheal extubation. 
Anaesthesia. 2012;67(3):318– 340.
16
Postoperative care and planning
Joshua H. Atkins, Christopher H. Rassekh, and Andrew Herlich
Introduction
With all surgical procedures, postoperative management starts with 
a carefully prepared set of postoperative measures. This should 
begin with establishing clear patient expectations for trajectory of 
recovery, the likelihood and severity of potential complications (in-
cluding oedema, oozing, nausea, haematoma, and ecchymosis), and 
the potential need for post- procedure mechanical ventilation or in-
tensive care unit (ICU) monitoring. There are specific guidelines and 
order sets for many of the oromaxillofacial surgical (OMFS) pro-
cedures undertaken. This chapter discusses the general principles 
underlying postoperative management of OMFS patients, as well 
as outlining procedure- specific strategies. It is crucial to acknow-
ledge the multidisciplinary nature of postoperative care and recog-
nize the importance of team education and communication for the 
successful implementation of protocols, process improvements, and 
other care measures.
Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
The focus of the postoperative period is rapid patient recovery with 
the goal to return to baseline function and activities of daily living 
at the earliest possible time. Current realities in healthcare are fo-
cused on decreasing cost, increasing access to care, and improving 
quality as measured through the dual lenses of the qualitative pa-
tient experience and quantifiable metrics such as frequency and cost 
of complications, functional outcome, and length of stay. This de-
fines the ‘patient- centred’ care model. Decreased length of stay in 
most cases pleases patients, families, and payers alike. It also frees 
up scarce inpatient resources for other patients. In the periopera-
tive realm, Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) is a focus 
of evidence- based quality improvement initiatives. ERAS pro-
grammes began with colorectal surgery and have rapidly expanded 
across most surgical specialities.1 Interventions to date have been 
broad, and the relative contribution of any single element or bundle 
of elements to the outcome improvement remains poorly charac-
terized. ERAS pathways focus heavily on multimodal analgesia, 
early mobilization, and optimization of volume status with goal- 
directed fluid resuscitation. Literature guidance is limited on how 
to approach ERAS for OMFS procedures. A recent meta- analysis 
of ERAS in head and neck free flap surgery included up to 17 po-
tential ERAS pathway interventions and described great variation 
in application across a variety of surgical procedures. Preoperative 
carbohydrate loading, pharmacological thromboprophylaxis, peri-
operative antibiotics in clean- contaminated procedures, postop-
erative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylaxis, goal- directed 
fluid management, opioid- sparing multimodal analgesia, frequent 
flap monitoring, early mobilization, and the minimization of pre-
operative fasting may all contribute in various ways.2 Overall, clin-
ical data generally support a decreased length of stay resulting from 
well- implemented ERAS protocols, but data on the long- term goals 
of improved functional outcomes are lacking.3 These would include 
earlier return to work or primary activities of daily living, higher 
satisfaction with care, and decreased postoperative cognitive dys-
function or impairment. ERAS is an area that catalyses the anaes-
thetist to assume the role of perioperative physician and coordinator 
with the goal of integrating multiple disciplines and potential care 
approaches into a unified pathway. Where possible, careful consid-
eration of new evidence for the development of procedure- specific 
and resource- appropriate ERAS protocols should be considered. 
The ERAS Society (https:// eras soci ety.org) and Evidence Based 
Perioperative Medicine (https:// ebpom.org) are two multidiscip-
linary organizations working to evaluate, distil, and apply evidence 
regarding perioperative optimization interventions and maintain 
updated resources on the subject.
A critical aspect of ERAS is the identification of anaemia and its 
optimization for surgery. Postoperative morbidity and mortality 
are increased in the face of intraoperative transfusion. A consensus 
statement published in 2017 made several important and practical 
suggestions with respect to anaemia and avoidance of transfusion. 
A best practice care plan of nine points is simply and practically 
identified.4 Other work reaffirmed the recommended approach to 
diagnosis, treatment, and its conclusions.5 Anaemia is defined as 
a haemoglobin level <130 g/ L and the aetiology should be investi-
gated. The mean corpuscular volume can be used to categorize the 
type of anaemia as either normocytic, microcytic, or megaloblastic 
anaemia. A normocytic anaemia indicates chronic disease or acute 
haemorrhage. A megaloblastic anaemia is likely related to vitamin 
B12 deficiency or folate deficiency (a rather less frequent cause of 
Postoperative care and planning
180
anaemia). However, the most common form of anaemia is a micro-
cytic anaemia and is generally due to iron deficiency (although 
other causes do exist). Iron deficiency may be specifically identified 
by measuring serum ferritin and transferrin levels. If an inflamma-
tory cause of this type of anaemia is suspected, a C- reactive protein 
level will assist in the diagnostic process. Investigation (and treat-
ment) should be initiated immediately upon the decision to operate, 
and elective surgery should be postponed until treatment with oral 
iron has corrected the problem (which may take up to 6– 8 weeks). 
Patients who are intolerant of oral iron, or in whom faster correc-
tion is warranted, may also receive intravenous iron. Correction of 
anaemia prior to urgent or emergency surgery may not be possible, 
such that intraoperative transfusion may be required. Transfusion 
should usually not take place unless there is a haemoglobin level of 
<70 g/ L. In the case of minimally invasive cranial base surgery, this 
surgical approach has reduced the requirement for blood transfu-
sion. However, the benefit of preoperative treatment of anaemia is 
less clear in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and 
neck— where overall survival has been shown to be worse in patients 
where anaemia was corrected preoperatively (including with blood 
transfusion).6
Postoperative levels of care and monitoring
The provision of appropriate levels of postoperative nursing care and 
monitoring are important considerations in postoperative planning. 
In general, it is preferable for patients to receive postoperative care on 
a ward dedicated to OMFS and head and neck patients. Experienced 
clinical staff are more likely to recognize specialty- specific compli-
cations early, are more comfortable with critical tasks such as trache-
ostomy care, drain management, and neurological and vascular flap 
checks, and are more likely to escalate care at the appropriate time. 
They may also be more familiar with and adherent to procedure- 
specific and emergency rescue protocols. Standard electronic order 
sets can be generated and modified to individual patients, while still 
adhering to generally agreed care pathways (Fig. 16.1). Procedure- 
or patient- specific alerts can also be incorporated into order sets as 
reminders to enter or adjust specific orders.
The decision on the most appropriate level of postoperative care 
facility (including ICU) should always be based on multidisciplinary 
discussion between the anaesthetist and surgical team.7 The avail-
ability of necessary skills and resources outside the ICU, including 
step- down units, must be considered. Failure to rescue (due to failure 
to recognize) can have an important contribution to morbidity, and 
may directly relate to the lack of familiarity of clinical staff in the 
post- procedure unit with the type, signs and symptoms, and tra-
jectory of potential complications— even when the patient is in the 
ICU; for example, a cardiothoracic ICU team may be less likely to 
identify incipient uncal herniation than an experienced neurosur-
gical ward team.
There is little evidence to support a default critical care pathway 
for major OMFS patients— a retrospective analysis revealed low 
utilization of critical care services by patients undergoing head and 
neck cancer surgery, and did not identify any causes of complica-
tions leading to the use of critical care services.8 Risk factors for 
complications include bilateral neck dissection, an Acute Physiology 
And Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) score >10, mas-
sive blood transfusion, early postoperative complications requiring 
further surgery under general anaesthesia, history of smoking, and 
perioperative antibiotic choice. In addition, obstructive sleep ap-
noea syndrome (OSAS) is a common comorbid condition in OMFS 
patients and requires careful planning. When OSAS is moderate to 
severe, surgery on the airway or mandibular advancement has been 
performed, or when use of significant postoperative opioid analgesia 
is planned, careful consideration should be given to enhanced re-
spiratory monitoring in a high- acuity setting.9
Anaesthetic considerations
Postoperative normothermia is important for wound healing, 
haemostasis, patient comfort, and to reduce metabolic demands.10 
This may be especially relevant after free- flap reconstruction and in 
patients with cardiopulmonary comorbidities. A post- anaesthesia 
care unit (PACU) target temperature of 36.0°C has been established 
as a quality standard in many countries. Active forced air warming 
and elevated ambient room temperature are the most effective post-
operative interventions.
Patients who present with oromaxillofacial and head and neck can-
cers may have a history of significant, regular alcohol consumption 
and smoking. Such patients are at substantial risk of acute alcohol 
withdrawal in the perioperative period. Preoperative assessment 
should include screening questions about alcohol use and nutri-
tional status. Preoperative alcohol detoxification should be seriously 
considered and be implemented whenever possible. Attention to 
this detail should be thought of as part of the overall prehabilitation 
and optimization of the patient. Perioperative benzodiazepine ad-
ministration should be considered along with monitoring for signs 
and symptoms of acute withdrawal. Acute nicotine withdrawal may 
also contribute to agitation and can be treated with transdermal 
patches. In either case, intraoperative use of dexmedetomidine can 
be helpful in attenuating acute withdrawal, as well as ameliorating 
perioperative agitation. Early removal of urinary catheters will also 
reduce agitation.
PONV is particularly important to avoid after OMFS and head 
and neck surgery as repeated Valsalva events can disrupt deli-
cate haemostasis and lead to life- threatening bleeding. Airway 
Fig. 16.1 Example of a standard order set menu that can be used for OMFS and head and neck procedures, which can be modiﬁed according to the 
individual patient.
 
 
 
 
Difﬁcult airway identiﬁcation
181
obstruction and pulmonary aspiration is a particular concern in 
patients with intermaxillary fixation or those who have undergone 
surgery in the oropharynx that may impair protective reflexes. 
Multimodal prophylaxis with a serotonin 5- HT3 antagonist with 
or without dexamethasone (if not contraindicated) should be rou-
tine. Total intravenous anaesthesia also reduces PONV. For higher- 
risk patients (except the elderly), a transdermal hyoscine patch 
can be added but will result in decreased saliva production. This 
may exacerbate pre- existing xerostomia and should be avoided 
in procedures such as sialendoscopy or those involving salivary 
duct reconstruction where salivary flow should be maintained. 
For intractable PONV (despite all of the above interventions), 
oral aprepitant, a neurokinin- 1 receptor antagonist, may also be 
considered. Refractory post- procedure PONV can be treated 
with haloperidol, prochlorperazine, promethazine, or low- dose 
propofol depending on the clinical circumstances, the patient’s 
age, and other comorbidities. Where possible, medications with 
sedative side effects should be avoided in the elderly and those with 
a history of cognitive impairment.
Oral hygiene
Oral hygiene requires meticulous attention in the postoperative 
period, and maintenance of oral hygiene in the postoperative pe-
riod is a hallmark of early recovery. Gentle irrigation with chlor-
hexidine will help reduce inflammation and possible local infection 
after maxillary or mandibular surgery. In the case of surgery beyond 
simple exodontia, brushing of the teeth should be gentle and is easily 
augmented with oral chlorhexidine 0.014% rinses (several times per 
day, for the first week). Regimens of benzethonium chloride and 
hydrogen peroxide have also been described.11
Tissue oedema
Irrespective of the type of surgery, postoperative oedema is expected 
to a lesser or greater extent. The degree of oedema is largely de-
pendent upon the duration of the procedure, the invasiveness of the 
procedure, and the care by which tissues have been handled. Factors 
that may be modified by the anaesthetist include volume and type 
of intravenous fluids administered during surgery (i.e. avoiding 
large volumes of crystalloid or hypotonic fluids), the incline of the 
operating table, as well as the timing of intravenous corticosteroid 
administration. However, postoperatively, the patient should be 
nursed in the semi- Fowler’s position (or more erect if tolerated). 
Cold packs, facial compression dressings, and care to avoid restric-
tion of venous drainage are additional factors in oedema reduction. 
Early ambulation is also important in that it promotes peripheral 
fluid recruitment and excretion.
Cognitive recovery
The American Society of Anesthesiologists launched a Brain Health 
Initiative (https:// www.asahq.org/ brainh ealt hini tiat ive) to address 
the growing recognition that a subset of patients have impaired 
cognition after surgery and anaesthesia. This can present as delirium 
and/ or memory and executive function problems. Although often 
self- limiting, in some patients this postoperative cognitive dysfunc-
tion progresses to long- term cognitive decline.12 The pathophysi-
ology of this process is poorly understood. Older patients and those 
with a history of dementia, alcohol abuse, and other neurological 
disorders (e.g. Parkinson’s disease) are at highest risk. At the very 
least, patients and their families should be counselled regarding this 
potential complication. Avoiding excessive depth of anaesthesia 
with processed electroencephalogram monitoring, use of total 
intravenous anaesthesia, and avoidance of known associative agents 
such as benzodiazepines may be important. Interdisciplinary com-
munication and shared decision- making as to appropriate interven-
tions for sedation, analgesia, and anxiolysis should be emphasized. 
Providers are urged to monitor the scientific literature for new re-
commendations and to consider development of multidisciplinary 
clinical pathways for patients at risk.
Difﬁcult airway identiﬁcation
Many health systems have adopted a difficult airway identification 
system. In most instances, the system involves placement of a diffi-
cult airway identity bracelet and an electronic alert in the medical 
record system on any admitted patient with a known difficult airway, 
provision of an algorithm or specialized rescue system with equip-
ment13 for airway emergencies, and a mechanism to communicate 
the successful initial airway approach that is readily accessible in an 
emergency. Most centres have a difficult airway trolley, and some 
have a difficult airway response team with surgical airway equip-
ment for management of any patient with a difficult airway status. 
Factors such as airway mass, friable airway tissue, intermaxillary 
fixation, previous radiation therapy to the head and neck, trismus, 
and risk of haematoma impacting the airway are all common in 
OMFS patients. In settings where high- risk airways are routine (e.g. 
transoral robotic surgery, TORS), clear protocols should be in place 
for emergency surgical airway, and teamwork drills should be regu-
larly conducted to refresh crisis management skills and protocol 
familiarity.
Consideration should be given to designating select OMFS pa-
tients as having difficult airways in the postoperative period. This 
is particularly true for procedures involving the jaw or airway. 
Extubation guidelines are just as important as intubation.13 Even if 
prior airway management at induction of anaesthesia was straight-
forward, postsurgical reintubation in the ward may be challenging 
or impossible due to oedema, bleeding, or surgery- related anatom-
ical changes. After some surgical procedures, tracheal extubation 
is delayed for airway protection in order to allow oedema to sub-
side. Occasionally, a temporary tracheostomy may be used. We 
recommend a system to identify ‘high- risk extubation’ patients, 
minimizing the risk of inadvertent early extubation, and facili-
tating appropriate planning and intervention should unplanned 
extubation occur. This might include a red ‘high- risk extubation’ 
sticker placed on the pilot balloon of the tracheal tube or more 
formal documentation of an extubation and reintubation plan and 
banner warning alerts in the medical records. Examples of such 
procedures would be when a patient’s trachea remains intubated 
 
 
 
 
Postoperative care and planning
182
after a transoral (robotic or laser) posterior hemiglossectomy or 
supraglottic laryngectomy.
Analgesia
Analgesic needs vary depending upon the procedure undertaken. 
The analgesic regimen must take into consideration the surgical 
site, patient expectations, medical history (including chronic use of 
opioids or chronic pain), sleep- disordered breathing, concomitant 
use of synergistic medications such as benzodiazepines, and liver 
and kidney disease that may influence drug bioavailability, metab-
olism, and excretion. Chronic postsurgical pain is a common, yet 
underdiagnosed syndrome, which may be lessened by appropriate 
preventive and multimodal analgesia in the immediate periopera-
tive period.14 The increase in chronic prescription opioid use and de-
pendence, particularly in the UK and North America, is an evolving 
challenge to optimal perioperative pain control. Patients with 
chronic pain and concurrent use of high- dose opioids may benefit 
from preoperative counselling and assessment by a pain specialist 
in conjunction with the surgeon and anaesthesia team. Unrealistic 
patient expectations may contribute significantly to patient dis-
satisfaction and may cause clinicians to be overly aggressive with 
analgesic dosing, thereby increasing the risks. The American Pain 
Society has published consensus guidelines for the management of 
surgical pain.15 Consideration may be given to tapering of opioid 
medications in the preoperative period if this is feasible. Otherwise, 
the usual dose of opioid medication should be maintained up to 
the beginning of surgery, including the doses on the day of the pro-
cedure. The involvement of the pain specialist in perioperative plan-
ning may facilitate patient- controlled analgesia dose titration and 
conversion of intravenous opioid medications to an oral analgesic 
regimen suited to outpatient use in preparation for discharge. In 
most situations, due to the risks of opioid- related respiratory de-
pression, a basal infusion on the patient- controlled analgesia is not 
recommended.
Multimodal analgesia is currently the standard approach for 
many surgical procedures, with the emphasis on patients’ recovery 
profile, reduced opioid use, and reduced opioid- related side ef-
fects.16 This is especially true in patients with a complex history of 
chronic pain, opioid use, morbid obesity, or OSAS for whom the 
risks of opioid- related complications are high (especially for out-
patient procedures and procedures involving the airway). Despite 
some supporting evidence, there continues to be contradictory data 
suggesting that multimodal approaches, at least in spinal surgery, 
have minimal benefit on analgesia specifically.17 A major concern in 
many OMFS procedures is postoperative bleeding and haematoma 
formation. The surgical site is often highly vascular, and small vol-
umes of bleeding can result in substantial morbidity— particularly 
if the haematoma causes airway compromise. For this reason, there 
is a reluctance to use non- steroidal anti- inflammatory medica-
tions in the immediate perioperative period, even though the ab-
solute risk of bleeding is small.18 COX- 2 selective non- steroidal 
anti- inflammatory drugs (coxibs) are a popular alternative as 
they have similar analgesic efficacy with no inhibition of platelet 
function. Paracetamol has a good safety profile in normal dosing 
and is available in oral, rectal, and intravenous formulations.19 
Paracetamol exerts its analgesic effects via multiple mechanisms 
and can be co- administered with coxibs.20,21 Oral bioavailability 
is high and the oral or nasogastric route is preferred if possible.22 
Perioperative infusions of adjuvant medications such as lidocaine, 
ketamine, and dexmedetomidine have been studied for a variety 
of surgical procedures. Dexmedetomidine can augment analgesia, 
facilitate maintenance of blood pressure at lower levels (to reduce 
haematoma formation and oedema), and reduce risk of withdrawal 
or agitation in alcohol- dependent patients. Protocols for the con-
tinuation of these medications in the PACU, ward, or ICU can be 
considered. The use of continuous infusions of lidocaine in the im-
mediate perioperative period for reduction in acute surgical pain 
is relatively recent and the evidence base is limited. Data from 
small studies continue to emerge, though significant concerns 
exist regarding its safety.23,24 Hypothesized mechanisms include 
direct blockade of voltage- gated sodium channels, modulation of 
wide- dynamic nociceptive neurons through glycine receptors, and 
modulation of proinflammatory signalling pathways.25,26 Opioid 
sparing, more rapid recovery of bowel function, decreased nausea 
and vomiting, and enhanced cognitive recovery have all been re-
ported with lidocaine infusions. However, there has been limited 
investigation in procedures specific to OMFS. A typical approach 
is a loading dose of 1.5– 2 mg/ kg and an infusion of 1– 2 mg/ kg/ hr 
(with a maximum dose based on ideal body weight). In some insti-
tutions, the infusion is continued at a modestly reduced dose for up 
to 48 hours postoperatively.26 Plasma levels can demonstrate wide 
ranges and the use of ideal body weight is therefore preferable to 
reduce risk.27 Caution should be exercised if significant infiltration 
of supplemental local anaesthesia by the surgeons is anticipated or 
in patients with low albumin levels, reduced ejection fraction, im-
paired liver function, intrinsic or pharmacological cardiac conduc-
tion disorders, and in extremes of age. Ketamine exerts analgesic 
effects through multiple mechanisms, but mainly via antagonist 
action at the glutamate N- methyl- d- aspartate (NMDA) receptor. 
Ketamine may contribute to preventive analgesia by modulating 
ascending nociceptive signalling pathways when given early. The 
dissociative side effects appear to be rare at the doses used for ad-
juvant anaesthesia and, in fact, the drug may have positive effects 
on mood. Most regimens entail a pre- emptive bolus followed by 
a continuous infusion that may be continued into the postopera-
tive period. Ketamine may be particularly useful in patients with a 
history of neuropathic pain or chronic opioid use. Gabapentin and 
pregabalin are neuromodulatory medications with slightly different 
side effect profiles which may also improve perioperative anal-
gesia.28,29 Both drugs are commonly used in the treatment of neuro-
pathic pain. Side effects include dizziness, sedation, blurred vision, 
and less commonly nausea or vomiting. These effects should be 
considered in patient selection for perioperative adjuvant use, par-
ticularly in vulnerable populations such as the elderly. Perioperative 
gabapentin has been studied in various head and neck- related sur-
gical procedures with a very modest reduction in 24- hour opioid 
use demonstrated on meta- analysis.30 Preoperative doses were 
large, ranging from 600 mg to 1200 mg in a single dose, that in some 
cases was continued into the postoperative period.
Regional anaesthesia through targeted nerve blocks and field 
block infiltration are important components of the multimodal post-
operative analgesic plan.31 Techniques include anterior, superior, 
and middle alveolar nerve blocks, greater palatine and nasopalatine 
nerve blocks, and local infiltration of the palate. Availability of 
Perioperative nutrition
183
ultrasound for targeted blocks is increasing the number and options 
of regional approaches for OMFS procedures.
Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome
OSAS is increasingly common in all surgical patients, though still 
frequently goes undiagnosed. However, of any surgical specialty, 
oromaxillofacial surgeons are likely to have a higher index of suspi-
cion, arising from a greater exposure and awareness of the disease. 
New surgical approaches for OSAS have evolved, including TORS, 
tongue base resection, palatopharyngoplasty, and tonsillectomy, as 
well as implantation of genioglossus nerve stimulators.32,33 This has 
resulted in an increasing number of patients with OSAS presenting 
for surgery. Growing evidence suggests that patients with undiag-
nosed OSAS are at the highest risk of perioperative complications.34 
A formal sleep study remains the gold standard for OSAS diag-
nosis. The STOP- BANG tool is a validated bedside screening tool 
that should be used preoperatively to assess most OMFS surgical 
patients.35A STOP- BANG score of ≥5 correlates with a substantial 
risk of the patient having moderate to severe OSAS. The threshold 
for specialist management (and nature of the postoperative care fa-
cility) should be adjusted to local resources.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is the mainstay in 
OSAS therapy. Anaesthesia and, especially, opioid medications 
can have a profound impact on OSAS in the perioperative period, 
yet perioperative use of CPAP may be restricted due to the nature 
of the OMFS procedure, for example, after sinusotomy, concern 
may exist about the potential for pneumocephalus with CPAP use. 
A survey of practising surgeons demonstrated wide variation in 
when to restart CPAP, with severity of OSAS and extent of surgery 
considered to be significant factors.36 Similarly, after TORS, concern 
about air tracking into the mediastinum generally favours avoid-
ance of CPAP immediately postoperatively. A perioperative plan 
for resumption of CPAP should therefore be formally discussed by 
the multidisciplinary team. For nasal/ sinus surgery, intraoperative 
endoscope- guided placement of a nasopharyngeal airway across 
the defect (sutured in place) can be considered. This allows posi-
tive pressure airway support as needed. In extreme cases, consid-
eration should be given to elective tracheostomy for perioperative 
management. International guidelines have attempted to address 
questions related to periprocedural monitoring and the appropri-
ateness of outpatient surgery in patients with OSAS.37,38 There is 
no universal consensus, and options for monitoring include con-
tinuous pulse oximetry, capnography, step- down or ICU level care, 
and non- invasive minute ventilation.38 The disadvantages of add-
itional monitoring— principally cost/ resource allocation and false- 
alarms/ alarm fatigue— should be weighed up against the benefits of 
closer surveillance of patients’ physiological status. The decision to 
use additional monitoring modalities must be tailored to local re-
sources, individual patients’ conditions, the nature of the surgery, 
the planned use of postoperative opioids, and the ability to use post- 
procedure CPAP. Wherever possible, CPAP should be reinitiated 
in the PACU. Discharge from the PACU is a similarly complicated 
issue, with limited evidence to guide decision- making. Patients with 
diagnosed or suspected (untreated) severe OSAS with poorly char-
acterized or poorly controlled comorbid conditions (hypertension, 
diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), and those 
where CPAP is precluded in the postoperative period, should be 
considered for in- hospital admission for all but the most minor of 
procedures (if general anaesthesia has been undertaken and opioids 
will be necessary for postoperative pain control). An extended stay 
in the PACU or in- hospital admission should be considered after 
planned ambulatory surgery if there have been repetitive oxygen de-
saturations or frequent apnoea events in the PACU. This may be par-
ticularly important in cases of sedation/ analgesia mismatch.
Venous thromboprophylaxis
Most moderate to major OMFS procedures are associated with a 
level of risk of venous thromboembolism that necessitates routine 
thromboprophylaxis.39 Subcutaneous low- molecular- weight heparin 
and sequential calf compression devices are standard measures, and 
should be continued until the patient is ambulatory. Sequential com-
pression devices should not be used in the presence of atherosclerosis 
of the lower extremities. For most procedures, aspirin can be resumed 
immediately postoperatively, although caution is required following 
airway surgery (when there has been no covering tracheostomy) due 
to concerns that even minor bleeding in an oedematous airway could 
precipitate an emergency.40,41 Most patients who have undergone free 
flap reconstructions are placed on aspirin, but they also often have a 
tracheostomy. Patients on long- term anticoagulants are increasingly 
common, presenting a challenge for perioperative management— 
particularly those with coronary artery disease and cardiac stents re-
quiring dual antiplatelet therapy. In general, there is a trend towards 
continuing patients on their anticoagulants and accepting the greater 
likelihood of bleeding, rather than risking life- threatening cardiac 
stent occlusion— though this depends on the type of stent, how long it 
has been in place, and the individual surgical risk (cardiac risk assess-
ment and management is discussed in detail in Chapter 1).42
Perioperative nutrition
Optimizing nutritional status is a critical element of preparation for 
surgery and postoperative recovery. Patients with oromaxillofacial 
and head and neck cancer often have preoperative malnutrition 
with associated hypoalbuminemia and anaemia. Preoperative diet-
ician consultation and prehabilitation should be considered, along 
with optimization of anaemia (as previously discussed in the ERAS 
section). Lesions may impair preoperative oral intake due to pain or 
dysphagia, and surgery may breach the oropharyngeal mucosa or im-
pair pharyngeal function and airway protective reflexes, increasing 
the risk of aspiration postoperatively. Enteral nutrition via a post- 
pyloric nasogastric tube (placed during surgery) is routinely used 
for patients undergoing laryngectomy and TORS. For patients who 
are unable to speak or swallow without aspiration risk, placement of 
a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) or jejunostomy (J- 
tube) is necessary for feeding. For patients expected to have delayed 
recovery of swallowing following major OMFS procedures, or for 
those who have endoscopy followed by chemoradiation, a PEG is 
usually the best option and can be done at the time of endoscopy 
or at the time of surgery (depending on the degree of nutritional 
impairment). Even in patients with a PEG, it is important to con-
tinue with some oral intake if possible, as the long- term success of 
 
 
 
Postoperative care and planning
184
oral dietary rehabilitation is improved in patients who maintain 
swallowing function despite requiring supplemental nutrition via a 
feeding tube. In some cases, a PEG tube is best placed preoperatively, 
particularly in those undergoing major resections with the risk of 
pharyngocutaneous fistula or aspiration, as they are unlikely to re-
commence oral intake for a significant period of time. Evaluation of 
speech and swallowing should be an early part of routine postopera-
tive care for any such procedures.
Neurological sequelae
Cranial nerve injuries following OMFS procedures can be associated 
with significant morbidity, but fortunately, are quite rare.43 Injuries to 
the cranial nerves II, III, VI, and VII have all been reported (both in 
isolation and in combination). The majority of injuries resolve, but 
permanent blindness can occur.44,45 Certain intraoperative moni-
toring modalities can be employed to tailor the anaesthetic technique, 
and to detect/ avoid excessive hyperextension or flexion positions— 
these include somatosensory evoked potentials, electromyography, 
and brainstem auditory evoked potentials. Electromyography moni-
toring can be used for cranial nerves that have a motor component, 
such as cranial nerves III– VII and IX– XII, and is most commonly 
used for monitoring laryngeal function during thyroid surgery and 
facial nerve function during parotid surgery.46 Brainstem auditory 
evoked potentials have been routinely used during skull base surgery. 
Such monitoring modalities are now incorporated in the American 
Academy of Otolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery recommenda-
tions.47 Unfortunately, neurological complications are not always ap-
parent in the immediate postoperative period, and may only become 
evident as the patient regains full consciousness several days later.48
Perioperative antimicrobials
The use of perioperative antibiotics for orthognathic surgery is quite 
common. The wounds are classified as clean, but contaminated, in 
that the oral mucosa has been transected, and the nasal mucosa has 
also been exposed during nasotracheal intubation. The choice of 
antibiotic and duration of therapy depends on the individual risk, 
but generally, antibiotics are discontinued after 24 hours. The pres-
ence of active infection, or the need for complex reconstruction 
involving bone grafts and implants, may elongate any prescribed 
course. Infected, contaminated wounds clearly require more ag-
gressive intravenous antibiotic therapy, which may entail not only 
Gram- positive but also anaerobic and Gram- negative cover. Wound 
cultures are helpful, and the input from a microbiology/ infectious 
disease specialist is advisable. Other influencing factors on anti-
biotic cover include patient comorbidities such as diabetes and im-
munosuppression, and the extent of any oromaxillofacial cancer.
Procedure- speciﬁc considerations
Tracheostomy
Tracheostomy is often performed in conjunction with other pro-
cedures, but sometimes in isolation. There are two major subsets 
of patients who undergo tracheostomy: those who have an 
oromaxillofacial or airway- specific problem, and those who have a 
systemic problem requiring a prolonged period of mechanical ven-
tilation and airway toilet. The guidelines vary slightly for these two 
groups. It takes approximately 3– 5 days for the tract between the skin 
and the tracheal mucosa to mature. Newly formed tracheostomies 
should be carefully secured, for example, by a pair of 2- 0 Prolene® su-
tures bilaterally, in addition to a tracheostomy tie or securing device, 
for at least 3 days. For patients with free flap reconstructions, trache-
ostomy ties are avoided so as not to compress blood vessels and only 
sutures are used. For high- risk patients, this period of close fixation 
may be extended significantly (though for most patients, 5 days is 
ample). In most settings, a cuffed tracheostomy tube is placed at the 
time of surgery to facilitate mechanical ventilation and secretion 
management in the immediate postoperative period. For most adult 
surgical patients, a size 6.0 mm internal diameter cuffed tracheos-
tomy tube is sufficient, with the cuff being left inflated for the first 24 
hours postoperatively. Thereafter, the cuff can be deflated if the pa-
tient is suitable (it is advisable to have suction ready for the first time 
the cuff is deflated as secretions often accumulate above the cuff). 
On postoperative day 3, if the tracheostomy site is not felt to be high 
risk, the cuffed tube can usually be exchanged for an uncuffed tube, 
and in some cases, downsized to a size 4.0 mm tracheostomy tube. 
Again, depending on the patient, a cap or a Passy– Muir valve may 
be placed. If the patient requires ongoing mechanical ventilation, the 
tracheostomy tube change is delayed until the cuff is no longer re-
quired. The tracheostomy formed is dependent on local preferences, 
but a Björk flap (an inverted U- flap of tracheal cartilage sutured 
to the skin) is useful in facilitating the reinsertion of the tracheos-
tomy tube (in event of dislodgement). A stay (rescue) suture is an 
alternative measure. For morbidly obese patients or patients with 
short necks, where access to the trachea is difficult, a Shiley™ XLT 
(Medtronic, Minneapolis, US) extended- length tracheostomy tube 
may be used and, in general, a longer period of time is allowed be-
fore tube changes. On changing the tracheostomy tube for the first 
time, the stoma site and tract should be assessed, and if it appears 
safe for future tube reinsertions to be done by staff other than the 
surgical team, the sutures can be removed, and the tracheostomy 
tube secured with soft Velcro™ ties. Where there is a free flap, a de-
cision can be made at this point whether to re- suture the tube or to 
use ties if the early risk of venous compression is considered to have 
passed. The relatively straightforward OMFS patient with a trache-
ostomy may be discharged from hospital at this time, if there are no 
other ongoing medical requirements (dependent on local policies 
and practices). Plans for home tracheostomy care and suction ap-
pliances must be in place prior to discharge, and additional support/ 
training may be needed. Most patients can eat after tracheostomy. 
However, while a tracheostomy can facilitate pulmonary toilet if 
there is aspiration, it can also cause dysphagia (and even aspiration) 
by one of several mechanisms (Box 16.1). A standard set of postop-
erative orders for tracheostomy management should be in place and 
can be modified according to the individual patient circumstances 
(Fig. 16.2).
During the early postoperative period, inadvertent removal of 
the tracheostomy tube may result in the inability to reidentify the 
tracheotomy site and subsequent loss of airway. Dislodgement may 
occur due to inadequate sedation in an agitated patient, during vig-
orous suctioning or coughing, or during patient turning (pressure 
 
 
 
 
Procedure-speciﬁc considerations
185
area management) by nursing staff, especially if the tracheostomy 
tube has only been advanced a short distance into the trachea due 
to excessive tissue between the skin and the trachea. As mentioned 
previously, a Björk flap can facilitate rescue of a displaced fresh 
tracheostomy. Similarly, in patients with a large neck circumference 
due to adipose tissue, surgical debulking of the pretracheal tissue 
near the tracheotomy site will reduce the distance from skin to tra-
chea. This may reduce both the risk of accidental dislodgement and 
facilitate surgical re- exploration if necessary. In extreme cases, mul-
tiple skin flaps may be required to form a fully epithelialized tract to 
ensure formation of a safe tracheostomy and facilitate tracheostomy 
replacement. Loss of airway is the most serious post- tracheostomy 
complication. Tracheostomy- related airway emergencies are not 
infrequent and have three main causes: tube dislodgement, mu-
cous plugging, and bleeding. These problems are more frequent 
in patients whose tracheostomies were performed for systemic 
conditions (rather than temporary surgical cover), and are more 
likely to have a worse outcome due to comorbid disease and lack 
of physiological reserve. The UK National Tracheostomy Safety 
Project (http:// www.trach eost omy.org.uk/ ) sets out a framework 
for improving quality and safety of tracheostomy management, 
which can be adapted to local resources and requirements.49 The 
programme focuses on education of providers, covering the funda-
mentals of tracheostomy care, and the assessment and management 
of tracheostomy emergencies (including a mobile reference app). It 
highlights the importance of clear communication of the details of 
the surgical procedure using bedside signs— including the model 
of tracheostomy tube, the location and type of stay sutures, and the 
surgical approach (site and type of tracheostomy), so that it is clearly 
accessible to all postoperative care providers. The accompanying 
emergency algorithm for the management of a displaced tracheos-
tomy (acute or chronic) should also be displayed, and staff should 
undergo frequent training using the algorithm. Similar signs and 
algorithms also exist for laryngectomies. The standardized bedside 
signs and algorithms can be modified to local institutions and prac-
tices (Figs 16.3 and 16.4). In the event of a suspected displaced or 
blocked tracheostomy, assessment of tracheostomy patency should 
occur as the first step, and always precede any attempt at positive 
pressure ventilation. Patency is most reliably assessed by checking 
for end- tidal carbon dioxide followed by passage of a suction cath-
eter or a fibreoptic scope through the lumen of the tube. Listening 
or feeling for air exchange through or around the tracheostomy 
(with the cuff up and down) may also assist in assessing adequacy 
of spontaneous ventilation. Attempted positive pressure ventilation 
through a dislodged tracheostomy will produce mediastinal air and 
may result in further patient deterioration.
Humidification of supplemental oxygen in the postoperative pe-
riod is crucial, to minimize mucous plugging— a frequent problem 
that can cause an airway emergency by obstructing the tube. Inability 
to pass a suction catheter can be indicative of dislodgement or a mu-
cous plug (though other causes do exist). In the presence of end- tidal 
carbon dioxide via the tracheostomy tube, partial obstruction is the 
more likely cause. To prevent mucus plugging, frequent tracheos-
tomy suctioning is advised— usually at least once every 6 hours, 
though shorter intervals may be required dependent on the extent of 
secretions. In addition, saline bullets or nebulizers can reduce drying 
of secretions and consolidation of plugs. In the event of an adverse 
respiratory event (e.g. oxygen desaturation) that does not respond 
to suctioning, an airway rapid response team (Box 16.2) should be 
immediately activated. Simple removal of the inner cannula of the 
tracheostomy will alleviate the blockage in many cases. However, 
sometimes the tracheostomy tube itself must be removed to clear 
secretions— flexible bronchoscopy can be particularly beneficial in 
this instance, in preventing creation of a false passage on reinsertion 
of the tracheostomy tube and loss of airway control. Re- intubation 
of the trachea from above should always be considered if there is dif-
ficulty reinserting the tracheostomy tube during an episode of plug-
ging or failure to ventilate via the tracheostomy. During attempts 
to restore patency and adequate oxygenation/ ventilation, oxygen 
should be delivered via the upper airway (facemask/ supraglottic 
airway) and via the tracheostomy stoma (unless a laryngectomy, 
rather than tracheostomy has been performed— laryngectomy pa-
tients are ‘neck- only breathers’).
Bleeding from a tracheostomy can also be an airway emergency— 
especially in the case of a tracheo- innominate artery fistula (TIF, or 
TIAF). Immediate management consists of inflating the tracheos-
tomy cuff or the cuff of a tracheal tube at the site in an attempt to 
tamponade the bleeding, followed by prompt surgical exploration. 
Patients at risk of TIF can sometimes be identified at the time 
of surgery or in the immediate postoperative period, evidenced 
by pulsation of the tube itself or within the tissues immediately 
surrounding the tube, suggesting the close proximity of a major 
artery. Surgical teams should indicate clearly if they think the 
Box 16.1 Causes of dysphagia related to tracheostomies
 • Tethering of the laryngeal rotation and elevation.
 • Inadequate subglottic pressure needed to expectorate.
 • Pain limiting patient swallowing and cough.
 • Compression of the oesophagus by the cuff.
 • Reduced vocal cord closure reﬂex.
 • Decreased sensation of pharynx and larynx.
 • Weakening of the laryngeal muscles.
Fig. 16.2 Example of a tracheostomy nursing order set. Default orders can be selected and modiﬁed as required.
Postoperative care and planning
186
tracheostomy tube is ‘low lying’, and generally the risk is avoided 
by formation of tracheostomies between the second and third tra-
cheal rings (occasionally, an even more superiorly placed site is 
chosen, accepting the higher risk of laryngeal complications). If a 
TIF is suspected following a controlled ‘sentinel’ bleed, a computed 
tomography angiogram can be obtained to confirm the diagnosis. 
If a TIF presents with massive bleeding, the airway rapid response 
team should be activated immediately as it may be necessary to 
intubate the trachea from above, while applying digital pressure 
to the artery via the tracheostomy site. This digital pressure must 
be maintained until exploration can be undertaken, and often ne-
cessitates the team member’s finger to be ‘prepped’ into the sur-
gical field. A cardiothoracic surgeon is likely to be required for the 
surgical management, so they must be notified immediately. The 
blood transfusion laboratory should also be notified, as part of a 
massive haemorrhage protocol.
An important, delayed, complication of tracheostomies is tracheal 
stenosis, which is associated with significant morbidity. Stenosis is 
secondary to chronic inflammation from the presence of the tube 
and cuff within the trachea. Overinflation of the cuff can also cause 
ischaemic injury, leading to subsequent stenosis or tracheomalacia. 
Constant movement of the tube, which commonly results from 
movement of the patient’s head and neck while they remain con-
nected to the ventilator via a breathing circuit, can also contribute 
to the inflammatory process. Consequently, the breathing circuit 
should be appropriately supported to minimize the movement of 
the tracheostomy tube within the trachea.
Transoral robotic surgery
TORS is a treatment utilized for oropharyngeal cancer and for 
CPAP- resistant OSAS in select patients.50,51 TORS resection is asso-
ciated with reduced morbidity, faster recovery, and the avoidance 
of PEG feeding. Post- TORS airway emergencies usually relate to 
bleeding or swelling. Patients with a previous history of difficult 
airway management/ difficult laryngeal exposure, prior laryngeal ra-
diation, and/ or significant resection of the epiglottis are routinely left 
intubated for 48– 72 hours after surgery, or undergo tracheostomy if 
especially high risk. Postoperative medical and nursing teams must 
be prepared for, and well- drilled in, the emergency management of 
the post- TORS bleed— which necessitates clear communication and 
rapid and appropriate escalation, in preparation for an emergency 
bedside surgical airway and immediate return to the operating the-
atre. Consequently, TORS should only be performed at institutions 
where the necessary airway and surgical expertise is immediately 
available. Patients must also be educated in the importance of re-
porting promptly to the closest emergency department in the event 
of a suspected airway issue or bleeding.
TORS is typically preceded by a neck dissection during which ar-
terial ‘feeders’ to the oropharynx can be ligated, and this may reduce 
the risk of postoperative bleeding. CPAP is generally not reinitiated 
in the OSAS patients for some time following TORS due to the po-
tential risk of pneumomediastinum if a pharyngo- cervical fistula 
is present— the first sign of which may be the presence of subcuta-
neous emphysema. The association between the timing of the neck 
dissection relative to the TORS procedure and fistula formation is 
Afﬁx Patient Label
HAND VISIBLY AND KEEP WITH PATIENT AT ALL TIMES
Performed on (date) ______________________________________________
Date to Remove Sutures: _________________
___________________________________________
Location/Function of Sutures:
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
Tracheostomy Changed:
         Date ___________ Tube Size __________
         Date ___________ Tube Size __________
Additional Information/Events:
Performed by/dept   ______________________________________________
Tracheostomy Type
Shiley
Tracheostomy Tube Size:
4
6
5
7
7.5
8
DXLT
PXLT
Other _________
Cuff
No Cuff
Tracheostomy Approach
Bjork Flap: 
Other:
EMERGENCY ALGORITHM - SEE OTHER SIDE
Other
Bivona
Portext
Other _________
Difﬁcult Intubation:
No
No
Yes
Yes
High Risk Trach:
CONSIDER AIRWAY RAPID RESPONSE FOR ALL AIRWAY EMERGENCIES: CALL 3333
OPEN/SURGICAL TRACHEOSTOMY
Fig. 16.3 Adapted Tracheostomy UK bedside signs used to convey critical information about the type and age of the tracheostomy, model and size of 
tube, and position of any sutures.
Procedure-speciﬁc considerations
187
unclear. Some surgical centres elect to perform a staged procedure, 
with the neck dissection preceding TORS by up to a week.50
Neck dissection
Expanding neck haematoma is a surgical emergency. Consequently, 
it is routine practice during neck dissection that at least one or 
two surgical drains are inserted— which should be emptied and 
recompressed. A common approach is to attach the drains to wall 
suction for the first 24 hours, after which bulb suction is usually 
sufficient. Haematoma formation is less likely in those who have 
undergone neck dissection surgery if drains are left in situ and 
are functional. Mild oozing is not unusual from any neck wound, 
but active haemorrhage is not! Drains can be passive (Penrose) 
or active (suction), with drainage output being easier to calculate 
Utilize when a tracheostomy patient has any concerns or symptoms (SOB, change in LOC, etc.)
*Star CPR *Call Code
*Consider Airway Rapid Response
No
No
*Suction trach prn
*Inﬂate cuff
*Reapply oxygen to face/trach
*If ventilated, maintain settings
* Call Airway Rapid Response: 3333
*DO NOT BAG VENTILATE VIA TRACH
* Deﬂate cuff
* Attempt FACE bag-mask ventilation
and reapply oxygen to trach
Can u pass a suction c at heter?
Breathing or symptoms NOT improving
*Bag ventilate via trach
*Call RRT *Consider Airway Rapid Response
Not breathing/airway not patent
Standard ORAL airway maneuvers
Cover the stoma (gauze/hand).
Use: Face bag-value-mask
Oral or nasal airway adjuncts
Supraglottic airway device (LMA)
Tracheostomy STOMA ventilation
Face mask and/or LMA applied to stoma
Attempt ORAL intubation
Prepare for difﬁcult intubation
ETT, advanced beyond stoma
Attempt intubation of STOMA
Small tracheostomy tube/6.0 cuffed ETT
Consider exchange catheter and ﬁberoptic
scope/Bougie/Airway exchange catheter
PRIMARY Emergency Oxygenation
** Airway Rapid Response Team/Specialty Provider **
First responders/frontline clinicians (i.e., RN, RT, MD, APP)
SECONDARY Emergency Oxygenation
Attempt bronchoscopy, if available
look, listen and feel for breathing at mouth and trach
Attempt suction catheter
Continue to apply OXYGEN to face/stoma and monitor EtCO2
REMOVE TRACHEOSTOMY TUBE
Yes
Patient is having difﬁculty
breathing or other symptoms
ASSESS TRACHEOSTOMY PATENCY
*Ventilated patient: skip to blue box and suction patient
*Look, listen and feel at the mouth and trach
*Deﬂate the cuff (if present) and remove speaking valve/cap
* Apply OXYGEN to BOTH the face and trach and conﬁrm O2 ﬂow
*Check inner cannula for occlusion, replace if occluded
*Assess/conﬁrm trach placement: EtCO2 or Colormetric
Yes
Does patient have a pulse?
TRACHEOSTOMY EMERGENCY ALGORITHM
Fig. 16.4 Emergency algorithm for management of a suspected blocked or dislodged tracheostomy.
 
Postoperative care and planning
188
from the latter. If drain output is very high, or there is evidence 
of neck swelling, and/ or wound oozing is too great to be man-
aged by the drain, the wound may need to be opened and ex-
plored. Expanding neck haematoma can threaten the airway and 
the viability of the overlying skin, as well as increasing the risk of 
infection. Symptoms and signs of neck haematoma may include 
painful swelling, bruising, or bleeding around the drain site or 
from the incision. Immediate bedside surgical evacuation of clot 
may be lifesaving if the haematoma is compressing the airway. 
Multidisciplinary teamwork is critical in such emergencies, and 
protocols for their management should be immediately available 
in the PACU (and practised regularly by staff, using in situ simu-
lation). Patients who have had previous neck radiotherapy are at 
particularly increased risk of haemorrhage (along with most other 
complications). Indeed, haemorrhage in a previously irradiated 
patient who has undergone oral cavity surgery may signify major 
vascular compromise, including potential carotid artery haemor-
rhage (a controlled ‘sentinel’ bleed may precede a catastrophic ca-
rotid ‘blow out’), especially if the neck has also been operated on. 
The triad of (1) radiation (which not only weakens the arterial wall 
but causes ischaemia and necrosis of the adventitial layer), (2) air 
(pharyngocutaneous fistula, indicative of wound breakdown and 
infection), and (3) saliva (the fistula allows direct contact between 
the carotid artery wall, causing desiccation and digestion by sal-
ivary enzymes) is usually required for a carotid bleed to occur, but 
this process can happen insidiously. Morbidity is high from carotid 
blow- out syndrome, though both emergency endovascular (em-
bolization or stenting) and open surgical carotid artery ligation 
(performed less commonly) can be undertaken.
Free ﬂap reconstruction
These patients require frequent assessment of vascular anastomosis 
patency. This can be accomplished in the ICU, or in other moni-
tored settings— provided that medical and nurse staff numbers and 
training are appropriate (e.g. a dedicated OMFS/ head and neck 
ward). Reduced blood flow, as detected by Doppler ultrasound, 
is a surgical emergency, therefore many units use implantable 
Doppler probes for the first 48– 72 hours. For the first postopera-
tive day, hourly flap observations are necessary— checking for the 
colour, texture, and temperature of the flap. Venous congestion 
or arterial insufficiency can be assessed by a pinprick test, where 
bleeding with a 1– 2 second delay and bright red blood should be 
expected if flap perfusion is healthy. This test should be done imme-
diately postoperatively to allow comparison later if there are con-
cerns. Dark blood on pinprick suggests venous congestion, as does 
the presence of swelling or ecchymosis. Pallor and lack of blood on 
pinprick suggests issues with arterial supply. Most flaps can be sal-
vaged by prompt revascularization as long as perfusion problems are 
recognized early. Maintenance of normothermia and euvolemia are 
important elements of both intraoperative and postoperative care. 
Antiplatelet therapy (with aspirin) is frequently used to reduce the 
risk of flap thrombosis, and a continuous heparin infusion may be 
employed in particularly high- risk cases (dextran solutions are no 
longer used).
Orthognathic procedures
Patients may require intermaxillary fixation following some 
orthognathic procedures, and a wire cutter should always be at the 
bedside in case of vomiting, bleeding, or swelling that compromises 
airway control and/ or breathing (discussed in detail in Chapters 10 
and 17). Although postoperative airway obstruction is uncommon, 
it can be devastating, and timely reintubation of the trachea (or 
emergency front of neck airway) is crucial in preventing poor pa-
tient outcome.
Orthognathic patients require a special postoperative diet, con-
sisting of soft foods (common to most intraoral surgery, where 
mucosal disruption has occurred), and drinking straws (to aid oral 
intake of liquids) should be specifically avoided if dentoalveolar pro-
cedures have been undertaken, as the straw may dislodge any clots.
Irrespective of the level of the Le Fort osteotomy, it is imperative 
that patients do not blow their nose for 4– 6 weeks postoperatively, as 
this may cause significant subcutaneous emphysema.
Paediatric procedures
Every surgeon has a preferred approach to wound management 
which should be followed to optimize recovery, and the under-
standing and collaboration of the patient and their caregivers is es-
sential in achieving this. Early involvement of the child’s caregivers 
in their postoperative care is therefore critical (e.g. gentle cleansing 
of extraoral wounds). Provision of a liquid, then a soft diet is im-
portant in maintaining the child’s nutrition as well as the stability of 
the surgical repair.
Most facial trauma is managed as conservatively as possible 
in the paediatric population, due to rapid growth and develop-
ment.52 Fortunately, patients under the age of 10 years are less likely 
to sustain facial fractures than adults, due to their relatively larger 
forehead, increased facial soft tissue/ fat, and absence of air in the 
paranasal sinuses. The frequency of nasal fractures increases with 
downward and forward growth of the craniofacial matrix as the 
child develops with age. Non- displaced fractures are usually man-
aged expectantly with appropriate analgesia, soft diet, and surveil-
lance for any changes in fracture position.53 Subcondylar fractures 
are repaired with circum- mandibular wires and fixation to the 
pyriform aperture— required to be in place for only a brief period 
(7– 10 days). Early mobilization is important to prevent temporo-
mandibular joint ankylosis.
Postoperative care of the paediatric OMFS patient requires an 
additional degree of vigilance due to the relatively narrowed airway 
and the greater potential for compromise from surgical oedema. 
Children who have undergone nasotracheal intubation should be 
Box 16.2 Essential components of an airway rapid response 
team
 • Anaesthetist (consultant level).
 • Surgeon (surgical airway experience essential; usually a fellow or con-
sultant level).
 • Tracheostomy kit (tracheostomy tubes, skin retractors, etc.).
 • Front of neck needle/ scalpel kit (depending on local training).
 • Rapid response specialist nurse.
 • Fibreoptic bronchoscope.
 • Videolaryngoscope.
 • Difﬁcult airway trolley with additional advanced airway equipment.
 • Respiratory/ physiotherapist.
 • X- ray equipment.
 • Established criteria for activation.
 
 
 
Conclusion
189
expected to have some mild nasal oozing or epistaxis, which may be 
minimized by nursing in an upright position.
Paediatric tracheostomy formation, especially in the infant or 
small child, requires specialist expertise and training, and should 
ideally not be undertaken as an emergency procedure, unless abso-
lutely necessary. In countries where there are insufficient resources 
to safely perform and manage paediatric tracheostomies, submental 
intubation may provide a potential alternative. Following surgery, 
early extubation of the trachea (in the operating theatre, if possible) 
gives the best opportunity for both the anaesthetic and surgical 
teams to evaluate the airway together, identify any issues, and ad-
dress them expeditiously. Any paediatric patient who necessitates 
the ongoing presence of an oro/ nasotracheal tube or tracheostomy 
tube into the postoperative period must be appropriately sedated to 
prevent inadvertent displacement of the airway device prior to its 
planned removal.54
Conclusion
Postoperative care should be considered as essential, and delivered 
in the same meticulous manner as preoperative assessment and 
intraoperative care. It is a fundamental component of the periopera-
tive journey of the OMFS patient, and complications during this 
period can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. The postop-
erative care of each patient should be individualized, and planned 
carefully, to ensure the appropriate level of physiological monitoring 
is in place, and so that the patient receives the necessary level of care 
from the nursing, medical, surgical, and allied health professionals 
required to achieve the best outcome.
REFERENCES
 1. Ljungqvist O, Scott M, Fearon KC. Enhanced recovery after 
surgery: a review. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(3):292– 298.
 2. Dort JC, Farwell DG, Findlay M, Huber GF, Kerr P, Shea- 
Budgell MA, et al. Optimal perioperative care in major head and 
neck cancer surgery with free flap reconstruction: a consensus 
review and recommendations from the Enhanced Recovery 
After Surgery Society. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2017;143(3):292– 303.
 3. Jandali DB, Vaughan D, Eggerstedt M, Ganti A, Scheltens H, 
Ramirez EA, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery in head and 
neck surgery: reduced opioid use and length of stay. Laryngoscope. 
2020;130(5):1227– 1232.
 4. Muñoz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, Besser M, Habler O, Kehlet 
H, et al. International consensus statement on the peri- operative 
management of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia. 
2017;72(2):233– 247.
 5. Burton BN, A’Court AM, Brovman EY, Scott MJ, Urman RD, 
Gabriel RA. Optimizing preoperative anemia to improve patient 
outcomes. Anesthesiol Clin. 2018;36(4):701– 713.
 6. Baumeister P, Canis M, Reiter M. Preoperative anemia and 
perioperative blood transfusion in head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma. PLoS One. 2018;13(10):e0205712.
 7. Ghaffar S, Pearse RM, Gillies MA. ICU admission after 
surgery: who benefits? Curr Opin Crit Care. 2017;23(5):424– 429.
 8. de Melo GM, Ribeiro KC, Kowalski LP, Deheinzelin D. Risk factors 
for postoperative complications in oral cancer and their 
  prognostic implications. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2001;127(7):828– 833.
 9. Chung F, Memtsoudis SG, Ramachandran SK, Nagappa M, 
Opperer M, Cozowicz C, et al. Society of Anesthesia and Sleep 
Medicine guidelines on preoperative screening and assessment 
of adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 
2016;123(2):452– 473.
 10. Sessler DI. Perioperative thermoregulation and heat balance. 
Lancet. 2016;387(10038):2655– 2664.
 11. Mizuno H, Mizutani S, Ekuni D, Tabata- Taniguchi A, Maruyama 
T, Yokoi A, et al. New oral hygiene care regimen reduces 
postoperative oral bacteria count and number of days with 
elevated fever in ICU patients with esophageal cancer. J Oral Sci. 
2018;60(4):536– 543.
 12. Belrose JC, Noppens RR. Anesthesiology and cognitive 
impairment: a narrative review of current clinical literature. BMC 
Anesthesiol. 2019;19(1):241.
 13. Mark LJ, Herzer KR, Cover R, Pandian V, Bhatti NI, Berkow LC, 
et al. Difficult airway response team: a novel quality improvement 
program for managing hospital- wide airway emergencies. Anesth 
Analg. 2015;121(1):127– 139.
 14. Tawfic Q, Kumar K, Pirani Z, Armstrong K. Prevention of 
chronic post- surgical pain: the importance of early identification 
of risk factors. J Anesth. 2017;31(3):424– 431.
 15. Chou R, Gordon DB, de Leon- Casasola OA, Rosenberg JM, 
Bickler S, Brennan T, et al. Management of postoperative pain: a 
clinical practice guideline from the American Pain Society, the 
American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, 
and the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ Committee on 
Regional Anesthesia, Executive Committee, and Administrative 
Council. J Pain. 2016;17(2):131– 157.
 16. Bruhn J, Scheffer GJ, van Geffen G- J. Clinical application of 
perioperative multimodal analgesia. Curr Opin Support Palliat 
Care. 2017;11(2):106– 111.
 17. Maheshwari K, Avitsian R, Sessler DI, Makarova N, Tanios 
M, Raza S, et al. Multimodal analgesic regimen for spine 
surgery: a randomized placebo- controlled trial. Anesthesiology. 
2020;132(5):992– 1002.
 18. Stephens DM, Richards BG, Schleicher WF, Zins JE, Langstein 
HN. Is ketorolac safe to use in plastic surgery? A critical review. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2015;35(4):462– 466.
 19. McNicol ED, Ferguson MC, Haroutounian S, Carr DB, 
Schumann R. Single dose intravenous paracetamol or 
intravenous propacetamol for postoperative pain. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2016;5:CD007126.
 20. Apfel CC, Souza K, Portillo J, Dalal P, Bergese SD. Patient 
satisfaction with intravenous acetaminophen: a pooled analysis 
of five randomized, placebo- controlled studies in the acute 
postoperative setting. J Healthc Qual. 2015;37(3):155– 162.
 21. Shaffer EE, Pham A, Woldman RL, Spiegelman A, Strassels SA, 
Wan GJ, et al. Estimating the effect of intravenous acetaminophen 
for postoperative pain management on length of stay and 
inpatient hospital costs. Adv Ther. 2017;33(12):2211– 2228.
 22. Jibril F, Sharaby S, Mohamed A, Wilby KJ. Intravenous versus 
oral acetaminophen for pain: systematic review of current 
evidence to support clinical decision- making. Can J Hosp Pharm. 
2015;68(3):238– 247.
 23. Bailey MA, Toner AJ, Corcoran TB. A survey of perioperative 
intravenous lidocaine use by anaesthetists in Australia and New 
Zealand. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2020;48(1):53– 58.
 24. Ates İ, Aydin ME, Ahiskalioglu A, Ahiskalioglu EO, Kaya Z, 
Gozeler MS. Postoperative analgesic efficacy of perioperative 
 
 
Postoperative care and planning
190
intravenous lidocaine infusion in patients undergoing 
septorhinoplasty: a prospective, randomized, double- blind study. 
Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2020;277(4):1095– 1100.
 25. Kościelniak- Merak B, Batko I, Kobylarz K, Sztefko K, Tomasik 
PJ. Intravenous, perioperatively administered lidocaine regulates 
serum pain modulators’ concentrations in children undergoing 
spinal surgery. Pain Med. 2020;21(7):1464– 1473.
 26. Dunn LK, Durieux ME. Perioperative use of intravenous 
lidocaine. Anesthesiology. 2017;126(4):729– 737.
 27. Greenwood E, Nimmo S, Paterson H, Homer N, Foo I. 
Intravenous lidocaine infusion as a component of multimodal 
analgesia for colorectal surgery- measurement of plasma levels. 
Perioper Med. 2019;8:1.
 28. Kong VKF, Irwin MG. Gabapentin: a multimodal perioperative 
drug? Br J Anaesth. 2007;99(6):775– 786.
 29. Bhavaraju SA, Vorrasi JS, Talluri S, Kalladka M, Khan, J. 
Pre- emptive administration of gabapentinoids to reduce 
postoperative pain and opioid usage following oral and 
maxillofacial surgical procedures. Oral Surg. 2022;15:106– 115.
 30. Sanders JG, Dawes PJD. Gabapentin for perioperative analgesia 
in otorhinolaryngology- head and neck surgery: systematic 
review. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;155(6):893– 903.
 31. Herlich A. Focused local anesthesia and analgesia for head and 
neck surgery. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2012;50(1):13– 25.
 32. Baptista PM, Costantino A, Moffa A, Rinaldi V, Casale M. 
Hypoglossal nerve stimulation in the treatment of obstructive 
sleep apnea: patient selection and new perspectives. Nat Sci Sleep. 
2020;12:151– 159.
 33. Bisogni V, Pengo MF, De Vito A, Maiolino G, Rossi GP, Moxham 
J, et al. Electrical stimulation for the treatment of obstructive 
sleep apnoea: a review of the evidence. Expert Rev Respir Med. 
2017;11(9):711– 720.
 34. Fernandez- Bustamante A, Bartels K, Clavijo C, Scott BK, Kacmar 
R, Bullard K, et al. Preoperatively screened obstructive sleep 
apnea is associated with worse postoperative outcomes than 
previously diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 
2017;125(2):593– 602.
 35. Nagappa M, Liao P, Wong J, Auckley D, Ramachandran SK, 
Memtsoudis S, et al. Validation of the STOP- Bang questionnaire 
as a screening tool for obstructive sleep apnea among different 
populations: a systematic review and meta- analysis. PLoS One. 
2015;10(12):e0143697.
 36. Cohen JC, Larrabee YC, Weinstein AL, Stewart MG. Use of 
continuous positive airway pressure after rhinoplasty, septoplasty, 
and sinus surgery: a survey of current practice patterns. 
Laryngoscope. 2015;125(11):2612– 2616.
 37. Corso RM, Gregoretti C, Braghiroli A, Fanfulla F, Insalaco G. 
Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients 
with obstructive sleep apnea: navigating through uncertainty. 
Anesthesiology. 2014;121(3):664– 665.
 38. Memtsoudis SG, Cozowicz C, Nagappa M, Wong J, Joshi GP, 
Wong DT, et al. Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine 
guideline on intraoperative management of adult patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesth Analg. 2018;127(4):967– 987.
 39. Blatt S, Al- Nawas B. A systematic review of latest evidence for 
antibiotic prophylaxis and therapy in oral and maxillofacial 
surgery. Infection. 2019;47(4):519– 555.
 40. Yoshimoto Y, Fujikawa T, Tanaka A, Hayashi H, Shimoike N, 
Kawamoto H, et al. Optimal use of antiplatelet agents, especially 
aspirin, in the perioperative management of colorectal cancer 
patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal resection. World J 
Surg Oncol. 2019;17(1):92.
 41. Gibb C. The Yin and Yang of perioperative aspirin: a clinician’s 
perspective. Int J Cardiol. 2018;258:74– 75.
 42. Lee LKK, Tsai PNW, Ip KY, Irwin MG. Pre- operative cardiac 
optimisation: a directed review. Anaesthesia. 2019;74 Suppl 
1:67– 79.
 43. Brignardello- Petersen R. Uncertainty regarding risk factors for 
cranial nerve injury after Le Fort I osteotomy owing to serious 
methodological limitations of systematic review. J Am Dent Assoc. 
2019;150(6):e103.
 44. Hanu- Cernat LM, Hall T. Late onset of abducens palsy after 
Le Fort I maxillary osteotomy. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2009;47(5):414– 416.
 45. Kim JW, Chin BR, Park HS, Lee SH, Kwon TG. Cranial nerve 
injury after Le Fort I osteotomy. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2011;40(3):327– 329.
 46. Deng Y, Navarro JC, Markan S. Advances in anesthesia 
monitoring. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin N Am. 
2019;31(4):611– 619.
 47. American Academy of Otolaryngology- Head and Neck Surgery 
(AAO- HNS/ F). Position statement: intraoperative nerve 
monitoring in otologic surgery. 2017. https:// www.ent net.org/ 
cont ent/ int raop erat ive- cran ial- nerve- mon itor ing.
 48. Koht A, Sloan TB, Hemmer LB. Neuromonitoring in surgery and 
anesthesia. UpToDate. 2020. https:// www.uptod ate.com/ conte 
nts/ neur omon itor ing- in- surg ery- and- ane sthe sia?s
 49. Wilkinson K, Freeth H, Kelly K. ‘On the right trach?’ A review 
of the care received by patients who undergo tracheostomy. Br J 
Hosp Med (Lond). 2015;76(3):163– 165.
 50. Miller SC, Nguyen SA, Ong AA, Gillespie MB. Transoral 
robotic base of tongue reduction for obstructive sleep 
apnea: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Laryngoscope. 
2017;127(1):258– 265.
 51. Tomifuji M, Araki K, Uno K, Kamide D, Tanaka S, Suzuki H, 
et al. Transoral videolaryngoscopic surgery for laryngeal and 
hypopharyngeal cancer— technical updates and long- term 
results. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2020;47(2):282– 290.
 52. Ryan ML, Thorson CM, Otero CA, Ogilvie MP, Cheung MC, 
Saigal GM, et al. Pediatric facial trauma: a review of guidelines 
for assessment, evaluation, and management in the emergency 
department. J Craniofac Surg. 2011;22(4):1183– 1189.
 53. Cole P, Kaufman Y, Hollier LH. Managing the pediatric facial 
fracture. Craniomaxillofac Trauma Reconstr. 2009;2(2):77– 83.
 54. Taiwo OA, Ibikunle AA, Braimah RO, Suleiman MK. Submental 
intubation in paediatric oral and maxillofacial surgery: review 
of the literature and report of four cases. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 
2015;12(4):296– 300.
17
Surgical complications
Justin P. Curtin and Gene Lee
Introduction
This chapter aims to familiarize the oral and maxillofacial anaesthe-
tist with perioperative surgical complications, from the perspective 
of the surgeon. This insight and awareness of operative concerns and 
potential complications should allow the anaesthetist to anticipate 
problems, minimize sequelae, and appreciate the requirement for 
further surgical intervention.
 Airway management
Preservation of a patent, secure airway is fundamental to safe 
management of the oromaxillofacial surgical (OMFS) patient. 
Challenging airway management may be more frequently encoun-
tered, and the essence of ‘shared airway’ surgery means that the type 
of airway device and its position may have a considerable impact 
on the facility of surgery (Box 17.1). Most surgeons have their own 
preference, and this is a key item to discuss at the ‘pre- brief’, prior to 
commencing the operating list.
Distinguishing between airway issues affecting the ‘upper 
airway’ from those distal to the larynx is pivotal in airway man-
agement decision- making (Box 17.2). Limited mouth opening 
is the most common upper airway issue and may be related to 
mechanical causes (e.g. ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint 
(TMJ) or joint fibrosis following radiotherapy) or functional causes 
(muscle spasm due to trauma or infection)— most of which are ap-
parent prior to anaesthesia and surgery. Reduced tissue bulk and 
sarcopenia is relatively common in patients with head and neck ma-
lignancy. Subglottic stenosis resulting from previous tracheostomy 
may not be recognized on routine examination; however, a trache-
ostomy scar should raise suspicion. Patients with long- standing 
limitation of mouth opening or those specifically undergoing TMJ 
surgery should be considered to have mechanical obstruction that 
will not be improved by anaesthesia or muscle relaxation. TMJ 
ankylosis, while rare, necessitates advanced airway management. 
Conversely, limitations of mouth opening related to muscle spasm 
or TMJ/ mandibular pain are often relieved by analgesia or anaes-
thesia. However, delayed presentation must be treated with caution 
as prolonged mandibular immobility from pain may cause struc-
tural TMJ stiffness, fibrosis, and limited mouth opening not re-
lieved by anaesthesia.
Diligent preoperative assessment and consideration of how the 
airway may change over time significantly influence the optimal 
timing of surgery. In instances of trauma, airway swelling may re-
gress and a delay in surgery may be beneficial, while infections may 
progress and airway management may become increasingly dif-
ficult. Consideration of the developmental age in paediatric cases 
with congenital deformity is essential when deciding on the most 
appropriate time for corrective surgery.
Tumour extension into the posterior tongue and inflamma-
tion of the masticatory muscles requires thorough preoperative 
airway assessment and special consideration of postoperative 
management due to the high potential for upper airway obstruc-
tion. Inflammatory processes within the neck may cause laryngeal 
oedema that can rapidly progress to airway obstruction, and any 
patient with dysphagia, drooling, or requirement to sit forwards 
Box 17.1 Surgical considerations affecting choice of airway 
management/ device selection
 • Optimize surgical access.
 • Minimize alteration of anatomy and potential impact on aesthetic as-
sessment (and surgical correction), for example, traction of nasotracheal 
tubes or tapes impairing assessment of facial symmetry, operative ac-
cess, or free mandibular movement (precluding intraoperative occlu-
sion checks).
 • Protection from potential soiling by blood, tissue, or bone/ tooth 
fragments.
 • Permit instrumentation— bite blocks/ gags/ suspension/ osteotomes, etc.
Box 17.2 Pre- existing pathology causing impaired airway access
 • TMJ disease and dysfunction.
 • Anatomical deformity— infection, congenital malformation, malignancy, 
or trauma.
 • Cleft palate, and other congenital conditions.
 • Severe obstructive sleep apnoea and excessive soft tissue.
 • Previous surgery or treatments, for example, revision orthognathic 
surgery such as maxillary advancement following previous cleft palate 
surgery.
 
 
 
Surgical complications
192
should prompt urgent airway intervention and management of the 
underlying cause.
In selecting the appropriate airway management device for 
OMFS procedures, the anaesthetist must consider the require-
ment to withstand local movements and instrumentation, and 
the need for protection from potential airway soiling. The type 
of airway device, and where and how it is secured may be influ-
enced by the location of surgical incisions, therefore this must be 
specifically discussed prior to anaesthesia. Surgical access to the 
mandible may be gained via oral incision alone, or in combin-
ation with incisions in the neck (submental, submandibular). The 
TMJ may be accessed endoscopically via oral access, or via tem-
poral, transparotid or retromandibular incisions. Isolated orbital 
fractures may be accessed via cutaneous or transconjunctival in-
cisions. Zygomatic fractures may require oral, temporal, or brow 
incisions. Fractures involving the frontal sinus, naso- ethmoid re-
gion, or complex zygomatic fractures may require access via a cor-
onal incision (also called bicoronal incision— which extends from 
ear to ear, allowing the scalp to be reflected anteriorly exposing 
the facial bones). Rainey clips or haemostats are used to minimize 
scalp bleeding. Fractures involving much of the facial skeleton and 
Le Fort III osteotomies require combinations of these incisions to 
gain access to the facial skeleton.
Surgical gags are often used to hold the mouth open while the 
surgeon operates, and these may dislodge or compress any airway 
device. Foreign objects, ranging from bone or teeth fragments to 
screws, may fall posteriorly into the airway, and may be extremely 
difficult to locate and retrieve due to their size.
In contrast to many other surgical specialties, procedures 
involving the mouth, jaws, or neck may disturb a previously stable 
airway such that it may need replacement or exchange for an alter-
native device. Tracheal tubes may be inadvertently perforated or the 
cuff punctured by surgical drills, or during maxillary down- fracture 
or maxillectomy. Adequate ventilation may not still be possible, and 
tube exchange is often indicated if inadequate or much of the op-
eration remains. Tube exchange must be undertaken through an 
active sterile field and is often best undertaken using an exchange 
catheter, necessitating good cooperation from anaesthesia and sur-
gical teams (Box 17.3).
Extubation planning and postoperative 
airway compromise
Upper airway oedema and ongoing ‘surgical ooze’ (bleeding from 
undefined sources) common to OMFS procedures mean that im-
mediate tracheal extubation following completion of surgery may 
not always be advisable, and extubation may be delayed by several 
minutes, extending up to several days (with extubation being under-
taken in the intensive care unit) (Box 17.4). The decision regarding 
optimal timing for extubation requires careful consideration of both 
anaesthetic and surgical factors, and multidisciplinary team discus-
sion (Box 17.5). Prolonged mechanical ventilation is not without 
risk; however, a period of stabilization following prolonged surgery, 
allowing any temporary airway oedema to reside, may be indicated. 
It is usually relatively straightforward to distinguish those patients 
suitable for standard ward care and those requiring intensive care. 
Prolonged surgery, significant comorbidities, advanced airway man-
agement, potential airway issues, and microvascular tissue transfer 
(and perfusion pressure management) all potentially warrant a 
higher level of postoperative care.1
A potentially fatal triad of compromised airway patency and ac-
cess, diminished consciousness, and upper airway secretions may 
exist following major OMFS procedures. Simple manoeuvres that 
are usually easily instituted to manage airway obstruction (e.g. jaw 
thrust and oropharyngeal suctioning) may not be possible in the 
OMFS patient (Box 17.6).
Patients most at risk of airway complications are those that require 
IMF, where the maxillary teeth are ligated to the mandibular teeth 
(with wires or elastics). Placed intraoperatively (after airway inspec-
tion, suctioning, and removal of any throat pack), the IMF device 
may be required to remain in situ postoperatively, posing unique 
challenges to post- anaesthesia care unit (PACU) staff in the short- 
term and ward nursing staff later on— with responsibility often 
falling to the anaesthetist where problems arise. Communication 
with patients can be very challenging and, more importantly, ac-
cess to the upper airway to undertake suctioning of secretions may 
be significantly impaired, or impossible. The entire team must be 
aware when patients are being transferred from theatre to PACU, 
and they must be reviewed prior to discharge/ transfer from PACU. 
PACU and ward staff must also be trained and familiar with man-
aging these patients and the potential life- threatening complications 
(Box 17.7). The principal risk to the patient relates to the potential 
for upper airway obstruction from secretions, bleeding, or vom-
itus (or even a retained throat pack). Jaw thrust is impossible and 
Box 17.3 Considerations for the shared airway
 • Airway instrumentation.
 • Accidental tracheal extubation, or tracheal tube cuff damage from sur-
gical site manipulation or instrumentation.
 • Surgical gags causing tracheal tube occlusion or displacement.
 • Nasotracheal tube laceration following lateral nasal osteotomy or la-
ceration from surgical drills or saws.
 • Foreign bodies, including retained surgical packs or throat packs.
 • Intermaxillary ﬁxation (IMF) application and management.
 • Tracheal extubation plans and strategies for early and late reintubation.
 • Inspection and suctioning of the airway prior to extubation (remove 
throat packs, blood, and secretions).
 • Intraoperative changes to the airway device (planned, and emergency 
airway exchanges).
 • Airway oedema or haematoma compromising airway patency in the 
postoperative period (and consideration of delaying extubation).
Box 17.4 Potential indications for delayed tracheal extubation
 • Prolonged surgery and anaesthesia, and potential effect on physio-
logical stability, respiratory drive, and airway tone.
 • Impaired airway protection and high aspiration risk.
 • Upper airway obstruction secondary to oedema, haematoma, or for-
eign body.
 • Concerns over laryngeal oedema, and potential for laryngeal 
obstruction.
 • Direct surgical causes— to facilitate IMF stability or prevent wound 
breakdown.
 
Return to theatre!
193
suctioning is limited. In the conscious patient, assisting them to sit 
forwards will facilitate passage of secretions/ blood per oral. The 
unconscious patient should be placed in the lateral position, with 
suctioning performed immediately inside the mouth between the 
cheeks and teeth. A nasopharyngeal airway (often placed prior to 
tracheal extubation and emergence) can provide an additional route 
for suctioning of the oropharynx, though care must be taken not to 
cause mucosal injury and precipitate bleeding. Crucially, PACU and 
ward staff must be shown where the wires (or elastics) that secure the 
teeth together are located, and how to cut them, and equipment for 
releasing the IMF must be always immediately available and func-
tional (Box 17.8).
Patients who have undergone cleft palate repair also pose a 
number of unique postoperative challenges. Prolonged bloody ooze 
is common from the ‘raw’ superior surface of the transposed pal-
atal flaps; however, nasal suctioning is not advisable given that these 
form the new nasal floor. Oral suctioning must be performed with 
great care to protect the surgical repair. Some surgeons place small 
intraoral packs, and while they are sutured in place, they still con-
stitute a potential aspiration risk. These patients have anatomically 
smaller airways at baseline, and palatal reconstruction significantly 
reduces available space for the tongue (which prior to surgery may 
have protruded into the nasal cavity), which may now obstruct 
against the newly formed soft palate. Recovery in the supine position 
puts them at high risk of both aspiration and airway obstruction, 
and patients are best nursed either in the lateral or prone position 
(allowing secretions to flow out freely). Some surgeons place a 
prophylactic tongue suture for anterior traction should obstruction 
occur. Placement of a nasopharyngeal airway may initiate bleeding 
from the raw palatal surfaces and should be judiciously performed 
only after consultation with the surgical team. Having excluded 
other causes of airway obstruction, application of continuous posi-
tive airway pressure is usually sufficient to relieve obstruction until 
oedema has resided and the infant has mastered mouth breathing.
Return to theatre!
The necessity to ‘return to theatre’ in the early postoperative pe-
riod is most commonly related to airway compromise, bleeding, 
or other surgical issues— all of which may present significant chal-
lenges to the anaesthetist. All aspects of airway management may be 
more difficult. Facemask oxygenation may be impaired by oedema 
or facial surgical wounds, and excessive positive pressure ventila-
tion may cause unwanted and potentially dangerous tissue insuffla-
tion. Insertion of a nasopharyngeal airway in patients who have had 
midfacial fractures, osteotomies, or other procedures that have dis-
rupted the nasal septum/ mucosa requires particular caution to avoid 
tearing of the nasal mucosa and associated bleeding— nevertheless, 
it may be a potentially life- saving intervention in patients with IMF. 
IMF devices should of course be released as soon as possible— either 
during, or prior to anaesthetic management. An oropharyngeal 
airway may bypass some upper airway obstruction as well as facili-
tating airway suctioning in preparation for laryngoscopy. Bleeding 
from the surgical site and into the upper airway may severely limit 
laryngoscopy views and adequate lighting and large- bore suction 
devices are essential. Fragile facial bones (due to fractures or re-
construction) and/ or tissue reconstructive flaps (dependent on 
Box 17.5 Extubation strategies and airway rescue planning
 • An individualized extubation strategy should be agreed for each pa-
tient by the surgical and anaesthetic teams; the appropriate equip-
ment and personnel should be present; it should be undertaken in the 
most appropriate environment, with a back- up plan in case of failure.
 • Patients should be risk stratiﬁed in order to decide upon immediate or 
delayed tracheal extubation:
 
• Is the airway considered ‘safe’ for immediate extubation?
 
• Is there expected to be signiﬁcantly worsening oedema/ continued 
bleeding?
 
• Should the patient return to theatre for further surgical intervention 
(usually to arrest ongoing bleeding)?
 • Advanced options include a bridging tracheostomy or staged 
extubation using an airway exchange catheter.
 • Smooth emergence is desirable with minimal coughing and straining 
to reduce bleeding and airway soiling.
 • Extubation strategies may need to be adapted to avoid tight- ﬁtting 
facemasks on midface and mandibular wounds, or nasal airways with 
vulnerable nasal wounds.
Box 17.6 Challenges of airway rescue in OMFS patients
 • Impaired access to oral airway, by surgical ﬁxation and IMF devices.
 • Limitations on available rescue techniques— facemask ventilation im-
paired by tissue oedema, vulnerable facial wounds, and limited range 
of movement of condyles and soft tissue; desire to avoid jaw thrust 
and chin lift manoeuvres in certain OMFS patients.
 • Impaired access to nasal airway due to prior surgical involvement.
Box 17.7 Concerning postoperative clinical signs in the OMFS 
patient
 • Restlessness— may be caused by hypoxia.
 • Confusion— may be caused by hypoxia.
 • Stridor— may suggest laryngeal oedema.
 • Persistent vomiting— especially after orbital surgery.
 • ‘Tripod’ patient positioning/ desire to sit up— may suggest base of 
tongue or sublingual swelling.
 • Bleeding per oral— may warrant urgent return to theatre.
Box 17.8 Essential equipment for management of patients 
with IMF
 • High- volume suction device with range of ﬂexible- tipped suction 
catheters.
 • Independent light source for aiding in identifying bleeding points and 
accurate suction catheter placement.
 • Wire cutters.
 • Scissors (if elastic IMF).
 • Cheek retractor.
 • Range of appropriately sized and lubricated nasopharyngeal airways.
 • Picture board to facilitate communication between patient and staff 
members.
 
Surgical complications
194
recently anastomosed blood vessels), mean that laryngoscopy must 
be performed with the lowest forces necessary. Videolaryngoscopic 
or fibreoptic techniques may cause less tissue disruption; however, 
views may be impaired by excessive secretions or blood. The priority 
should always be to maintain patient oxygenation and restore a se-
cure airway— the surgical team will appreciate that some disruption/ 
manipulation of tissues may be required to achieve these goals and 
will make the necessary revisions. In some cases, a surgical front of 
neck airway may be required, for which the decision largely depends 
on the underlying aetiology.
Bleeding
Following acute oral and maxillofacial trauma, significant bleeding 
may necessitate urgent nasal packing or the placement of wire liga-
tures around grossly mobile fragments of the mandible— in order 
to regain control while other definitive management can be under-
taken. Importantly, anterior mandibular trauma may result in floor 
of the mouth haematoma which has the potential to threaten airway 
patency.
Intraoperative bleeding
Haemodynamically significant bleeding is generally uncommon, 
but may occur intraoperatively or postoperatively. Intraoperative 
bleeding during OMFS procedures is rarely life- threatening 
but can significantly accumulate over time. More likely is that 
bleeding will obscure the surgical field, impacting the facility 
and length of the procedure, and, ultimately, patient outcome. 
Certain anatomical regions are prone to significant blood loss and 
knowledge of when these areas are involved in certain procedures 
permits the anaesthetic team greater planning and preparation. 
These areas include the pterygoid plexus, palatine vessels, nasal 
floor and septum, and great vessels in the neck— named arteries, 
and internal jugular vein (IJV; also note the attendant issue of air 
embolism) (Box 17.9).
Bleeding into the floor of the mouth is a rare yet recognized com-
plication following insertion of mandibular implants (Box 17.10).2
Due to the rich blood supply of the head and neck regions, even 
small intraoperative bleeding points can result in postoperative 
haematoma formation that may compromise airway patency or 
threaten perfusion of free flap reconstructions. There are numerous 
pharmacological and non- pharmacological strategies for reducing 
bleeding, each with relative advantages and disadvantages, and these 
are discussed extensively in Chapters 7, 9, and 10.
Infection
Surgical wound infections
Postoperative infections following elective OMFS procedures are 
relatively infrequent, are typically caused by the abundant oropha-
ryngeal flora, and can usually be managed by local debridement and 
intravenous antibiotics. In common with other surgery specialties, 
contributory factors include prolonged surgery, patient comorbid-
ities, pre- existing methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus col-
onization/ infection, and perioperative hypothermia. Optimally 
positioned surgical drains will reduce fluid re- accumulation (and its 
sequelae) post surgical drainage.
Deep neck space infections
Deep neck space infections that spread along fascial planes within 
potential spaces of the head and neck can be life- threatening, po-
tentially causing airway obstruction, mediastinitis, severe sepsis, 
and other catastrophic complications. Most frequently caused by 
necrotic teeth, infection spreads through the cortical plate, into 
adjacent soft tissues, and beyond. The pathophysiology, micro-
biology, range of clinical presentations (depending on direction of 
spread), and the management priorities are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 12, including management of impending airway obstruc-
tion. Postoperative infection following dental extractions can also 
spread into the soft tissues of the face, base of skull, and/ or neck.
Early intervention by an experienced multidisciplinary team is 
critical. Firmness of the floor of the mouth, dysphagia, and adop-
tion of the tripod position are very concerning signs. Trismus 
may be present when infection involves either the masticatory 
space (medial to the mandibular ramus and the medial pterygoid 
muscle) or submasseteric space. It should be noted that, while mas-
ticatory space infections often result in very obvious facial swelling, 
submasseteric infections have virtually none. A relatively insubstan-
tial submasseteric collection on computed tomography imaging may 
limit mouth opening to just a few millimetres, which, importantly for 
anaesthesia, will not improve with muscle relaxation, necessitating 
advanced airway management. Removal of the cause of infection, 
and drainage of pus are the cornerstones of management. Crucially, 
oedema (including laryngeal oedema) may worsen postoperatively 
and decisions regarding optimum timing of extubation and/ or 
bridging tracheostomy must be discussed and agreed by the multi-
disciplinary team (also discussed in detail in Chapter 12).
Other perioperative complications
Other perioperative surgical complications are discussed in 
Table 17.1.
Box 17.9 Vascular complications of maxillary surgery 
 • The maxillary artery, major palatine or sphenopalatine artery, and 
nasoethmoidal arteries can be injured with the osteotome (surgical 
chisel) and during down- fracture of the maxilla. These include Le Fort 
osteotomies and midface fracture surgical procedures.3
 • The pterygomaxillary venous plexus is a potential source of persistent 
venous blood loss, requiring cauterization and use of surgical haemo-
static agents.
 • Direct visualization of the lacerated vessels by the surgeon is required 
for ligation and control.
 • In rare cases of severe bleeding, angiography and embolization may be 
required; ligation of the external carotid artery may also be necessary.
Box 17.10 Vascular complications of mandibular surgery
 • Haemodynamically signiﬁcant bleeding is generally uncommon, but 
may occur intraoperatively or postoperatively.4
 • Retromandibular vein, inferior alveolar artery, and facial artery are 
at risk.
 • Laceration of masseter or pterygoid muscles may also lead to surgical 
bleeding.
 • Surgical control is achieved with packing, ligation, and diathermy as 
required.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure-speciﬁc complications
195
Procedure- speciﬁc complications
Oral surgery
Oral surgery largely refers to procedures involving the alveolus 
and adjacent structures, including removal of teeth, mucosal pro-
cedures, and insertion of dental implants. Complications mostly 
relate to infection and bleeding. Wound breakdown, tissue loss, 
and/ or localized infections following oral surgical procedures are 
uncommon but may require management under general anaes-
thesia. While also rare, postoperative bleeding can cause airway 
compromise.17 Crucially, swelling of the floor of the mouth can 
occur following relatively minor surgery and is a potentially life- 
threatening complication. Foreign objects (e.g. surgical screws) 
may also fall into the oropharynx, warranting consideration of a 
throat pack (though, as discussed in Chapter 10, throat packs carry 
their own risks).
Oral and maxillofacial trauma
All patients presenting with facial trauma should be assumed to 
have sustained significant head and/ or cervical trauma until ex-
cluded, and warrant a ‘trauma survey’ (discussed in Chapter 13). 
The restoration of a functional dental occlusion following fractures 
of the jaw(s) requires the teeth to be ‘fixed’ in place while the bones 
either heal (conservatively) or while fixation plates are placed sur-
gically. Once the plates have been inserted intraoperatively, the 
maxillomandibular fixation can usually be released prior to under-
taking tracheal extubation. It is relatively rare for patients to leave 
the operating theatre with their jaws still wired closed (IMF), 
though elastics may remain in situ (specific IMF precautions were 
discussed earlier in this chapter). Postoperative identification of 
functional discrepancies in dental occlusion may necessitate re-
turn to theatre. Postoperative infection, failure of bony fixation, or 
non- union of facial fractures are uncommon outcomes following 
Table 17.1 Additional perioperative surgical complications
Intraoperative arrhythmia
Bradyarrhythmias (including asystole) resulting from the trigeminocardiac reﬂex occasionally occur during down- fracture of 
the midface or from manipulation of midface bones
Similarly, midfacial osteotomies may illicit bradyarrhythmias5
Dental injury
Inadvertent damage/ fracture of teeth or artiﬁcial dentition may occur, and may also be lost into the airway
Flap perfusion issues
Flap ischaemia or aseptic necrosis of the maxilla or mandibular segments may occur due to impaired vascular support of the 
segment or ﬂap
Ophthalmic complications
The eyes are at risk of injury given the shared airway and proximity of the oral and maxillofacial procedure and equipment. 
Eyes should be protected with a water- based lubricant, tapes, steri- strips, or corneal shields where appropriate
Blindness following Le Fort osteotomies has been reported, with proposed mechanisms including propagation of fractures to 
involve orbital ﬁssure structures6
Base of skull complications
Though generally rare, extended fracture lines (from Le Fort osteotomies) may transmit injury to base of skull structures. 
Complications of this include cavernous sinus thrombosis, pseudoaneurysms, and arteriovenous ﬁstula formation7,8
Soft tissue injury
The lip is at risk of pressure injuries, as well as the nasal tip from excessive traction caused by the nasotracheal tube
Pressure injuries may occur during prolonged procedures (especially if hypotensive anaesthesia techniques are employed), 
and particular attention must be paid to protecting pressure areas
Nasolacrimal complications
Laceration of the lacrimal duct or facial oedema (causing obstruction) may cause epiphora and recurrent dacryocystitis— 
necessitating return to theatre for dacryocystorhinostomy
Thrombotic complications
A perioperative strategy for thromboprophylaxis must be speciﬁcally agreed by the surgical and anaesthesia teams, 
particularly when microvascular procedures are being undertaken
Prolonged procedures, a protracted period of immobility after major surgery, and underlying malignancy may also contribute 
to risk of venous thrombosis
Major circulatory complications
During neck dissection, manipulation of the internal carotid artery may dislodge atherosclerotic plaque compromising 
cerebral perfusion
Dissection of lymphatics around the internal jugular vein may cause signiﬁcant blood loss. Perioperative ‘head- up’ patient 
positioning aids in reducing distension of neck veins. Air embolism can also rarely occur if neck veins are opened
Brisk bleeding may also occur during maxillary osteotomies or maxillectomy, following cleavage of the maxilla from the 
pterygoid plates (arterial and/ or venous sources)— usually managed with cautery, packing, and ligation3
Delayed bleeding
This typically occurs within the ﬁrst 2 weeks, presenting with epistaxis from a recanalized blood vessel, wound breakdown, or 
a pseudoaneurysm (which requires packing, surgical intervention or angiography, and embolization)9,10
Unsatisfactory surgical outcome
Unfavourable surgical correction, relapse, and/ or instability of fractures or osteotomies may necessitate further surgical 
intervention/ revision procedures
Neurological injury
Postoperative neurological injury is relatively common following OMFS procedures11
Branches of the trigeminal or facial nerve may be compressed during dissection or retraction/ protection from the operative 
ﬁeld.12 Most of these neuropraxia will recover, although not all, with some developing into chronic pain syndromes.13 Central 
hypersensitization measures (e.g. nociceptive blockade, anti- inﬂammatory agents, and gabapentin) have shown some 
reduction in postoperative neuropathies.14 Melatonin has also shown some initial promise, though larger trials are needed15
Third molar extraction bears special mention here, due to the frequency with which these procedures are performed, and 
the risk to both the inferior alveolar and lingual nerves, which may proximate to the surgical site resulting in subsequent 
altered sensory function. Despite these risks, removal is still warranted as third molar teeth may cause localized infections 
(pericoronitis) that spread into the deep spaces of the ﬂoor of mouth and neck
Impaired sensation of the lips and chin may occur following bilateral sagittal split osteotomies16
The prolonged nature of major OMFS procedures carries the risk of peripheral nerve compression injuries
Surgical complications
196
open reduction and internal fixation; nevertheless, management 
entails fracture revision and free bone grafting (if bony continuity 
has been lost).
Mandibular trauma
Mandibular fractures often present with trismus (limited mouth 
opening due to muscle spasm) that may or may not be relieved by 
neuromuscular blocking agents. Most mandibular fractures require 
nasotracheal intubation so that the teeth can be brought together 
for functional reduction, and most do not require advanced airway 
techniques. Direct laryngoscopy is less likely to be impeded by frac-
tures involving the mandibular body or passing through the third 
molar tooth socket, as the upward and forward movements of the 
laryngoscope will usually lift the entire glossal apparatus anteriorly, 
allowing visualization of the glottis. In contrast, fractures beneath 
the ascending ramus of the mandible (i.e. under the masseter and 
medial pterygoid muscles) can be more problematic as spasm of 
these muscles (causing trismus) can limit the anterior movement of 
the mandible during laryngoscopy. Secondary displacement of frac-
tures can occur during laryngoscopy, and while clearly not desirable, 
tracheal intubation must always take precedence, with any unavoid-
able displacement addressed by the surgical team during fracture 
reduction.
Midfacial trauma
Fractures of the midface tend to occur in patterns, classified ac-
cording to the level at which the fractures cross the facial skeleton 
(discussed in detail in Chapter 13). Le Fort I fractures separate the 
dental- bearing portion of the maxilla from above, extending from 
the level of the lateral nose to the pterygoid plates posteriorly. Le 
Fort II fractures extend from the nasal rim, along the orbital floor 
to beneath the zygomas, to the pterygoid plates posteriorly. Le Fort 
III fractures cleave the entire facial skeleton from the cranial base, 
and signify significant cranial and cervical impact (with their con-
comitant risks). Naso- ethmoidal fractures tend to be localized, but 
are significant due to the potential for haemorrhage and intracra-
nial involvement. ‘Panfacial’ fractures involve most of the facial 
skeleton, requiring multiple incisions, that are subsequently joined 
subperiosteally to provide access to the facial skeleton beneath the 
facial soft tissues.
Orbital trauma
Orbital trauma deserves special mention due to the risk of blindness 
following surgical repair. The visual status of the affected eye must 
be established prior to commencement of surgery. If the eye cannot 
be fully examined due to lid swelling, a bright light can be used to 
at least confirm light perception and the integrity of the optic nerve. 
Blindness may be caused by the initial trauma causing damage to 
the optic nerve, or increased perioperative intraocular pressure re-
sulting in retinal ischaemia and blindness postoperatively. Measures 
should be taken to avoid/ minimize increases in intraocular pressure. 
Repair of orbital floor fractures requires the globe to be elevated 
which may compress the globe and raise intraocular pressure. The 
oculocardiac reflex (associated with profound bradycardia) can be 
precipitated as the surgeon accesses the orbital floor, though release 
of the applied retraction usually leads to spontaneous resolution.18 
Anything that might increase the risk of venous bleeding within the 
orbit postoperatively must also be prevented, for example, coughing 
at tracheal extubation, and vomiting in the recovery period. Signs 
of retrobulbar haematoma include severe pain behind the eye, 
proptosis, and reduced vision/ reaction to light in the affected eye. 
Patients should be closely monitoring for these signs, and the sur-
gical team must be notified immediately if there is any concern, 
with acetazolamide and dexamethasone administered, and an im-
mediate return to theatre for surgical release via lateral canthotomy. 
Retrobulbar haemorrhage (and blindness) can also occur following 
indirect elevation of zygomatic fractures (due to involvement of the 
lateral orbital wall) therefore these patients require the same degree 
of vigilance.
Facial osteotomies
Facial osteotomies (discussed in detail in Chapter 10) are performed 
for functional and aesthetic reasons. These procedures require sig-
nificant collaboration between the orthodontist (who plans the de-
sired dental occlusion preoperatively) and the surgeons (who move 
the bony segments bearing the teeth into the pre- planned positions). 
In a similar manner to the reduction of jaw fractures, the occlu-
sion of the teeth is used to guide the bony segments into position. 
A satisfactory functional result requires fixation accurate to within 
one or two millimetres (on dental occlusion); however, functional 
reproducibility of osteotomies can be affected by the presence of 
multiple bony segments, TMJ ligament laxity, and variations in 
muscle tone. A discrepancy of >2 mm detected postoperatively may 
require subsequent (non- urgent) return to theatre— which is usu-
ally undertaken within the first 10 days, when airway management 
may be complicated by incomplete resolution of surgical oedema 
and the presence of early fibrosis throughout the local musculature. 
Voluntary mouth opening may be restricted, but usually improves 
upon induction of anaesthesia. Extra caution should be taken with 
the bimaxillary osteotomy patient returning to theatre as the fixation 
screws used to hold the facial skeleton in place are small (usually 
2 mm in diameter) and the bone is generally thin. Fixation can be 
easily disrupted during tracheal intubation, with the bony frag-
ments displaced. The surgeon will be aware of this possibility and 
will check the final revised reduction; however, a return to theatre 
for correction of a ‘small discrepancy’ can sometimes turn out to be 
not such a simple undertaking.
Maxillary osteotomies roughly mimic the correspondingly named 
midfacial (Le Fort) fracture patterns. All involve transection of the 
nasal septum and disarticulation of the maxilla from the pterygoid 
plates in some manner, and are therefore always associated with the 
risk of perioperative haemorrhage.3 During a Le Fort I osteotomy 
(the most commonly undertaken maxillary osteotomy), the mucosa 
of the nasal floor is frequently breached exposing the nasotracheal 
tube to potential damage. Le Fort II and III procedures involve orbital 
osteotomies, and therefore pose the same risks mentioned earlier 
during orbital fracture management. Le Fort III osteotomy involves 
cleavage of the entire facial skeleton from the cranial base, requiring 
coronal, orbital, and oral surgical incisions for access. The vitality of 
the osteotomized facial bones and dental segments is dependent on 
random diffusion through adherent periosteum. Hypoperfusion, 
evidenced by decreased bleeding from the osteotomized segments, 
threatens the viability of the bone segments and dental tissues, there-
fore maintenance of adequate perfusion is essential. Avascular ne-
crosis of bone and dental tissues following facial osteotomies are 
relatively uncommon. Management involves waiting for the extent 
 
 
 
 
Procedure-speciﬁc complications
197
of necrosis to be clearly defined, and then secondary debridement 
and revision.
Tumour resection and reconstructive surgery
Malignancy can have a significant impact on airway management, 
relating to distortion of anatomy from the tumour itself, previous 
surgery, and the presence of scar tissue, or the effects of radio-
therapy on tissues (discussed in detail in Chapter 15). Oral and 
maxillofacial pathology includes epithelial tumours (skin and mu-
cosa), salivary gland tumours (major and minor), tumours relating 
to the dental apparatus (odontogenic— benign and malignant), and 
tumours arising from the tissues covering the facial skeleton and 
within the bony skeleton itself. Resective surgery may require facial 
osteotomies (as osteoplastic flaps) to disarticulate the facial skel-
eton, providing access to tumours deep to the facial skeleton (e.g. 
base of skull).19 These approaches employ orthognathic surgical 
techniques, avoiding the need to resect uninvolved tissues, and this 
ability to reposition large anatomical units following tumour resec-
tion allows restoration of facial form and function, while greatly 
reducing surgical morbidity.
Neck dissection is frequently undertaken as part of the manage-
ment of malignant tumours, with the aim of removing the regional 
draining lymph nodes. The superficial lymph nodes of the head and 
neck drain to the vertical deep chain surrounding the IJV, within the 
carotid sheath. Neck dissections that extend beyond the superficial 
lymphatics breach the carotid sheath, exposing the length of the IJV 
to injury. Damage to the IJV may cause significant rapid bleeding 
that also obscures the injury site until control can be regained by ap-
plication of pressure and suturing. Without the application of appro-
priate pressure, a significant breach in the IJV may also result in air 
embolism. The ‘great vessels’ of the neck are replete with arterial and 
venous branches, and the IJV’s multiple feeding veins must be sealed 
to prevent postoperative haematoma. Hypotensive anaesthesia may 
assist during neck dissection; however, restoration of ‘normal’ blood 
pressure is essential prior to wound closure to ensure any potential 
sources of bleeding (that may cause postoperative haematoma) are 
identified and addressed. The carotid sheath also carries the vagus 
nerve which gives off motor branches to the soft palate, pharynx, 
and larynx as it travels into the chest and abdomen. In addition, 
the phrenic nerve, glossopharyngeal nerve, hypoglossal nerve, and 
ansa cervicalis all traverse the region involved in neck dissection (at 
various levels) and therefore any of these may also be the source of 
postoperative dysfunction. Return to theatre for such a patient is 
likely to be severely complicated by upper airway oedema and rela-
tively fragile bony fixation.
Tumour resection in the oral and maxillofacial region often re-
sults in substantial bony and soft tissue defects that, if left uncor-
rected, would result in poor functional and aesthetic outcomes. 
Reconstructive efforts are therefore often considerable, entailing the 
use of local, regional, and distant microvascular flaps carrying bone 
and soft tissue. While alloplast and xenografts avoid the issues of 
donor site morbidity, the incidence of postoperative complications 
and the lack of true biological integration with host tissues, generally 
favours the use of autogenous grafts. The choice of graft material is 
largely determined by the size of the defect and the requirement for 
vascular integration of the graft at the donor site. Regional flaps (e.g. 
pectoralis major and temporalis muscle flaps) are harvested on a de-
fined anatomical vascular pedicle, which provides relative resilience 
to fluctuations in systemic blood pressure and fluid status. However, 
bone is frequently required in oral and maxillofacial reconstruction 
to restore continuity, with the donor site being determined by the 
volume of bone needed. Relatively small amounts of bone may be 
harvested locally, while sites such as the anterior iliac crest are used 
for larger defects. The size of free bone grafts is limited by their re-
liance upon ingrowth of a new vascular supply over time. Because 
blood supply of free flaps is restored intraoperatively, they are often 
preferred in patients scheduled for radiotherapy.20 Miniplate fix-
ation of the grafted bone to the resection margins can provide an 
immediate structure to which soft tissues and musculature can be at-
tached. This enhanced structural integrity has improved functional 
and aesthetic outcomes, largely obviating the requirement for post-
operative IMF, and allowing more effective application of an anaes-
thetic facemask (if required postoperatively).
Each flap type has its own potential complications. For example, 
the temporalis muscle flap (frequently used for maxillary recon-
struction) may be a source of persistent bleeding in the early post-
operative period (usually evident at the anterior nares or within the 
oropharynx). The exact source of bleeding is rarely identifiable and 
due to its inaccessibility, is often addressed by local packing via the 
anterior nares. Conversely, the pectoralis major muscle flap may im-
pair respiratory function in the immediate postoperative period.21 
Bone harvest from distant sites may necessitate additional postoper-
ative analgesia. Patient- controlled analgesia or continuous infusion 
of local anaesthetic may be safer in patients who have undergone 
major OMFS procedures, where excessive sedation in the context 
of oedema and secretions should be avoided.22 Since flap survival 
depends upon adequate tissue perfusion, excessive patient move-
ment and physiological disturbance should be avoided in the early 
postoperative period— especially in the case of free tissue flaps, in 
which perfusion depends upon anastomotic integrity.1 Impairment 
of either arterial supply or venous drainage can jeopardize the flap, 
and free flap perfusion must be closely and frequently monitored 
postoperatively. Flaps that are swollen, pale, blue, or cold should 
prompt urgent physiological optimization of the patient, treatment 
of any reversible causes, and surgical review— most surgical teams 
have a low threshold to return to theatre.
Anaesthetic management impacts regional flap integrity to a 
greater extent than local flaps.1 Optimizing fluid status, temperature 
control, and analgesia/ sedation are crucial in the success of micro-
vascular tissue transfer (different types of flaps and their manage-
ment are discussed in detail in Chapter 15).
Cleft lip and palate repair
Thorough preoperative assessment is essential in these patients 
due to the association with other congenital defects (particularly 
cardiac and renal) and recognized syndromes (discussed in detail 
in Chapter 11). There are several different facial cleft classification 
systems to aid in identification and medical communication, most 
of which are anatomically or clinically based (rather than develop-
mental).23 The most frequent facial cleft affects the lip, alveolus (ei-
ther unilaterally or bilaterally), and both the hard and soft palate. 
While cleft lip may be more aesthetically distressing, it is the loss of 
palatal integrity that has the most significant clinical and functional 
impact— recurrent upper and lower respiratory tracts infections and 
nutritional deficiencies may affect overall physical development, 
and the timing of surgery.
Surgical complications
198
Both cleft lip and palatal repairs are undertaken with an oral tra-
cheal tube (usually a south- facing Ring– Adair– Elwyn or flexible 
reinforced tube) secured carefully to avoid traction on facial soft tis-
sues and positioned in the midline to facilitate optimal repair of the 
defect. For palatal repair, a mouth gag (e.g. Dingman) is inserted 
by the surgeon to facilitate access, by widening mouth opening, re-
tracting the cheek, and depressing the tongue. During the applica-
tion of the mouth gag, tracheal tube position and patency may be 
affected, and placement of a gauze swab over the lower lip and under 
the tracheal tube may help prevent tube compression. Following 
gag insertion (and any necessary tracheal tube optimization), the 
patient is then placed in a ‘head- down’ position with considerable 
head extension— which again may alter tracheal tube position, war-
ranting further confirmation of adequacy of ventilation and poten-
tial tube adjustment.
Repair of the palate (closure of the alveolar cleft) requires soft 
palate muscle dissection and elevation of mucosal flaps, which are 
then advanced over the defect, covering the bone that has been 
harvested from a distant site which has been used to fill the bony 
gap in the alveolus. The volume of intraoperative blood loss is not 
usually significant; however, any bleeding can severely impede the 
procedure, in turn leading to further bleeding, and increased sur-
gical time. Closure of the midline palatal defect achieved by medial 
movement of the mucosal flaps leaves exposed mucosal and bony 
surfaces which are prone to bleeding— in fact, the entire nasal sur-
face of the reconstructed palate is left to granulate and is, there-
fore, a potential source of postoperative bleeding. The exposed 
bone surface is therefore usually covered by a haemostatic pack 
(resorbable or non- resorbable) that must be sutured in place. As 
mentioned earlier, nursing and medical staff caring for these pa-
tients postoperatively must be aware of these packs and the poten-
tial airway hazard they may pose if they become loose. A certain 
degree of early postoperative bleeding is to be expected; however, 
persistent bleeding should always warrant urgent review and con-
sideration of re- exploration.
Patients with craniofacial cleft syndromes have an increased in-
cidence of disordered breathing beyond the structural issues of the 
cleft itself,24,25 which should be identified at preassessment, and may 
necessitate a temporary tracheostomy to enable corrective surgery 
to be safely undertaken. Closure of the palatal defect can result in 
sudden and significant reduction in volume of the oral airway, which 
may cause temporary upper airway difficulties— usually addressed 
by postural measures or traction on a previously placed temporary 
tongue suture (discussed in the earlier section on extubation plan-
ning). Postoperative pain can be significant, impairing the child’s 
ability to feed, and bilateral infraorbital nerve blocks are commonly 
used as an adjunct.
Conclusion
The shared airway of OMFS dictates that the surgeon and anaes-
thetist have a mutual understanding of each other’s perspectives, 
needs, and concerns. This can never be truer than when there is 
a complication during or following surgery as those relating to 
OMFS procedures, even minor operations, can be potentially life- 
threatening. Good communication and combined input to the 
whole perioperative care process will undoubtedly achieve better 
outcomes.
REFERENCES
 1. Kruse AL, Luebbers HT, Grätz KW, Obwegeser JA. Factors 
influencing survival of free- flap in reconstruction for cancer 
of the head and neck: a literature review. Microsurgery. 
2010;30(3):242– 248.
 2. Tomljenovic B, Herrmann S, Filippi A, Kühl S. Life- threatening 
hemorrhage associated with dental implant surgery: a review of 
the literature. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2016;27(9):1079– 1084.
 3. Lanigan DT, Hey JH, West RA. Major vascular complications 
of orthognathic surgery: hemorrhage associated with Le Fort 
I osteotomies. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1990;48(6):561– 573.
 4. Flanagan D. Important arterial supply of the mandible, control of 
an arterial hemorrhage, and report of a hemorrhagic incident. J 
Oral Implantol. 2003;29(4):165– 173.
 5. Kiani MT, Tajik G, Ajami M, Fazli H, Kharazifard MJ, 
Mesgarzadeh A. Trigeminocardiac reflex and haemodynamic 
changes during Le Fort I osteotomy. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2016;45(5):567– 570.
 6. Cruz AAV, dos Santos AC. Blindness after Le Fort I osteotomy: a 
possible complication associated with pterygomaxillary separation. 
J CranioMaxillofac Surg. 2006;34(4):210– 216.
 7. Chepla KJ, Totonchi A, Hsu DP, Gosain AK. Maxillary 
artery pseudoaneurysm after Le Fort I osteotomy: treatment 
using transcatheter arterial embolization. J Craniofac Surg. 
2010;21(4):1079– 1081.
 8. Kramer FJ, Baethge C, Swennen G, Teltzrow T, Schulze A, Berten 
J, Brachvogel P. Intra- and perioperative complications of the 
LeFort I osteotomy: a prospective evaluation of 1000 patients. J 
Craniofac Surg. 2004;15(6):971– 977.
 9. Hacein- Bey L, Blazun JM, Jackson RF. Carotid artery 
pseudoaneurysm after orthognathic surgery causing lower 
cranial nerve palsies: endovascular repair. J Oral Maxillofac 
Surg. 2013;71(11):1948– 1955.
 10. Park B, Jang WH, Lee BK. An idiopathic delayed maxillary 
hemorrhage after orthognathic surgery with Le Fort I osteotomy: a 
case report. J Korean Assoc Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2019;45(6):364– 368.
 11. Renton T. Chronic orofacial pain. Oral Dis. 2017;23(5):566– 571.
 12. Dos Santos Alves JM, de Freitas Alves BW, de Figueiredo Costa 
AC, Carneiro BGDS, de Sousa LM, Gondim DV. Cranial nerve 
injuries in Le Fort I osteotomy: a systematic review. Int J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 2019;48(5):601– 611.
 13. Devine M, Hirani M, Durham J, Nixdorf DR, Renton T. 
Identifying criteria for diagnosis of post- traumatic pain and 
altered sensation of the maxillary and mandibular branches of the 
trigeminal nerve: a systematic review. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral 
Pathol Oral Radiol. 2018;125(6):526– 540.
 14. Correll D. Chronic postoperative pain: recent findings in 
understanding and management. F1000Research. 2017;6:1054.
 15. Lee TYC, Curtin JP. The effects of melatonin prophylaxis 
on sensory recovery and postoperative pain following 
orthognathic surgery: a triple- blind randomized controlled 
trial and biochemical analysis. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2020;49(4):446– 453.
 16. Essick GK, Phillips C, Turvey TA, Tucker M. Facial altered 
sensation and sensory impairment after orthognathic surgery. 
Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007;36(7):577– 582.
Conclusion
199
 17. Law C, Alam P, Borumandi F. Floor- of- mouth hematoma 
following dental implant placement: literature review  
and case presentation. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2017;75(11): 
2340– 2346.
 18. Lang S, Lanigan DT, van der Wal M. Trigeminocardiac 
reflexes: maxillary and mandibular variants of the oculocardiac 
reflex. Can J Anaesth. 1991;38(6):757– 760.
 19. Kamalpathey LCK, Sahoo MGNK, Chattopadhyay CPK, Issar 
MY. Access osteotomy in the maxillofacial skeleton. Ann 
Maxillofac Surg. 2017;7(1):98– 103.
 20. Venkatesulu BP, Mahadevan LS, Aliru ML, Yang X, Bodd MH, 
Singh PK, Yusuf SW, Abe JI, Krishnan S. Radiation- induced 
endothelial vascular injury: a review of possible mechanisms. 
JACC Basic Transl Sci. 2018;3(4):563– 572.
 21. Talmi YP, Benzaray S, Peleg M, Eyal A, Bedrin L, Shoshani Y, 
et al. Pulmonary function after pectoralis major myocutaneous 
flap harvest. Laryngoscope. 2002;112(3):467– 471.
 22. Agochukwu UF, DeVine JG. Evaluating post- operative pain 
management at the iliac crest bone graft site: an editorial. J Spine 
Surg. 2016;2(3):237– 239.
 23. Tessier P. Anatomical classification of facial, cranio- facial and 
latero- facial clefts. J Maxillofac Surg. 1976;4(2):69– 92.
 24. MacLean JE, Hayward P, Fitzgerald DA, Waters K. Cleft lip and/ or 
palate and breathing during sleep. Sleep Med Rev. 2009;13(5):345– 354.
 25. Wynne DM, Justice RE, Russel CJH, Gibson NA, Moores T, Ray 
AK, et al. Evaluation of changes in sleep breathing patterns after 
primary palatoplasty in cleft children. S Eur J Orthod Dentofac 
Res. 2014;1:10– 14.
18
Non- technical skills
Frances Lui
Introduction
It has been estimated that one in ten patients suffer from an adverse 
event during hospital admission and nearly half are preventable.1 
Medical errors account for a reported 44,000– 98,000 deaths annu-
ally in the US,2 and are postulated to be the third leading cause of 
hospital death.3 In 2010, the European Board of Anaesthesiology and 
the European Society of Anaesthesiology established the Helsinki 
Declaration on Patient Safety in Anaesthesiology. This declaration 
was universally endorsed, and was a major step forwards in improving 
patient safety with the World Health Organization (WHO) Surgical 
Safety Checklist (SSC), and other safety recommendations.4
The importance of human factors and system safety have long been 
recognized within industries such as nuclear energy and aviation— 
indeed, crisis resource management (CRM) training has been a li-
censing and revalidation requirement for commercial airline pilots 
for many years. These high- risk, high- hazard organizations have 
well- established safety records, based upon intrinsically low abso-
lute error rates and resilient systems designed to minimize sequelae 
when errors do occur. Conversely, awareness of the importance of 
human factors has only permeated into healthcare relatively re-
cently. Human factors have often been mislabelled as human errors, 
with critical incidents attributed to individual carelessness, poor 
knowledge, or negligence, rather than exploring (and improving) 
the limitations of the system that contributed. The importance of 
human factors, ergonomics, and non- technical skills in healthcare 
are now being recognized— reflected by their overdue inclusion in 
medical education and postgraduate curricula.
Non- technical skills refer to a set of cognitive and social skills that 
must be integrated with medical knowledge, clinical skills, and pro-
cedural skills, to deliver high- quality, safe, and effective patient care.
Anaesthetic non-technical skills (ANTS) 
framework
ANTS developed from a list of desirable skills identified for consultant 
anaesthetist and trainee interviews.5 Critical incident reports from the 
Australian Anaesthetic Incident Monitoring System were reviewed to 
support the concept, and taxonomy and rating systems were derived. 
Video clips of simulated anaesthetic crises were filmed at the Scottish 
Clinical Simulation Centre and consultant anaesthetists, who had 
been given training on the system, rated observed behaviours of rele-
vant non- technical skills. The scores were analysed and found to have 
acceptable internal consistency, reliability, validity, and usability.6 The 
system has subsequently been modified and translated into many dif-
ferent languages.5,7 The ANTS framework8 (Table 18.1) includes four 
categories and 15 elements, with desirable and less desirable behav-
ioural attributes under each element, with a 4- point rating scale (1, 
poor; 2, marginal; 3, acceptable; 4, good; N, not observed).
Challenges of oromaxillofacial anaesthesia
In the UK, most procedures are performed in hospitals with anaes-
thesia provided solely by trained anaesthetists. In other countries, 
minor oromaxillofacial surgical (OMFS) procedures continue to 
be performed in outpatient settings— a practice that is accredited 
by several national bodies, including the Accreditation Association 
for Ambulatory Health Care and the American Association for 
Accreditation of Ambulatory Surgery Facilities.9 In this setting, the 
operating surgeon often administers sedation (nitrous oxide gas, 
Table 18.1 The ANTS framework
Categories
Elements
Task management
Planning and preparing
Prioritizing
Providing and maintaining standards
Identifying and utilizing resources
Team working
Coordinating activities with team members
Exchanging information
Using authority and assertiveness
Assessing capabilities
Supporting others
Situation awareness
Gathering information
Recognizing and understanding
Anticipating
Decision- making
Identifying options
Balancing risks and selecting options
Re- evaluating
 
 
 
 
Non-technical skills
202
benzodiazepines, and/ or opioids) and there is significant variability 
in sedation expertise, medical knowledge, and crisis management 
training. The office environment is rarely equipped with an anaes-
thetic machine, and resuscitation may be impaired by poor ergo-
nomics, lighting, and electricity supply, as well as restricted access 
to oxygen sources and monitoring devices. In the US, the ‘Office 
Anesthesia Evaluation’ is designed to check for the presence of essen-
tial equipment, but does not encompass equipment functionality, 
calibration, or electrical testing. Anaesthetists may be called urgently 
to assist in the middle of an OMFS procedure, having had no prior 
patient interaction and without any pre- anaesthetic evaluation. Staff 
numbers may be reduced, with scrub nurses often fulfilling the role 
of theatre runner as well, and anaesthetists expected to work com-
pletely independently. A post- anaesthesia care unit is usually absent, 
with patients recovering in the office environment before discharge 
home the same day. The curriculum of the Association of British 
Academic Oral and Maxillofacial surgeons incorporates only a small 
element on medical crisis training.10 In contrast, dental anaesthesia 
in Japan is an independent entity and anaesthetists must undergo 
additional specialist training before being certified to practise. Such 
disparity in legislation and organizational structures combined with 
highly variable patient characteristics pose significant challenges to 
anaesthesia providers.
For some patient groups, only hospital- based anaesthesia is ap-
propriate, even for minor OMFS procedures (e.g. dental extrac-
tions). These include most paediatric patients (especially those 
with complex syndromes and/ or congenital heart disease), patients 
with behavioural/ psychosocial disorders (anxiety, phobia, cog-
nitive impairment, and attention deficits), patients with signifi-
cant comorbidities (heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, dementia), patients unable to lie still, and those who re-
quire more extensive surgery.11 Medical errors and complications 
are poorly tolerated in these vulnerable patient groups due to their 
limited physiological reserve. Indeed, 44 paediatric dental deaths 
were identified from a US database between 1980 and 2011.12 
Patients with significant comorbidities may require medical opti-
mization, and treatment courses may be prolonged, involving mul-
tiple staged procedures, scheduled around complex social needs. 
An estimated 40%13,14 of children with autistic spectrum disorders 
require multiple dental visits. Arrangements for patient transfer 
into hospital from their home or institution can be particularly 
challenging. Emergence delirium is more common in the paedi-
atric and elderly populations, and the incidence of airway compli-
cations following OMFS is higher. Consequently, some patients 
require additional monitoring after anaesthesia, although most still 
expect rapid recovery and same- day discharge following dental ex-
tractions. Turnover of patients is usually high and with constant 
demand for efficiency, there is increased propensity for medication 
errors, wrong- site surgery, retained throat packs, and communica-
tion gaps.15 Clearly, not just technical skills are required to meet the 
complex demands posed by these environmental, organizational, 
and patient challenges.
Task management
Task management is defined as ‘skills for organizing resources and 
required activities to achieve goals, applied to both individual case 
plans and longer- term scheduling issues’, comprising four skill 
elements8:
Planning and preparing
Strategies for task management must be developed for both primary 
and contingency pathways, reviewed regularly, and modified as re-
quired. This is especially important for minor OMFS procedures, as 
scheduling issues and ad hoc requests arise frequently. The anaes-
thetist may be the first physician to assess the patient, reconcile the 
medication list, and take a relevant history and airway examination. 
A postoperative discharge plan should also be discussed with pa-
tients in the pre- anaesthetic assessment.
Prioritizing
Anaesthetists must allocate varying degrees of attention and im-
portance to different tasks, and avoid being distracted— for example, 
prioritizing airway control and oxygenation over optimal surgical 
access during sedation for dental extractions.
Providing and maintaining standards
Guidelines, protocols, and checklists should be adhered to whenever 
possible. Drugs must be labelled (preferably colour coded) and in 
standardized dilutions. Equipment, including the anaesthetic ma-
chine, must be checked and records kept accurately. Pre- anaesthetic 
evaluation should be standardized,16 particularly the airway as-
sessment, given that OMFS patients are more likely to pose airway 
management difficulties. Anaesthetists practising in office- based 
environments must be especially aware of potential safety threats, 
and meticulously check monitoring and resuscitation equipment, as 
well as oxygen and electricity supplies. Algorithms and emergency 
manuals are indispensable cognitive aids, and the WHO SSC is es-
pecially important in prevention of wrong tooth extraction (where 
marking of the surgical site is not possible).17
Identifying and utilizing resources
Anaesthetists should be able to establish the requirements for task 
completion with minimal disruption, stress, and overload to the 
individual or team. Adverse events such as emergence delirium or 
OMFS crises such as local anaesthetic toxicity require additional re-
sources (personnel, expertise, equipment, and time). The team may 
not be optimally prepared if simulation drills are not practised regu-
larly. Good anticipation of potential problems and early recruitment 
of resources is helpful, with task allocation appropriately matched 
to skill levels.
Situation awareness
Situation awareness is a human performance construct in which an 
individual understands their current situation, the constantly chan-
ging nature of their environment, making correct decisions, and 
undertaking appropriate actions. Situation awareness can be div-
ided into three levels: perception (level I), comprehension (level II), 
and projection (level III).18 In an anaesthesia closed claims analysis, 
lack of situation awareness contributed to death or brain damage 
in 74% of claims.19 Inadequate oxygenation or ventilation, difficult 
tracheal intubation, and pulmonary aspiration were more common 
where situation awareness was impaired. In 81.5% of cases reported 
ANTS applied to situation awareness
203
to the German critical incident reporting system, situation aware-
ness errors occurred most commonly at the levels of perception and 
comprehension.18 This is of particular relevance during complex 
shared airway procedures, or when managing OMFS emergencies; 
for example, postoperative bleeding, oedema, or vomiting fol-
lowing bimaxillary osteotomy with intermaxillary fixation (where 
immediate oral access is impaired) can rapidly escalate to critical 
hypoxaemia if correct decisions and prompt actions are not taken. 
A number of different methods can assess situation awareness. 
These include performance measures— either direct (outcomes, 
time to task completion, error rate) or indirect (self- assessment, 
observer ratings); mental workload measures (subjective ratings, 
physiological parameters)20; task analytic measures (eye tracking, 
time and motion, time spent on task components, communication 
analysis); questionnaires (Situation Awareness Global Assessment 
Techniques); behavioural indicators (ANTS scale, Ottawa Global 
Rating Scale)21; and psychophysiological measures— heart rate, 
ocular movements, cerebral blood flow, electroencephalography, 
and event- related evoked potentials.
Situation awareness depends upon mental workload determin-
ants and the capacity of the human brain to process extra informa-
tion in evolving situations, which is influenced by exogenous factors 
(task demands, difficulty, priority, and urgency) and endogenous 
factors (attention, perception, working memory, expertise). Spatial 
distribution of visual attention of anaesthetists during simulated in-
duction of anaesthesia with or without critical incidents has shown 
that more experienced anaesthetists are able to dedicate less time to 
unrelated tasks, concentrating on manual tasks during critical inci-
dents.22 This suggests a higher degree of situation awareness allowed 
them to direct their spare mental capacity to the most relevant tasks, 
especially in a crisis. Endsley described eight ‘demons’ of situation 
awareness23:
 1. Attention tunnelling— for example, an anaesthetist continues 
to increase the depth of intravenous anaesthesia in response to 
hypertension, failing to notice drug extravasation.
 2. Requisite memory trap— especially for auditory information which 
is not subjected to visual review at a later occasion, for example, 
an anaesthetist may not remember to remove a throat pack when 
only verbally, but not visually reminded.
 3. Workload, anxiety, fatigue, and other stressors.
 4. Data overload— for example, in a tight schedule with high turn-
over of patients (common to dental anaesthesia operating lists), 
the clinical history of different patients may overload the working 
memory of the anaesthetist.
 5. Misplaced salience— humans are naturally attracted to envir-
onmental features such as the colour red, flashing lights, and 
moving objects. If these features are overused (e.g. multiple 
emergency crisis algorithms displayed in operating theatres), 
their impact will deteriorate.
 6. Complexity creep— for example, adding too much information 
will cause cognitive overload and an inability to notice and in-
terpret the information.
 7. Errant mental model— working with a single mental model and 
an inability to break out of it.
 8. Out- of- the- loop syndrome— this problem is created by automa-
tion. Automation occurs when a system performs so well that a 
potential problem with it no longer occurs to the team members— 
for example, most anaesthetists will not check for signs of hyp-
oxaemia if a pulse oximetry reading is good; however, when the 
saturation probe reading is low, anaesthetists may repeatedly 
check for interference rather than for signs of hypoxaemia.
Importantly, there is a relationship between cognitive capacity and 
established knowledge and understanding. Compared with novices, 
experts are able to apply their superior domain- specific factual and 
procedural knowledge to solve problems more quickly. Training in 
situation awareness (especially using simulation) is therefore de-
signed so that tasks are domain specific for skill acquisition. Visual 
aids are also encouraged rather than auditory cues, in order to re-
duce overloading the working memory (cognitive aids are discussed 
in greater detail later in this chapter).
Situation awareness can be derived at an individual or team 
level— involving shared requirements, devices, mental models, and 
processes (‘distributed’ situation awareness),24 taking into account 
the complex interactions that occur within a collaborative system. 
In this case, the interactions between components of the system be-
come the focus of any root cause analysis in the event of a critical 
incident.25
ANTS applied to situation awareness
Situation awareness in ANTS is defined as ‘the skills for developing 
and maintaining an overall awareness of the work setting, based on 
observing all relevant aspects of the theatre environment (patient, 
team, time, displays, equipment); understanding what they mean, 
and thinking ahead about what could happen in the near future’. It 
encompasses three skill elements:
Gathering information
Information is collected from all sources including records, drug 
charts, monitor displays, equipment databases, clinical symptoms, 
surgical field, theatre settings, and team communication threads. 
Information gathered is verified, and continuously updated for on-
going interpretation. Good communication between the surgeon 
and the anaesthetist is essential for accurate data gathering, as the 
anaesthetist’s view of the surgical field can be compromised during 
OMFS procedures.
Recognizing and understanding
Information is integrated and interpreted to identify any mismatch 
(a simultaneous diagnostic and management process). Not only the 
quantity, but also the significance of each information point is ana-
lysed to achieve specific goals; for example, if there has been sig-
nificant bleeding, a patient may become hypotensive, therefore the 
frequency of non- invasive blood pressure monitoring should be in-
creased. Team members should be alerted and initial management 
options might include volume expansion, vasopressor administra-
tion, upgrading existing intravenous access, point- of- care testing, 
optimizing anaesthetic depth, and simultaneous actions of the sur-
geon to achieve haemostasis. Further escalation might include acti-
vation of transfusion algorithms, tranexamic acid administration, 
prevention of hypothermia, and so on.
 
 
 
 
Non-technical skills
204
Anticipating
This involves projection of potential outcomes associated with dif-
ferent actions, and constant review of the evolving situation. In the 
above example, an anaesthetist may wish to call for extra personnel 
in anticipation of the increased number of tasks associated with 
massive bleeding.
Decision- making
How an individual selects a particular course of action depends upon 
the context, perceived consequences, time permitted, information 
reliability, and influence of the group (if they are working as part 
of a team). Perhaps the most significant threat to rational decision- 
making is a tendency to have preconceived notions and the desire to 
seek confirmation of these. Several different cognitive models26 are 
used to explain the processes involved in decision- making:
Normative model
The optimal decision is made with rationality. A good decision is 
based on projecting the relevant consequences of different actions, 
accurate assessment of situations, and making trade- offs in between. 
An alternative, with the greatest subjective expected utility, is chosen 
to maximize return and risk aversion.
Behavioural model
This model explains discrepancies in human estimates of probabil-
ities and inference using heuristics, biases, and effects of memory 
(see later for a list of cognitive biases).
Naturalistic model
This model states that decisions are made in a routine and non- 
analytical manner, in a dynamic and realistic environment, for ex-
ample, decisions based on following previous behavioural patterns 
(especially for manual tasks).
Sometimes, clinical decisions are based upon pattern recognition, and 
judgements may be made without considering all available options. 
Decision- making at a group level adds another layer of complexity, 
as groups are often bounded by social and ethical norms. A ‘group’ 
may not necessarily infer ‘team’ as individuals within the group may 
not share the same mental model, such that trade- offs must be made 
and conflicts may arise (large groups are especially prone to arrive 
at polarized conclusions). Conflict resolution involves discussion, 
argument, voting, negotiation, arbitration, and third- party interven-
tion. A variety of approaches have been developed to enhance ‘group 
thinking’, such as brainstorming, Delphi techniques, attaining con-
sensus, agendas, and computer- based decision support.
Ideally, anaesthetists would make rational decisions in accordance 
with the normative model; however, human decision- making is in-
fluenced by emotion and subconscious processes, such as clinical 
sense, ‘rule of thumb’, educational guess, and ‘common things are 
common’. Heuristics are not necessarily incorrect, and represent a 
means of tackling complex situations in a mentally economical way. 
Some of these cognitive biases are described below27:
 1. Anchoring heuristics— a tendency to rely on the first piece of 
information offered, for example, if an anaesthetist chooses to 
intubate the trachea using a nasal flexible fibreoptic approach, 
this is an ‘anchoring’ point for the team to focus on, and alterna-
tive options may not be considered.
 2. Availability heuristics— the ease with which an idea is conceived, 
for example, an anaesthetist may choose a fibreoptic approach 
because they have just attended an advanced airway workshop.
 3. Framing effects— preferences between medical interventions 
change dramatically depending on whether the outcomes are 
posed as losses or gains, for example, an anaesthetist may not 
choose to perform a fibreoptic intubation when they are in-
formed the technique has a 10% failure rate. Conversely, they 
may select the technique if they are told it has a 90% success rate.
The ‘rule of three’ has been described as a potential de- biasing 
strategy28: if a treatment for a diagnosed condition is initiated and 
repeated once without an effect, at least three other possible diag-
noses should be considered prior to attempting the same interven-
tion a third time. In addition, explanation for a particular treatment 
effect should also consider three other possible causes for the effect, 
for example, a patient’s oxygen saturation falls during intermittent 
positive pressure ventilation, leading to secretions being suctioned. 
If oxygen desaturation persists on repeat suctioning, three differen-
tial diagnoses should be considered. Even if secretions are present 
upon suctioning, differential diagnoses for oxygen desaturation 
should still be considered. Cognitive aids and checklists can aid this 
process of considering differential diagnoses and in avoiding fix-
ation errors.
ANTS applied to decision- making
There are three skill elements in this category8:
Identifying options
This requires the anaesthetist to problem- solve— a stepwise ap-
proach considering all the alternatives, involving patients in 
decision- making, and seeking opinion from experts in challen-
ging cases. For example, determining whether a patient’s trachea 
be extubated immediately after elective intermaxillary fixation; if 
extubation is not appropriate immediately, then when might it be 
undertaken and how might it be done safely— what will the airway 
rescue strategy involve; and were all these options discussed with the 
patient in advance?
Balancing risks and selecting options
This is the ability to consider both advantages and disadvantages be-
fore making a choice, specifically tailored to the patient’s individual 
situation, and then judicious implementation of the chosen action. 
For example, the decision is made to proceed to tracheal extubation; 
however, if the patient’s oxygen saturations fall following extubation, 
the priority must be rescue oxygenation and a plan for reintubation 
must be formulated and prepared for.
Re- evaluating
The chosen option must be constantly reassessed and the situation 
updated. Interventions may take time to take effect, during which 
the patient may continue to deteriorate, necessitating change in their 
management. If proven wrong or new information arises, the course 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Team communication
205
of action must be revised. In the previous example, if the oxygen sat-
urations continue to fall despite initial airway rescue techniques, the 
anaesthetist must transition down the difficult intubation algorithm 
rather than becoming fixated on reintubation.
Teamwork
In operating theatres, staff from different disciplines, educational 
backgrounds, and cultures must work together in a complex and 
dynamic environment. Each team member contributes to patient 
care and can have an impact on their outcome. The US Institute of 
Medicine report ‘To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System’2 
emphasized team training in critical care areas to provide safe, ef-
fective, efficient, personalized, timely, and equitable medical care. 
Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance and Patient 
Safety (TeamSTEPPS™)29 is an example of such a team training 
system. The WHO SSC also encourages collaboration between team 
members, to reduce communication errors and improve safety. The 
constituents of an effective team vary according to task character-
istics, such as task complexity and time pressure. Great teamwork 
depends on team members’ respective competencies in the ‘Big 
Five’: leadership, mutual performance monitoring, backup behav-
iour, adaptability, and team orientation.30
ANTS applied to teamwork
Teamwork in ANTS is ‘skills for working in a group context, in any 
role, to ensure effective joint task completion and team member sat-
isfaction’. It involves five skill elements at an individual level8:
Coordinating activities with team members
Oromaxillofacial anaesthetists are required to collaborate with 
many other operating theatre staff members during manual and 
cognitive tasks, and they must understand the roles and responsi-
bilities of each team member. It is crucial that tasks are allocated 
according to the best use of labour and resources, and not neces-
sarily assuming that all senior staff members are ‘leaders’ and all 
juniors are team ‘members’ in every task. Everyone (regardless of 
seniority or training) can contribute positively to any situation, es-
pecially in an emergency/ crisis. In an evolving situation, the role of 
each member may need to change, and role allocation should be fre-
quently reviewed. Responsibility and coordination should certainly 
not be assumed.
Exchanging information
Great teams give and receive knowledge and data, and confirm their 
understanding for better coordination. For example, in the event of 
significant intraoperative bleeding, surgical gauze should be regu-
larly weighed and correlated with the volume of irrigation fluid, and 
the anaesthetist should update the surgeon on the estimated blood 
loss, so that the entire team is sharing the same mental model to-
wards achieving haemostasis.
Authority and assertiveness
Instructions given by the team leader should be clear, precise, and 
delivered in a decisive manner. Team leaders should also be able to 
assume a non- leading role when appropriate. Nevertheless, conflicts 
may still arise, and a good team should be able to recognize and re-
solve these effectively. In a patient with impending airway obstruc-
tion, the anaesthetist and surgeon may differ on the preferred airway 
management strategy (e.g. awake fibreoptic intubation versus awake 
tracheostomy)— an effective, cohesive team must be able to appre-
ciate their colleagues’ perspectives, and reach consensus on the best 
strategy, based upon the available skill mix and individual patient 
pathology and presentation.
Assessing capabilities
Each team member has their own specific knowledge and skills, and 
is influenced by factors unique to themselves— previous experience, 
stress, fatigue, sickness, and so on. Inquiry into the relative experi-
ence of team members is essential prior to task delegation. If a team 
member is not performing to the expected standard, support and 
assistance (beyond the task) may be required.
Supporting others
Physical, cognitive, and emotional support should be provided to 
other team members, particularly when a critical incident/ untoward 
incident has occurred. Team members can often be second ‘victims’ 
from patient incidents, and even the team leader needs reassurance 
and appropriate debriefing.
Team communication
Unlike some other surgical specialities, the nature of oromaxillofacial 
surgery and the ‘shared airway’ dictate that good communication 
between operating surgeon and anaesthetist is essential to ensuring 
patient safety and optimizing patient outcome. Numerous strategies 
exist to improve communication within teams:
Distraction and noise avoidance
In the aviation industry, unnecessary conversation is not permitted 
in the cockpit when flying below 10,000 feet.31 Similarly, extraneous 
noise and interruptions should be minimized in anaesthesia— 
particularly during time- critical and potentially challenging pro-
cedures such as airway management in the oromaxillofacial patient. 
Notably, the American College of Surgeons has issued a statement 
addressing the use of smartphones and handheld electronic de-
vices, and the importance of avoiding noise distraction32 in the 
operating theatre. Rather unsurprisingly, the frequency of case- 
irrelevant conversations is lower during more challenging surgical 
procedures.33
Communication techniques and tools
‘Read- back’ is a technique in which the individual receiving the in-
formation repeats it back verbally to the sender, so that the sender 
knows their message was understood. This technique increases 
information transfer between anaesthetists and post- anaesthesia 
care unit nurses, and can be of particular use during patient 
emergencies.34
Weller et al.35 have also described a structured tool for im-
proved information sharing, ‘SNAPPI’: Stop, Notify, Assessment, 
Plan, Priorities, Invite ideas. In simulated scenarios of local anaes-
thetic toxicity and pulmonary embolus, the SNAPPI tool improved 
Non-technical skills
206
information sharing between anaesthetists and other team mem-
bers, and verbalization of the diagnosis. The tool also facilitated 
nursing staff and assistants to speak up (having been invited by 
the anaesthetists), empowering often- overlooked team members.
To ensure a task is completed, the three Cs of communication— 
Clear instructions, Closing the loop, and Citing names— have also 
been shown to be beneficial.36
‘Speaking up’ culture
The two- challenge rule in the aviation industry is an example of a 
tool to improve communication, and is covered in the TeamSTEPPS™ 
programme: if a pilot has endangered flight safety by his/ her actions, 
the co- pilot must challenge it. If there is no answer after two chal-
lenges, or an irrational response is given, the co- pilot is entitled to 
assume control of the flight. Similarly, United Airlines have pro-
moted the use of provocative words in a crisis, so that junior staff 
can attract their seniors’ attention, C (I am ‘concerned’), U (I am 
‘uncomfortable’), and S (I am ‘scared’).
Senior medical staff must specifically encourage feedback from 
junior team members, nursing staff, and assistants, as these in-
dividuals may not willingly speak up due to perceived hierarchy, 
lack of confidence, or in the assumption that the leader already 
knows the information. Green et al.37 suggested that phrases such 
as ‘anyone can and should speak up if you have any concerns what-
soever, without fear of retribution’ should be repeated throughout 
the day by senior clinicians to encourage assertive challenges from 
nursing staff about patient safety concerns. In some languages, par-
ticular words and sentence structures can be chosen to emphasize 
politeness and to highlight the relative hierarchy of the speaker and 
listener— in crisis situations, the speech pattern should be clear, 
avoiding overly convoluted language, and should follow a ‘hori-
zontal’ gradient.38
Team performance
Optimal team performance can be affected by a number of external 
factors.
In a simulation study,39 it was found that all categories of non- 
technical skills performance declined during cardiopulmonary re-
suscitation when there were external stressors present (extraneous 
noise or a scripted actor playing the role of a family member). 
However, when the leader possessed superior non- technical skills, 
the entire team demonstrated improved technical performance, 
with the authors recommending non- technical skills training 
specifically for team leaders, in order to benefit overall team 
performance.
Fatigue may be a particularly important factor in performance. 
Fatigue can arise not only from sleep deprivation but also boredom, 
work overload, physical exhaustion, and changes to circadian 
rhythm. Syringe swaps and wrong drug dosages were identified 
as the most common medical errors associated with fatigue in the 
Australian Incident Monitoring Study database from 1987 to 1997.40 
In 2014, the Association of Anaesthetists published guidelines on 
anticipating and mitigating the effects of fatigue in the workplace. 
Nevertheless, in a subsequent national survey on the effects of fatigue 
on UK anaesthetic trainees,41 fatigue was cited as impairing physical 
health, psychological well- being, and personal relationships.
Crisis resource management and simulation 
training
Concepts derived from the aviation industry have been translated to 
anaesthesia CRM courses to enhance non- technical skills training, 
focusing on tasks performed by anaesthetists in the operating the-
atre using simulation- based training.7
The principles of anaesthesia CRM include the following key 
points42:
 1. Knowing the environment.
 2. Anticipating and planning.
 3. Calling for help early and identifying who and how to call.
 4. Exercising leadership with assertiveness; planning, decision- 
making, and distribution of tasks with clear instructions.
 5. Distribution of workload— the ‘10- seconds- for- 10- minutes 
rule’: at critical moments, when a team ‘feels stuck’, it should 
pause for a 10- second time- out to re- evaluate. The leader 
should identify issues, gather information, and check with team 
members for their concerns. This 10- second delay is offset by 
the benefits of aligning rational decision- making and planning.
 6. Mobilizing all available resources.
 7. Communicating effectively.
 8. Using all available information— both primary (patient physio-
logical status, monitor displays) and secondary (patient charts 
and records, cognitive aids, online resources).
 9. Preventing fixation errors— cognitive biases may warrant a 
second opinion.
 10. Cross- checking and double- checking— never assume anything.
 11. Using cognitive aids— checklists, handbooks, guidelines, dose 
calculators, and advice hotlines.
 12. Repeated re- evaluation— application of the ‘10- seconds- for- 
10- minutes rule’.
 13. Implementation of good teamwork— coordination with and 
support of others.
 14. Astute allocation of attention.
 15. Dynamic prioritization.
Simulation has been applied to nearly all healthcare domains, to 
assist with acquisition of technical psychomotor skills for clinical 
procedures, in evaluation of cognitive and interpersonal skills, 
and to assess the effects of performance- shaping factors.43 As well 
as an educational tool, it has also become a key component of 
competency- based assessment in many anaesthesia certification 
programmes. Simulation- based CRM training has demonstrated 
significant and reproducible improvement in team communica-
tion and improved coordination in the management of obstetric,44 
critical care,45 neonatal,46 and trauma emergencies/ resuscitation.47 
The use of in situ high- fidelity simulation in the operating theatre 
also offers a means of testing the functional aspects of the clinical 
location during daily activities (surgical procedures) and to assess 
workplace attitudes.48 The participants gain intrinsic motivation 
and positive self- efficacy from their involvement as well.49 It is more 
challenging to prove simulation- based CRM training directly im-
proves patient outcomes; nevertheless, a few studies have dem-
onstrated such a change, in adult cardiac arrest team responses,50 
neonatal resuscitation,51 and in- hospital paediatric cardiac arrest 
 
 
 
Conclusion
207
survival.52 High fidelity simulation training has been shown to im-
prove anaesthetists’ technical performance and ANTS scores in ma-
lignant hyperthermia scenarios,53 and has been used successfully for 
medical crisis training of dental practitioners.54.55
Cognitive aids
Cognitive aids are tools created to assist an individual or team in 
reducing errors and omissions, and to increase speed and team flu-
idity during performance of a task.56 Examples relevant to OMFS 
include adult life support algorithms,57 management of local anaes-
thetic toxicity protocols,58 difficult airway algorithms,59 and SBAR 
(Situation, Background, Assessment, Recommendations) for struc-
tured handover of complex airway patients to recovery nurses.60 
Cognitive aids should be evidence based, context specific, contain 
only salient information in an easily readable format, and be imme-
diately available in the relevant clinical environment. Linear cogni-
tive aids have been shown to be more effective than branched flow 
charts,61 and paper checklists are generally preferable to electronic 
versions— particularly in emergency situations.62 Most importantly, 
education and training using the cognitive aids are essential as part 
of their implementation.56 The WHO SSC, introduced in 2009,63 is 
one of the most widely adopted checklists internationally, and has 
successfully reduced postoperative surgical complications including 
surgical site infections, unplanned reoperations, pneumonia, and 
overall mortality.64,65 Of course, adherence to the checklist is essen-
tial to influence outcome. Unfortunately, compliance and the quality 
of the process is highly variable,66,67 with some staff perceiving it as 
a ‘tick box’ exercise rather than recognizing its potential benefits.68 
Its use can be particularly helpful in OMFS, where it may assist in 
highlighting potentially difficult airway management and/ or signifi-
cant blood loss. Similarly, its application in dental operating theatres 
and outpatient settings may reduce ‘wrong- site surgery’ during 
dental extractions.69 Interestingly, improved checklist adherence 
has been observed when the checking process is initiated by sur-
geons,67 although successful implementation requires collaborative 
intention, with engagement of all staff members.70 At a university 
hospital in Taiwan, the WHO SSC was used as the basis for an entire 
educational programme for dental residents, successfully reducing 
their erroneous dental extraction rate from 0.026– 0.046% in 1991 
to zero in 2001.71
Continued path towards improving 
patient safety
Patient safety depends upon optimizing hazard control, by lim-
iting safety threats that may result in morbidity, mortality, and/ or 
legal liability. Hazards can be controlled by a three- phase response 
system: (1) eliminate it, (2) defend against it, and (3) warn about 
it. Total elimination of potential threats is often impossible, such 
that patient safety is often reliant upon robust processes and ef-
fective warning systems. In OMFS, pre- assessment clinics can be 
considered such a defence system, identifying potentially high- risk 
patients who require special planning and management, and patient 
difficult airway alert bracelets may represent a warning measure. 
Of course, like many interventions, these involve behavioural 
change and compliance, training, and appropriate personnel selec-
tion, and none are foolproof. Warnings should never compensate for 
inadequate or poorly designed defence measures.
Ultimately, the aim should be to establish a culture of safety within 
the workplace, across all settings and environments. This can be 
exemplified by the effect of simply broadening the WHO SSC into 
a five- step intervention (pre- list briefing, sign- in, time- out, sign- 
out, and post- list debriefing)— implementation of which has been 
shown to have significant improvement in five of the six safety cul-
ture domains: working conditions, perceptions of management, job 
satisfaction, safety climate, and teamwork climate72 (staff members’ 
perception of stress, the sixth domain, worsened, although this 
response may have resulted from improvements in the other do-
mains). The climate of safety created not only alerted frontline staff 
to adverse patient outcome indicators but also encouraged positive 
domains in the workplace.
Conclusion
Training in anaesthetic non- technical skills has crucially raised 
awareness of the important contribution of human factors and be-
havioural learning to patient safety, but should only be considered 
part of the framework necessary to create a culture of safety. Errors 
will continue to occur and, while they can be dreadfully damaging 
to both patients and the staff involved, they serve as the basis for 
continued improvement. The commitment to achieving a climate 
of safety must permeate through entire organizations, supported by 
healthcare policies, organizational structures, and professional re-
gulations, and driven by dedicated leaders and engaged staff.
REFERENCES
 1. de Vries EN, Ramrattan MA, Smorenburg SM, Gouma DJ, 
Boermeester MA. The incidence and nature of in- hospital 
adverse events: a systematic review. Qual Saf Health Care. 
2008;17(3):216– 223.
 2. Kohn JT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human: Building 
a Safer Healthcare System. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 1999.
 3. Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error- the third leading cause of 
death in the US. BMJ. 2016;353:i2139.
 4. Mellin- Olsen J, Staender S, Whitaker DK, Smith AF. The Helsinki 
declaration on patient safety in anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 
2010;27(7):592– 597.
 5. Flin R, Patey R. Non- technical skills for anaesthetists: developing 
and applying ANTS. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 
2011;25(2):215– 227.
 6. Rutherford JS, Flin R, Irwin A, McFadyen AK. Evaluation of 
the prototype Anaesthetic Non- technical Skills for Anaesthetic 
Practitioners (ANTS- AP) system: a behavioural rating system 
to assess the non- technical skills used by staff assisting the 
anaesthetist. Anaesthesia. 2015;70(8):907– 914.
 7. Flin R, Maran N. Basic concepts for crew resource management 
and non- technical skills. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 
2015;29(1):27– 39.
Non-technical skills
208
 8. Flin R, Glavin R, Maran N, Patey R. Anaesthetists’ Non- Technical 
Skills (ANTS) System Handbook v1.0. Framework for Observing and 
Rating Anaesthetists’ non- Technical Skills. Aberdeen: University of 
Aberdeen; 2012.
 9. Keeley KA. Equipment safety, maintenance and inspection: what 
the oral surgeon needs to know. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North 
Am. 2017;29(2):209– 221.
 10. Macluskey M, Durham J, Cowan G, Cowpe J, Evans A, Freeman 
C, et al. UK national curriculum for undergraduate oral 
surgery subgroup for teaching of the Association of British 
Academic Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. Eur J Dent Educ. 
2008;12(1):48– 58.
 11. Giovannitti JA Jr. Anesthesia for off- floor dental and oral surgery. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2016;29(4):519– 525.
 12. Lee HH, Milgrom P, Starks H, Burke W. Trends in death 
associated with pediatric dental sedation and general anesthesia. 
Paediatr Anaesth. 2013;23(8):741– 746.
 13. Bagattoni S, Sadotti A, D’Alessandro G, Piana G. Dental trauma 
in Italian children and adolescents with special health care 
needs. A cross- sectional retrospective study. Eur J Paediatr Dent. 
2017;18(1):23– 26.
 14. Nelson T, Chim A, Sheller BL, McKinney CM, Scott JM. 
Predicting successful dental examinations for children 
with autism spectrum disorder in the context of a dental 
desensitization program. J Am Dent Assoc. 2017;148(7):485– 492.
 15. Todd DW. General concepts of patient safety for the oral and 
maxillofacial surgeon. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 
2017;29(2):121– 129.
 16. Lieblich S. Preoperative evaluation and patient selection for 
office- based oral surgery anesthesia. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin 
North Am. 2018;30(2):137– 144.
 17. Assael LA. Preventing wrong- site surgery in oral and 
maxillofacial surgery. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 
2017;29(2):151– 157.
 18. Schulz CM, Krautheim V, Hackemann A, Kreuzer M, Kochs EF, 
Wagner KJ. Situation awareness errors in anesthesia and critical 
care in 200 cases of a critical incident reporting system. BMC 
Anesthesiol. 2016;16:4.
 19. Schulz CM, Burden A, Posner KL, Mincer SL, Steadman R, 
Wagner KJ, et al. Frequency and type of situational awareness 
errors contributing to death and brain damage: a closed claims 
analysis. Anesthesiology. 2017;127(2):326– 337.
 20. Wright MC, Taekman JM, Endsley MR. Objective measures of 
situation awareness in a simulated medical environment. Qual 
Saf Health Care. 2004;13 Suppl 1:i65– i71.
 21. Schulz CM, Endsley MR, Kochs EF, Gelb AW, Wagner KJ. 
Situation awareness in anesthesia: concept and research. 
Anesthesiology. 2013;118(3):729– 742.
 22. Schulz CM, Schneider E, Fritz L, Vockeroth J, Hapfelmeier A, 
Brandt T, et al. Visual attention of anaesthetists during simulated 
critical incidents. Br J Anaesth. 2011;106(6):807– 813.
 23. Endsley MR. Situation awareness. In: Salvendy G (ed) Handbook 
of Human Factors and Ergonomics, pp. 553– 568. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2012.
 24. Fioratou E, Flin R, Glavin R, Patey R. Beyond 
monitoring: distributed situation awareness in anaesthesia. Br J 
Anaesth. 2010;105(1):83– 90.
 25. Stanton NA, Stewart R, Harris D, Houghton RJ, Baber 
C, McMaster R, et al. Distributed situation awareness 
in dynamic systems: theoretical development and 
application of an ergonomics methodology. Ergonomics. 
2006;49(12– 13):1288– 1311.
 26. Lehto MR, Nah FFH, Yi JS. Decision- making models, decision 
support, and problem solving. In: Salvendy G (ed) Handbook of 
Human Factors and Ergonomics, pp. 192– 242. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons; 2012.
 27. Stiegler MP, Tung A. Cognitive processes in anesthesiology 
decision making. Anesthesiology. 2014;120(1):204– 217.
 28. Stiegler MP, Ruskin KJ. Decision- making and safety in 
anesthesiology. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2012;25(6):724– 729.
 29. Rhee AJ, Valentin- Salgado Y, Eshak D, Feldman D, Kischak 
P, Reich DL, et al. Team training in the perioperative arena: a 
methodology for implementation and auditing behavior. Am J 
Med Qual. 2017;32(4):369– 375.
 30. Baker DP, Salas E, King H, Battles J, Barach P. The role of 
teamwork in the professional education of physicians: current 
status and assessment recommendations. Jt Comm J Qual Patient 
Saf. 2005;31(4):185– 202.
 31. Chute RD, Wiener EL. Cockpit- cabin communication: II. Shall 
we tell the pilots? Int J Aviat Psychol. 1996;6(3):211– 231.
 32. American College of Surgeons (ACS) Committee on 
Perioperative Care. Statement on distractions in the operating 
room. Bull Am Coll Surg. 2016;101(10):42– 44.
 33. Widmer LW, Cumin D, Lombard B, Torrie J, Civil N, Weller 
J. More than talking about the weekend: content of case- 
irrelevant communication within the OR team. World J Surg. 
2018;42(7):2011– 2017.
 34. Boyd M, Torrie J, Boyd M, Frengley R, Garden A, Ng WL, et al. 
Read- back improves information transfer in simulated clinical 
crises. BMJ Qual Saf. 2014;23(12):989– 993.
 35. Weller JM, Torrie J, Boyd M, Frengley R, Garden A, Ng WL, et al. 
Improving team information sharing with a structured call- out 
in anaesthetic emergencies: a randomized controlled trial. Br J 
Anaesth. 2014;112(6):1042– 1049.
 36. Bodor R, Nguyen BJ, Broder K. We are going to name names and 
call you out! Improving the team in the academic operating room 
environment. Ann Plast Surg. 2017;78(5 Suppl 4):S222– S224.
 37. Green B, Oeppen RS, Smith DW, Brennan PA. Challenging 
hierarchy in healthcare teams— ways to flatten gradients to 
improve teamwork and patient care. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2017;55(5):449– 453.
 38. Brindley PG, Reynolds SF. Improving verbal communication in 
critical care medicine. J Crit Care. 2011;26(2):155– 1559.
 39. Krage R, Zwaan L, Tjon Soei Len L, Kolenbrander MW, 
van Groeningen D, Loer SA, et al. Relationship between 
non- technical skills and technical performance during 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: does stress have an influence? 
Emerg Med J. 2017;34(11):728– 733.
 40. Morris GP, Morris RW. Anaesthesia and fatigue: an analysis of the 
first 10 years of the Australian Incident Monitoring Study 1987– 
1997. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2000;28(3):300– 304.
 41. McClelland L, Holland J, Lomas JP, Redfern N, Plunkett E. A 
national survey of the effects of fatigue on trainees in anaesthesia 
in the UK. Anaesthesia. 2017;72(9):1069– 1077.
 42. Rall M, Gaba D, Howard SK, Dieckmann P. Human performance 
and patient safety. In: Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, Fleisher 
LA, Wiener- Kronish JP, Young WL (eds) Miller’s Anesthesia, 8th 
ed, pp. 106– 166. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/ Saunders; 2015.
 43. Small SD. Simulation applications for human factors and systems 
evaluation. Anesthesiol Clin. 2007;25(2):237– 259.
 44. Lipman SS, Daniels KI, Carvalho B, Arafeh J, Harney K, Puck A, 
et al. Deficits in the provision of cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
during simulated obstetric crises. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2010;203(2):179.e1– 5.
Conclusion
209
 45. Frengley RW, Weller JM, Torrie J, Dzendrowskyj P, Yee B, Paul 
AM, et al. The effect of a simulation- based training intervention 
on the performance of established critical care unit teams. Crit 
Care Med. 2011;39(12):2605– 2611.
 46. Williams AL, Lasky RE, Dannemiller JL, Andrei AM, Thomas EJ. 
Teamwork behaviours and errors during neonatal resuscitation. 
Qual Saf Health Care. 2010;19(1):60– 64.
 47. Hughes KM, Benenson RS, Krichten AE, Clancy KD, Ryan 
JP, Hammond C. A crew resource management program 
tailored to trauma resuscitation improves team behavior and 
communication. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;219(3):545– 551.
 48. Gardner AK, Ahmed RA, George RL, Frey JA. In situ simulation 
to assess workplace attitudes and effectiveness in a new facility. 
Simul Healthc. 2013;8(6):351– 358.
 49. Murray AW, Beaman ST, Kampik CW, Quinlan JJ. Simulation 
in the operating room. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 
2015;29(1):41– 50.
 50. Wayne DB, Didwania A, Feinglass J, Fudala MJ, Barsuk JH, 
McGaghie WC. Simulation- based education improves quality 
of care during cardiac arrest team responses at an academic 
teaching hospital: a case- control study. Chest. 2008;133(1):56– 61.
 51. Draycott T, Sibanda T, Owen L, Akande V, Winter C, Reading S, 
et al. Does training in obstetric emergencies improve neonatal 
outcome? BJOG. 2006;113(2):177– 182.
 52. Andreatta P, Saxton E, Thompson M, Annich G. Simulation- 
based mock codes significantly correlate with improved pediatric 
patient cardiopulmonary arrest survival rates. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med. 2011;12(1):33– 38.
 53. Hardy JB, Gouin A, Damm C, Compère V, Veber B, Dureuil 
B. The use of a checklist improves anaesthesiologists’ technical 
and non- technical performance for simulated malignant 
hyperthermia management. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med. 
2018;37(1):17– 23.
 54. Tan GM. A medical crisis management simulation activity 
for pediatric dental residents and assistants. J Dent Educ. 
2011;75(6):782– 790.
 55. Breuer G, Knipfer C, Huber T, Huettl S, Shams N, Knipfer 
K, et al. Competency in managing cardiac arrest: a scenario- 
based evaluation of dental students. Acta Odontol Scand. 
2016;74(4):241– 249.
 56. Marshall S. The use of cognitive aids during emergencies 
in anesthesia: a review of the literature. Anesth Analg. 
2013;117(5):1162– 1171.
 57. Soar J, Deakin CD, Lockey A, Nolan J, Perkins G. Adult Advanced 
Life Support Guidelines. London: Resuscitation Council UK; 2015.
 58. Neal JM, Mulroy MF, Weinberg GL, American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine. American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine checklist for managing 
local anesthetic systemic toxicity: 2012 version. Reg Anesth Pain 
Med. 2012;37(1):16– 18.
 59. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, Mendonca C, Bhagrath 
R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for 
management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J 
Anaesth. 2015;115(6):827– 848.
 60. Müller M, Jürgens J, Redaèlli M, Klingberg K, Hautz WE, 
Stock S. Impact of the communication and patient hand- off 
tool SBAR on patient safety: a systematic review. BMJ Open. 
2018;23;8(8):e022202.
 61. Marshall SD, Sanderson P, McIntosh CA, Kolawole H. The effect 
of two cognitive aid designs on team functioning during intra- 
operative anaphylaxis emergencies: a multi- centre simulation 
study. Anaesthesia. 2016;71(4):389– 404.
 62. Marshall SD. Helping experts and expert teams perform under 
duress: an agenda for cognitive aid research. Anaesthesia. 
2017;72(3):289– 295.
 63. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, Lipsitz SR, Breizat AH, 
Dellinger EP, et al. A surgical safety checklist to reduce 
morbidity and mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360(5):491– 499.
 64. Gillespie BM, Chaboyer W, Thalib L, John M, Fairweather 
N, Slater K. Effect of using a safety checklist on patient 
complications after surgery: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Anesthesiology. 2014;120(6):1380– 1389.
 65. Bergs J, Hellings J, Cleemput I, Zurel Ö, De Troyer V, Van Hiel 
M, et al. Systematic review and meta- analysis of the effect of 
the World Health Organization surgical safety checklist on 
postoperative complications. Br J Surg. 2014;101(3):150– 158.
 66. Neuhaus C, Spies A, Wilk H, Weigand MA, Lichtenstern C. 
‘Attention everyone, time out!’: safety attitudes and checklist 
practices in anesthesiology in Germany. A cross- sectional study. J 
Patient Saf. 2021;17(6):467– 471.
 67. Russ S, Rout S, Caris J, Mansell J, Davies R, Mayer E, et al. 
Measuring variation in use of the WHO surgical safety checklist 
in the operating room: a multicenter prospective cross- sectional 
study. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220(1):1– 11.e4.
 68. Dharampal N, Cameron C, Dixon E, Ghali W, Quan ML. 
Attitudes and beliefs about the surgical safety checklist: just 
another tick box? Can J Surg. 2016;59(4):268– 275.
 69. Pemberton MN. Surgical safety checklists and understanding 
of never events, in UK and Irish dental hospitals. Br Dent J. 
2016;220(11):585– 589.
 70. Leape LL. The checklist conundrum. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(11): 
1063– 1064.
 71. Chang HH, Lee JJ, Cheng SJ, Yang PJ, Hahn LJ, Kuo YS, 
et al. Effectiveness of an educational program in reducing the 
incidence of wrong- site tooth extraction. Oral Surg Oral Med 
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2004;98(3):288– 294.
 72. Hill MR, Roberts MJ, Alderson ML, Gale TC. Safety culture and 
the 5 steps to safer surgery: an intervention study. Br J Anaesth. 
2015;114(6):958– 962.
19
Orofacial pain
Stanley Sau Ching Wong and Chi Wai Cheung
Introduction
Orofacial pain disorders are a common clinical problem experi-
enced by a quarter of the general population, and about 10% is 
chronic.1,2 In the latest International Association for the Study of 
Pain (IASP) classification of chronic pain, chronic headache or 
orofacial pain is defined as headache or orofacial pain that occurs 
on at least 50% of the days during at least 3 months, and lasting at 
least 2 hours per day.3 Persistent facial pain has an incidence ratio 
of 38.7 per 100,000 person years.4 It is more common in women 
and the incidence increases with age.4 Both acute and chronic facial 
pain results in significant impairment in quality of life.1 Patients 
with facial pain may experience serious challenges in everyday ac-
tivities such as eating, brushing teeth, talking, and cleaning of the 
face. These pain- related problems can negatively impact patients’ 
psychosocial function for long periods of time.
Pain in the face is generally separated from headache. This is be-
cause transmission from the second (maxillary) and third (man-
dibular) trigeminal branches is responsible for pain in the facial 
region, whereas headaches are due to pain transmission via the first 
trigeminal (ophthalmic) branch. The trigeminal nerves innervate 
numerous anatomical structures including the lips, teeth, upper 
pharynx, uvula, soft palate, anterior two- thirds of the tongue, face, 
muscles of mastication and facial expression, nasal and oral mucosa, 
cornea, temporomandibular joints, dura mater, intracranial vessels, 
tooth pulp, and ears. The sensory innervation of the face, head, and 
neck is complex. The three branches of the trigeminal nerve and the 
upper cervical nerves (C2– C4) that innervate the posterior head 
and neck together form the trigeminocervical network5,6 (Fig. 19.1). 
This results in complex pain referral patterns, and orofacial pain, 
headache, and neck pain are often closely related. In addition, there 
are many anatomical structures in the head, face, and neck that can 
be the source of pain. These include the eyes, nose, teeth, tongue, 
sinuses, muscles, and temporomandibular joints. Anatomical com-
plexity has often led to difficulties in forming accurate diagnoses in 
patients with orofacial pain. Effective treatment of chronic orofacial 
pain depends on a precise diagnosis. Since chronic orofacial pain 
conditions are often complex and associated with psychosocial 
dysfunction, optimal management requires a multidisciplinary 
biopsychosocial approach.
Assessment for orofacial pain
History
Comprehensive assessment requires history, physical examination, 
and investigations. The history needs to follow the principles of a 
biopsychosocial approach and address the biological, psychological, 
social, and functional aspects of the patient. Diagnosis of the under-
lying pain condition is important but can be challenging due to the 
complex innervation of related structures and numerous potential 
causes. It is important to also be aware of conditions affecting the 
head, neck, shoulders, and upper back when searching for the cause 
of orofacial pain. The mouth and the face are important for many 
social activities, and an assessment of the functional impact on these 
activities is essential.
The patient should be given the opportunity to describe the pre-
senting pain problem. Issues in the chief complaint include the 
date of onset, location, duration, pain intensity, quality of pain, 
changes over time, aggravating and relieving factors, and any other 
associated symptoms. Intensity of pain can be rated using a 0– 10 
Ophthalmic
Maxillary
Mandibular
Trigeminal
nucleus caudalis
Fig. 19.1 The branches of the trigeminal nerve.
Reproduced with permission from Bartsch T, Goadsby PJ. The trigeminocervical 
complex and migraine: current concepts and synthesis. Current pain and headache 
reports. 2003;7(5):371– 6. 
Orofacial pain
212
numerical rating scale, with 10 representing the worse possible pain. 
It can also be described as mild, moderate, or severe. How the pain 
interferes with activities such as sleep, work, talking, and eating is an 
important indicator of the impact and severity of the pain condition. 
It is important to work out the anatomical distribution of the pain. 
In trigeminal neuralgia, for example, the location of pain is within 
the dermatomal distribution of the affected trigeminal branch. The 
quality and pattern of pain can also be used to aid diagnosis. For 
example, neuropathic pain is more likely to be described as sharp, 
burning, pins and needles, and lancinating. It is useful to determine 
whether the pain is episodic or continuous, to determine the dur-
ation of each pain attack, and any periods of remission. Patients with 
trigeminal neuralgia typically experience short episodes of severe 
pain, versus patients with persistent idiopathic facial pain (PIFP) 
who experience a persistent throbbing and aching pain. It is im-
portant to know what worsens or improves the pain. For example, is 
it worsened by light touch such as brushing the face, or other activ-
ities such as chewing or talking? The presence of associated symp-
toms should be sought. These may include symptoms such as facial 
numbness, itchiness, or crepitation. As patients with orofacial pain 
may have sought medical care from many practitioners before, a de-
tailed account of past treatment and its efficacy should be obtained. 
In addition, the past medical history including details such as any 
history of trauma or dental procedures should be recorded. A psy-
chosocial history is important. This should include questions about 
the presence of depression, anxiety, and social stressors. Patients 
should also be evaluated on how they adapt to chronic pain and 
whether they have barriers such as pain catastrophizing, fear avoid-
ance, and passive coping. Any pending or planned disability claims 
or litigation should also be noted.
Physical examination
The physical examination should be conducted systematically in 
order to aid the diagnosis. It should be guided by the history. Red 
flag conditions such as underlying tumours that require definitive 
treatment need to be excluded. A complete examination of the face, 
head and neck, oral cavity, and neurological system should be per-
formed. The teeth should be examined since dental problems are a 
common cause of orofacial pain. The ears and nose should be in-
spected, including otoscopic examination. Any swellings, lesions, 
signs of previous trauma, and discolouration should be looked for. 
Lymphadenopathy over the anterior and lateral neck and the sub-
mandibular region needs to be excluded. The carotid arteries and 
superficial temporal arteries should be examined, and tenderness on 
palpation may indicate a vascular pathology such as temporal arter-
itis. A neurological examination needs to include the cranial nerves. 
In particular, the fifth cranial nerve is important, as it innervates 
the majority of the face, head, and oral cavity. This includes sen-
sory testing of the skin distributions of all three trigeminal branches 
(ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular). Sensory modalities that 
should be tested include light touch, pinprick, temperature, and the 
presence of dynamic allodynia. Prominent neurological deficit may 
suggest significant underlying pathology. The masticatory muscles 
should be inspected for change in size and palpated for any familiar 
pain. The temporomandibular joint should be assessed for obvious 
swelling, tenderness, range of motion, and crepitation. The cer-
vical spine, neck muscles, shoulders, and upper back should also be 
examined, since they may be associated with orofacial pain.
Investigations
Investigations are ordered according to information gathered from 
the history and physical examination. Investigations include labora-
tory tests, imaging studies, and diagnostic blocks.
Laboratory tests are not routinely needed. Blood tests may be re-
quired to look for metabolic, haematological, and autoimmune dis-
orders. Blood taking for human leukocyte antigen (HLA)- B*15:02 is 
needed prior to commencing carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine to 
avoid the occurrence of severe cutaneous reactions.
Imaging studies may sometimes be indicated to look for struc-
tural pathologies in the head and neck region. Dental radiographs 
are inexpensive and provide information about the teeth and jaws. 
Computed tomography is good for providing images of bony struc-
tures in the maxillofacial skeleton such as the nose and sinuses, 
temporomandibular joints, and the skull base. Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) is the investigation of choice for assessing soft tis-
sues. It can be used to assess the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal 
structures, as well as the anatomy of the temporomandibular joints. 
It can also be used to look for intracranial pathologies. Patients with 
symptoms suggestive of trigeminal neuralgia should have an MRI 
performed to look for vascular compression of the trigeminal nerve 
root or other secondary causes such as tumours or multiple sclerosis 
(Fig. 19.2).
When diagnosis is uncertain, diagnostic blocks may be con-
sidered using injection of local anaesthetic. A significant positive re-
sponse in pain reduction after a diagnostic block would suggest that 
the targeted structure is a significant pain generator, while a negative 
response would suggest the presence of a different source of pain. 
This may be useful in differentiating from referred pain conditions. 
Nerves, muscles, or joints can all be targets of diagnostic local an-
aesthetic blocks.
Classiﬁcation
There have been different classifications for orofacial pain dis-
orders. These include the International Classification of Headache 
Disorders (ICHD), the American Academy of Orofacial Pain, and 
Fig. 19.2 MRI showing vascular compression of the trigeminal nerve 
root in a patient with trigeminal neuralgia (white arrow).
 
 
 
Speciﬁc chronic orofacial pain disorders
213
the Diagnostic Criteria for Temporomandibular Disorders (DC/ 
TMD).7– 9 Classification of headache disorders is mostly based 
on the ICHD, which is now in its third edition and also includes 
orofacial pain disorders.7 However, the ICHD classification is not 
comprehensive with respect to orofacial pain disorders, especially 
dental pain disorders and temporomandibular disorders (TMDs). 
A comprehensive and complete classification system for orofacial 
pain disorders is lacking. This limitation may have contributed to 
a relatively slower progress in the field of orofacial pain research. 
In order to fill this gap, the IASP created a task force that worked 
closely with the World Health Organization, the International 
Headache Society, the IASP special interest group on orofacial 
and head pain (OFHA- SIG), the American Academy of Orofacial 
Pain, and the International Network for Orofacial Pain and Related 
Disorders Methodology to come up with a standardized classifi-
cation system for chronic headache and orofacial pain disorders. 
The classification only describes chronic pain conditions, defined 
as persistent or recurrent pain lasting >3 months. Chronic head-
ache or orofacial pain is separated into chronic primary headache 
or orofacial pain and chronic secondary headache or orofacial pain. 
The criteria for chronic primary pain are as follows: (1) persist or 
recurs >3 months, (2) is associated with significant emotional dis-
tress and/ or functional disability, and (3) symptoms are not better 
accounted for by another diagnosis.10 Examples include chronic 
migraine and PIFP. Pain is defined as secondary when it is clearly 
associated with an identifiable disease, trauma, or other factors.3 
The majority of the secondary headache disorders are classified ac-
cording to the ICHD- 3.
One advantage of the new IASP classification is a more detailed 
systematic categorization of orofacial pain disorders, which has not 
been done previously. This classification has been accepted by the 
International Headache Society and IASP. Close cooperation be-
tween these two major societies will increase the likelihood that this 
classification is widely adopted in the future. The list of primary and 
secondary headache and orofacial pain disorders, as classified under 
the new IASP classification, are shown in Box 19.1.
Speciﬁc chronic orofacial pain disorders
Trigeminal neuralgia
Trigeminal neuralgia is an uncommon neuropathic facial pain con-
dition involving one or more divisions of the trigeminal nerve. It 
is usually characterized by short episodes of severe unilateral facial 
pain and can result in significant disruption of psychosocial func-
tion due to its detrimental effects on many normal daily activities 
such as eating and talking. Trigeminal neuralgia can be classified as 
classical, secondary, or idiopathic according to the new IASP clas-
sification.11 Classical trigeminal neuralgia is when there is vascular 
compression resulting in morphological changes of the trigeminal 
nerve root. It is classified as secondary trigeminal neuralgia when an 
underlying structural lesion or disease affects the trigeminal nerve. 
Idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia is when there is no identifiable cause 
in a patient with clinically diagnosed trigeminal neuralgia.
Clinical features
Patients with trigeminal neuralgia suffer severe facial pain in the 
distribution of the branches of the trigeminal nerve. The second 
and third trigeminal branches are most frequently affected.12 
Bilateral involvement is rare in classical trigeminal neuralgia, and 
its presence is suggestive of secondary trigeminal neuralgia.13 The 
pain is intense, occurs suddenly, and is transient in nature. The 
duration of each pain attack is usually a few seconds to 2 min-
utes; however, there may be numerous recurring pain attacks each 
day. The nature of the pain is stabbing, electric shock- like, burning, 
sharp, and shooting. The patient is typically pain free in between 
attacks. However, a subgroup of patients also have a continuous 
dull, burning, or aching background pain of a lower intensity, and 
this appears to affect women more frequently.14 The distribution 
of background pain is the same as that of the intense pain attacks. 
Box 19.1 List of primary and secondary headache and orofacial 
pain disorders with their ICD- 10 code if applicable
Chronic primary headache or orofacial pain
Chronic migraine without or with aura (G43.3)
Chronic tension- type headache (G44.22)
Chronic trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs):
Chronic cluster headache (G44.02)
Chronic paroxysmal hemicranias (G44.04)
Short- lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache with conjunctival 
injection and tearing (SUNCT) (G44.05)
Hemicrania continua (G44.51)
Chronic primary temporomandibular disorder pains
Myalgia (M79.1)
Myofascial pain with referral
Arthralgia (M26.62)
Chronic burning mouth
Glossodynia (K14.6)
Chronic primary orofacial pain
Orofacial pain as a presentation of primary headache
Presentation idiopathic dentoalveolar pain
Atypical facial pain (persistent idiopathic facial pain) (G50.1)
Chronic secondary headache or orofacial pain
Chronic headache/ orofacial pain attributed to trauma or injury to the 
head and/ or neck
Chronic headache/ orofacial pain attributed to cranial or cervical vas-
cular disorder
Chronic headache/ orofacial pain attributed to nonvascular intracra-
nial disorder
Chronic headache attributed to substance or its withdrawal
Chronic headache/ orofacial pain attributed to infection
Chronic headache/ orofacial pain attributed to disorder of homeo-
stasis or their nonpharmacological treatment
Chronic headache/ orofacial pain attributed to disorder of the cra-
nium, neck, eyes, ears, sinuses, salivary glands, and oral mucosa
Chronic dental pain
Diseases of pulp and periapical tissue (K04)
Other diseases of hard tissue of teeth (K03)
Chronic neuropathic orofacial pain
Pain attributed to a lesion or disease of the trigeminal nerve in-
cluding trigeminal neuralgia (primary parent: chronic peripheral 
neuropathic pain)
Other cranial and regional neuralgias and neuropathies
Chronic secondary temporomandibular disorder pain
Chronic secondary orofacial muscle pain
Systemic disorder or trauma
Chronic secondary temporomandibular joint pain
Systemic disorder, trauma or infection
IASP Classiﬁcation, Benoliel et al, Pain. 2019 Jan;160(1):60– 68.
 
 
 
 
Orofacial pain
214
Very often pain is triggered by non- painful stimuli to the affected 
face. Therefore, patients with trigeminal neuralgia may encounter 
extreme pain and difficulty when engaging in normal daily activ-
ities such as chewing, talking, brushing their teeth, or touching 
their face.12
Epidemiology
The incidence of trigeminal neuralgia ranges from 4.3 to 27 per 
100,000 people each year.15– 17 It affects women more commonly than 
men, and in those aged between 50 and 69 years.15 For classical tri-
geminal neuralgia, the average age of onset is 53 years, and for sec-
ondary trigeminal neuralgia the average age of onset is younger, at 
43 years.12,18
Aetiology
The underlying pathophysiology is focal demyelination of the 
primary trigeminal afferents close to where the trigeminal root 
enters into the pons.19– 21 In classical trigeminal neuralgia, this is 
due to compression of the trigeminal nerve root by a blood vessel, 
usually an artery in the cerebellopontine cistern. In secondary 
trigeminal neuralgia, an identifiable structural lesion is present. 
The most common causes are multiple sclerosis with a plaque 
affecting the trigeminal nerve root or a space- occupying lesion 
in the cerebellopontine cistern (e.g. meningioma, arteriovenous 
malformation, or epidermoid tumours).22,23 It has been hypothe-
sized that focal demyelination results in hyperexcitable nerve 
fibres, which can lead to ectopic excitation and high- frequency 
discharges.24,25 Hyperactivity of the primary afferent neurons may 
also result in central sensitization of neurons in the spinal trigem-
inal nucleus.21,26
Treatment
Pharmacotherapy
Carbamazepine (400– 1200 mg/ day) and oxcarbazepine (900– 
1800 mg/ day) should be given as first- line treatment.27,28 They 
work by blocking voltage- gated sodium channels, which 
stabilizes hyperexcited neural membranes and reduces repetitive 
firing. They have excellent analgesic efficacy and carbamazepine 
has a number needed to treat of 1.7.29 They are highly effective 
for paroxysmal pain, but are generally less effective for concomi-
tant continuous pain.28 Carbamazepine has a number needed 
to harm of 3.4 for minor adverse events and 24 for severe ad-
verse events.27 Common adverse effects include nausea, drowsi-
ness, dizziness, diplopia, and increased levels of transaminases. 
Hyponatraemia may also occur. Uncommon but serious adverse 
effects include allergic rash, hepatoxicity, systemic lupus ery-
thematous, Stevens– Johnson syndrome, and aplastic anaemia. 
An electrocardiogram is necessary before prescription because 
atrioventricular block is a contraindication. In Chinese, Thai, 
and Malaysian populations, HLA- B*15:02 polymorphism is as-
sociated with carbamazepine- and oxcarbazepine- induced se-
vere cutaneous reactions (Stevens– Johnson syndrome and toxic 
epidermal necrolysis).30– 33 Screening for HLA- B*15:02 is recom-
mended prior to starting these drugs. Oxcarbazepine has similar 
efficacy to carbamazepine, but is more tolerable and has less po-
tential for drug interaction, and therefore may be preferred.34 
Treatment failure is often due to intolerable side effects instead 
of a lack of drug efficacy. Interruption or dose reduction has been 
shown to occur in 27% of patients on carbamazepine and 18% of 
patients on oxcarbazepine.35
Other pharmacological agents for trigeminal neuralgia include 
lamotrigine, baclofen, pregabalin, gabapentin, botulinum toxin 
A, and phenytoin. These can be used as monotherapy or as ad-
juncts with carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine.36 Recommendations 
for these drugs are weak and based on low quality of evidence.36 
For patients suffering from severe acute exacerbations, infusion 
of lidocaine or fosphenytoin may be effective.28,36 Hospital admis-
sion may be required for rehydration and adjustment of analgesic 
medication.
Surgical and neuroablative procedures
Medical management should be used first. Surgical manage-
ment may be offered when medical treatment is ineffective or 
the patient is unable to tolerate the side effects.36 Surgical pro-
cedures available include microvascular decompression, and 
other percutaneous neuroablative procedures: radiofrequency 
thermocoagulation, gamma knife surgery, balloon compression, 
and glycerol rhizolysis (Fig. 19.3). Microvascular decompres-
sion is recommended as the first- line surgical option in patients 
with classical trigeminal neuralgia where neurovascular con-
tact of the trigeminal nerve root with morphological changes 
is demonstrated.36 The chance of success after microvascular 
decompression is significantly higher in patients with classical 
trigeminal neuralgia than those with idiopathic trigeminal neur-
algia. However, a significant proportion of patients with idio-
pathic trigeminal neuralgia also benefit from microvascular 
decompression. Compared to other percutaneous neuroablative 
procedures, microvascular decompression is associated with the 
longest duration of pain relief.37– 41 It has been reported that be-
tween 61% and 80% of patients were pain free at 4– 5 years after 
microvascular decompression.38,39,42 However, this is a major op-
eration requiring craniotomy and posterior fossa exploration. 
Minor complications include aching or burning pain, sensory 
loss, or transient cranial nerve dysfunction. Major complications 
are rare. The incidence of stroke is around 0.3%, major cranial 
nerve dysfunction is 2%, and death is 0.2%.43 Patients unwilling to 
be exposed to these risks can be offered other neuroablative pro-
cedures. All these alternative interventional procedures have also 
been shown to be effective. The trigeminal ganglion is targeted 
chemically in glycerol rhizolysis, thermally in radiofrequency 
thermocoagulation, and mechanically in balloon compression 
(Fig. 19.3). Beams of radiation are used to target the trigeminal 
nerve root in gamma knife surgery. These procedures are less in-
vasive and associated with less major adverse effects compared 
to microvascular decompression. Minor complications such 
as sensory loss, masticatory problems, and new burning pain 
can occur.27 There is currently no evidence to show any super-
iority in efficacy of one neuroablative procedure over another. 
Furthermore, it is also unclear whether microvascular decom-
pression or any of the other neuroablative procedures are more 
effective for idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia where neurovascular 
contact with morphological changes is not present.36 For patients 
with idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia, neuroablative procedures 
may be more appropriate than microvascular decompression.
Speciﬁc chronic orofacial pain disorders
215
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is a rare neuropathic pain condition 
affecting the distribution of the glossopharyngeal nerve. Similar to 
trigeminal neuralgia, glossopharyngeal neuralgia can be caused by 
neurovascular compression of the glossopharyngeal nerve. In sec-
ondary (symptomatic) glossopharyngeal neuralgia, it can be due 
to neck trauma, multiple sclerosis, tumours, and Chiari I malfor-
mation.44 In most secondary causes, there is damage to the nerve 
or nucleus, and the term glossopharyngeal neuropathy is more 
appropriate.
Clinical features
Patients suffer from short attacks of sharp, stabbing pain located 
in the ear, posterior part of the tongue, tonsillar fossa, or angle of 
the mandible. Pain is triggered by activities such as swallowing, 
talking, yawning, sneezing, and coughing. Pain intensity is usually 
severe, and can prevent patients from eating. Patients commonly 
experience remissions and recurrences. According to the predom-
inant location of the pain, glossopharyngeal neuralgia can be further 
subdivided into oropharyngeal and otalgic forms. Vagal symptoms 
such as bradycardia, syncope, or even cardiac arrest can accompany 
pain attacks 10% of the time.45 Mild sensory deficits may also occur. 
When an underlying pathology is identifiable, continuous pain is 
usually present in addition to paroxysmal pain attacks. There may 
also be prominent sensory deficits or missing gag reflex.
Epidemiology and aetiology
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is a very rare pain disorder and has an 
incidence of around 0.8 per 100,000.46
Similar to trigeminal neuralgia, neurovascular conflict from vas-
cular compression of the nerve root entry zone of the glossopharyn-
geal nerve is thought to be the cause of pain in most patients.47 There 
have also been reports of rare familial cases, which may be due to 
mutations of the voltage- gated sodium channel genes.48 Associated 
bradycardia and syncope may be a result of involvement of vagal af-
ferents and afferents from the carotid sinus.44
Treatment
The treatment options are similar to that of trigeminal neuralgia. 
As the disorder is very rare, there is a paucity of available evidence. 
Carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine are usually effective. Gabapentin 
and pregabalin may also be useful. Microvascular decompression 
can be considered when pharmacological treatment is ineffective, 
and is associated with a high success rate.49 A study reported that it 
resulted in long- term pain relief in 84.7% of patients.50 Percutaneous 
radiofrequency thermocoagulation, surgical rhizotomy, and stereo-
tactic radiosurgery are other therapeutic options.51– 53
Temporomandibular disorders
The most common orofacial pain conditions are TMDs— used to 
describe pain and dysfunction of the temporomandibular joints, 
masticatory muscles, and associated tissues.54,55 Chronic pain from 
TMDs can negatively impair quality of life and is associated with 
both psychosocial and functional impairment. TMDs are associ-
ated with other comorbidities such as bruxism, depression, irritable 
bowel syndrome, and chronic fatigue.56 The DC/ TMD is a valid and 
reliable method that can be used for the diagnosis and classification 
of TMDs.8 It consists of two components: a physical domain called 
axis 1 and a psychosocial domain called axis 2. TMD pain can be 
divided into three main subgroups: (1) myalgia, (2) arthralgia, and 
(3) headache attributed to TMDs. Myalgia describes pain origin-
ating from the muscles and is the most common TMD condition.57 
Arthralgia, which refers to pain from the joint, most often occurs 
together with myalgia.58 Headache attributed to a TMD is pain over 
the temple region as a result of pain- related TMD, and is aggravated 
by jaw movement and function. The importance of this diagnosis 
is that TMD treatment would be indicated for these patients. For 
TMDs, early diagnosis, explanation, and management is important 
for better outcomes.
Clinical features
Patients with TMDs can experience pain from the temporoman-
dibular joint or masticatory muscles. The pain can be located in 
the cheek, temporal regions, or preauricular area and can radiate to 
(a)
(b)
Fig. 19.3 Radiofrequency thermocoagulation of the trigeminal 
ganglion. (a) Fluoroscopic image demonstrating needle position for 
targeting the trigeminal ganglion. (b) Radiofrequency machine and 
cannulas for delivering thermocoagulation.
Reproduced with permission from Neurotherm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orofacial pain
216
other areas. Pain is usually moderate in intensity, and can be both 
intermittent and persistent. Aggravating factors include activities 
such as chewing, talking, and yawning. Audible clicking, popping, 
or grating sounds and limitation of range of motion of the temporo-
mandibular joints are also prominent symptoms. Other clinical fea-
tures include crepitus, locking, and an inability to open the mouth 
wide. The most common clinical sign is tenderness on palpation of 
the pericranial muscles and temporomandibular joint. Patients with 
TMDs may also have other symptoms such as tension- type head-
ache, neck and back pain, depression, and anxiety.54 There is a poor 
correlation between patient- reported severity of pain and patho-
logical changes.59
Epidemiology
The prevalence of TMDs in the general population is around 10– 15% 
for adults and 4– 7% for adolescents.60,61 The incidence of first- onset 
painful TMD has been reported to be between 3% and 4% per year.62 
Women are more frequently affected than men, occurring most 
commonly during child- bearing age (20– 40 years old). There are no 
sex differences during childhood. TMD pain occurred as a single 
episode in 12%, recurrent episodes in 65%, and persistent pain in 
19% of patients according to the large OPPERA study.63 TMD pain 
most commonly occurred together in both muscle and joint (73% of 
incident cases), followed by muscle pain alone (23%).62
Aetiology
The aetiology of TMD pain is thought to be multifactorial and 
biopsychosocial, including genetic factors, hormonal factors, 
trauma, endogenous opioid function, central sensitization, and 
psychosocial factors. Genetic variation can influence the de-
velopment of TMD pain, and there is an association with the 
two genes HTR2A and COMT.64 However, the degree of associ-
ation with TMD pain may be limited.65 As TMDs affect women 
more commonly, oestrogen has been postulated to play a role. 
Oestrogen may affect temporomandibular joint inflammation 
and nociceptive responses.54 However, there is contradictory evi-
dence regarding the association between oestrogen levels and 
TMD pain, with some studies showing association with low oes-
trogen levels while others show association with high oestrogen 
levels.66 Therefore, the overall evidence is weak and inconclusive. 
Trauma may also contribute to the development of TMD, whether 
it is macrotrauma or microtrauma. Macrotrauma may occur after 
injuries following procedures such as intubation or dental treat-
ment. Microtrauma may be caused by habits such as bruxism, 
tongue thrusting, bracing of the jaw, and pen chewing.54 Peripheral 
sensitization of myofascial sensory afferent neurons and central 
sensitization in the spinal dorsal horn, trigeminal nucleus, and 
supraspinal neurons may also contribute to the development and 
persistence of TMD pain.54 Psychosocial factors can predispose, 
precipitate, and prolong TMD pain.67 Patients with TMD pain have 
higher levels of stress, anxiety, depression, pain catastrophizing, 
and somatic awareness.68 In the OPPERA study, the factors most 
strongly associated with onset of TMD pain were perceived stress, 
past stressful life events and negative affect.69
Treatment
Management of TMD pain includes reversible and irreversible ap-
proaches. Reversible options are typically conservative methods 
and should be considered first. Between 75% and 90% of patients 
respond positively to simpler, less invasive treatment.70
Reversible and conservative treatment
Patients with TMD pain should be educated and reassured about the 
benign nature of the condition. Behavioural therapies are important 
and effective for self- management of TMD pain.71 It includes edu-
cation, biofeedback, cognitive behavioural therapy, habit reversal, 
and relaxation techniques. Cognitive behavioural therapy aims to 
train patients to actively cope with their pain. It covers techniques 
to manage pain- related anxieties, pain flare- ups, sleep hygiene, 
and communication strategies with family. Cognitive behavioural 
therapy has been shown to improve pain control, mood, and activity 
in TMD pain sufferers.72 Therapeutic jaw exercises appear to have 
low to moderate effects for TMD pain, and are usually part of patient 
self- care programmes.71 Jaw exercises can help with coordination, 
relaxation, and strengthening of muscles. Passive stretching can im-
prove range of motion of the temporomandibular joint. Occlusal ap-
pliance therapy is commonly used for TMD pain (Fig. 19.4). They 
allow coverage and protection of both the upper and lower teeth, 
and can be used at night for individuals who grind or clench their 
teeth. Occlusal appliances can also relax the jaw muscles and reduce 
the load on the temporomandibular joint.54 They have also been 
shown to reduce headache attributed to TMDs.73
Fig. 19.4 Occlusal appliance for patients with temporomandibular 
disorder.
 
 
 
 
 
Speciﬁc chronic orofacial pain disorders
217
Pharmacological treatment can be used for pain management. 
These include non- steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs, paracetamol, 
diazepam, tricyclic antidepressants, glucocorticoids, propranolol, 
and antiepileptic drugs. However, there is insufficient evidence to 
enable strong conclusions about the effectiveness of these drugs for 
TMD pain.74 The use of preventive analgesic drugs such as tricyclic 
antidepressants and antiepileptic drugs may be preferable because 
the adverse effect profile of acute analgesic drugs may not be as suit-
able for a chronic pain condition.
Irreversible approaches
According to the American Association for Dental Research, ir-
reversible approaches should not be used as the primary manage-
ment for TMD.75 There is a lack of evidence to support the use of 
orthodontics and occlusal equilibration. Arthroscopic surgery and 
arthrocentesis have been shown to reduce pain intensity and im-
prove function.72,76 However, evidence regarding long- term out-
comes is lacking. Many patients respond positively to conservative 
management; therefore, surgical management is only indicated in 
a small number of patients who have severe disability and are un-
responsive to conservative treatment for at least 6 months.54 These 
patients should have an intra- articular disorder, degenerative joint 
disease, or disease clearly affecting the temporomandibular joint.72
Auriculotemporal neuralgia
This is a rare neuropathic pain disorder where patients experi-
ence pain over the temple, ear, preauricular area, temporoman-
dibular joint, and the parotid area. The pain is unilateral and of 
moderate to severe intensity. The pain characteristic is stabbing, 
aching, or throbbing. It may be associated with paraesthesia and 
tenderness over the preauricular and temporal areas. Pain attacks 
can last from a few seconds to 30 minutes, and patients may also 
have background pain.44 Auriculotemporal neuralgia is a rare 
disorder with an estimated prevalence of 0.2– 0.4%,77,78 affecting 
middle- aged females more commonly. The auriculotemporal 
nerve may be affected and entrapped as it runs through the lateral 
pterygoid muscle. It may also be compressed by synovial cysts, 
malformation or aneurysm of the middle meningeal artery, frac-
ture of the mandibular condyle, or perineural spread of tumour.44 
Local anaesthetic block of the auriculotemporal nerve with or 
without steroids has been shown to provide positive analgesic 
effect. Pharmacological drug options include carbamazepine, 
oxcarbazepine, and gabapentin.77,78
Geniculate neuralgia
Geniculate neuralgia is characterized by the occurrence of short epi-
sodes of pain located in the auditory canal, and can radiate to the 
parieto- occipital area. The pain is always unilateral, stabbing, elec-
tric shock- like in nature, and located deep in the ear. Problems with 
lacrimation, salivation, or taste may also be present. This pain con-
dition is very rare, and a systematic review that searched from 1935 
to 2012 found <150 cases.79 Patients are usually elderly. Similar to 
trigeminal neuralgia, it is thought to be due to microvascular com-
pression. Pharmacological treatment of geniculate neuralgia in-
cludes the use of carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, and 
gabapentin. Microvascular decompression and transection of the 
geniculate nerve and ganglion are possible surgical options.79
Persistent idiopathic facial pain
Previously known as atypical facial pain, PIFP is a distressful, 
chronic orofacial pain disorder. It is defined by the ICHD- 3 as per-
sistent facial pain and/ or oral pain, with varying presentations, but 
recurring daily for >2 hours per day over >3 months, in the absence 
of a clinical neurological deficit.7 It is often diagnosed when other 
possible causes have been excluded. The pathophysiology is not well 
understood, and it is difficult to treat effectively.
Clinical features
Patients with PIFP typically suffer from persistent, unilateral facial 
pain that is deep and poorly localized. The pain persists over a long 
duration of time, is present daily, is there for most of the day, and is 
not associated with periods of remission.80 The characteristic of the 
pain is usually aching, burning, throbbing, and stabbing.80– 82 The 
distribution of pain may not be dermatomal and can spread to 
the upper or lower jaws, and even to the face and neck. In addition, 
the location, characteristics, and associated features of the pain can 
change over time. The severity of the pain ranges from mild to severe. 
Onset of pain is often associated with minor surgical procedures in-
cluding invasive dental procedures.83 There should be no clinically 
detectable neurosensory impairment in PIFP. This is in contrast 
to painful traumatic trigeminal neuropathy, where neurosensory 
changes should be present on clinical examination.84 Patients with 
PIFP may also have other chronic orofacial pain or headache syn-
dromes.80 PIFP is associated with psychiatric conditions, with anx-
iety and depression being the most common symptoms. Pain may be 
worsened with emotional stress.
Epidemiology
The estimated incidence rate of PIFP is 4.4 per 100,000 years, and 
lifetime prevalence is around 0.03%.4,16 Females are more likely to 
have PIFP, and the mean age of onset is in the mid- 40s.80
Aetiology
The pathophysiology of PIFP is not well known, and may be due 
to a combination of biological and psychological factors. Many pa-
tients with PIFP have a history of minor trauma and subclinical sen-
sory changes detected with quantitative sensory testing.81,82 Patients 
with PIFP have been shown to have increased brainstem neuronal 
excitability, impaired inhibitory function at the prefrontal cortex, 
and hypofunction of the dopaminergic pathway.85– 88 These findings 
suggest that PIFP may be a neuropathic pain syndrome. However, 
there are also patients with PIFP who have no significant changes in 
the trigeminal somatosensory pathways, which suggests that it may 
not always be a neuropathic pain syndrome.85 Therefore, there may 
be different subtypes of PIFP, with some patients having a greater 
neuropathic component. The association between PIFP and psychi-
atric disorders such as depression suggests that psychological factors 
may also play a prominent role.
Treatment
There is no curative treatment for PIFP. Since patients often suffer 
from biological and psychological comorbidities, a multidisciplinary 
approach is required. Pharmacological options includes antidepres-
sants (e.g. tricyclic antidepressants and serotonin– noradrenaline 
reuptake inhibitors) and anticonvulsants (e.g. pregabalin and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orofacial pain
218
gabapentin).89 First- line drug treatment is usually oral amitrip-
tyline 25– 100 mg daily.90 Second- line drug treatment includes other 
antidepressants such as venlafaxine, duloxetine, and fluoxetine, 
and anticonvulsants such as pregabalin and gabapentin.89– 92 While 
these drugs have been shown to provide analgesic benefit, the level 
of evidence is low. The addition of cognitive behavioural therapy 
together with antidepressant therapy has been shown to improve 
outcomes.89,93 Stress coping strategies and treatment of unresolved 
psychological problems are important as part of the overall manage-
ment of PIFP.94 Hypnosis may be a useful option for pain reduction.95 
Complementary and alternative medicine can also be tried, although 
the overall level of evidence is limited.96
Interventional pain procedures should be considered when con-
servative management is ineffective, although the level of supporting 
evidence is weak. The intervention associated with the most success 
is pulsed radiofrequency of the sphenopalatine ganglion, which has 
been shown to reduce pain and opioid consumption97,98 (Fig. 19.5). 
Pulsed radiofrequency of the sphenopalatine ganglion is therefore 
the recommended interventional treatment for PIFP.90,98 Other po-
tential interventional procedures that require further evaluation 
include peripheral nerve field stimulation and botulinum toxin 
injection.99,100
Acute herpes zoster
Acute herpes zoster results from the reactivation of dormant vari-
cella virus from the sensory ganglia. It is characterized by the de-
velopment of a painful maculopapular or vesicular rash over the 
affected dermatome. It is usually defined as acute when the duration 
of pain is <3 months. Apart from the face, acute herpes zoster can af-
fect other regions of the body. The thoracic region is most commonly 
affected, followed by trigeminal (usually the ophthalmic nerve), cer-
vical, and then the lumbar regions.101 Acute herpes zoster can result 
in severe pain. It usually resolves over a few weeks, but some patients 
go on to develop chronic post- herpetic neuralgia (PHN).
Clinical features
The most prominent clinical feature of acute herpes zoster is the 
acute onset of maculopapular or vesicular rash. Herpes zoster af-
fecting one of the three branches of the trigeminal nerve is respon-
sible for pain and rash over the face.102 The ophthalmic branch is 
most commonly affected. Rash and pain over the tympanic mem-
brane, auditory canal, auricle, and skin over the mastoid process 
occurs when the geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve is affected. 
Sometimes, vesicles may be present in the anterior third of the 
tongue or on the hard palate. The motor branches of the facial nerve 
may also be affected, which results in facial palsy. This is called 
Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
Ninety to ninety- five per cent of patients will experience pain 
and other symptoms such as tingling, itchiness, and numbness.103 
Pain usually occurs prior to onset of the rash. Patients typically 
suffer from continuous pain of a burning, throbbing, and aching 
quality. They may also have stabbing and shooting pain. Mechanical 
allodynia is prominent over the affected dermatome.
Acute herpes zoster may also result in other non- pain complica-
tions, which are important for the clinician to recognize. Around 
10– 15% of herpes zoster infections involve the ophthalmic division 
of the trigeminal nerve.104 Serious eye complications can occur in 
25– 50% of patients with ophthalmic herpes zoster. These include 
keratitis, iritis, and glaucoma.105 More rarely, patients may have nec-
rotizing retinitis and optic neuritis. In trigeminal herpes zoster, oph-
thalmoplegia may occur as a result of involvement of cranial nerves 
III, IV, and XI. Patients may experience tinnitus, hearing loss, ver-
tigo, nausea, hoarseness, and dysphagia as a result of involvement of 
the cranial nerves VIII, IX, X, and XI. A rare complication of acute 
herpes zoster is stroke due to the virus travelling from the trigeminal 
ganglion to the cerebral arteries. In addition, herpes zoster may also 
be complicated by bacterial superinfection and pneumonia.106
Diagnosis is usually straightforward due to the presence of skin 
rash and vesicles. When symptoms are not obvious, laboratory tests 
can be used to aid diagnosis. These include direct immunofluores-
cence assay for varicella zoster virus antigen or polymerase chain 
reaction assay for varicella zoster virus DNA from the base of the 
lesions or cerebrospinal fluid samples.107
Epidemiology
The estimated global annual incidence of herpes zoster is between 
3 and 5 per 1000 person years.108 The incidence increases with in-
creased age. Individuals who are immunocompromised, have 
chronic pulmonary disease, kidney disease, autoimmune disease, 
or depression have a higher risk of developing herpes zoster infec-
tion.109 As varicella zoster virus vaccination becomes more common 
for both children and the elderly, the incidence in the future may 
change.
Aetiology
Acute herpes zoster is due to reactivation of the varicella zoster virus 
that has been dormant in the sensory ganglia after primary infec-
tion. Reactivation of the virus causes inflammatory changes in the 
skin, nerve, ganglion, and spinal cord. Virus activation results in 
damage to the cell bodies and axons of nerve fibres. Inflammatory 
changes induce sensitization of peripheral nociceptors, which ex-
acerbates pain transmission.
Treatment
Acute herpes zoster is usually self- limiting. The goal of treatment 
is to reduce pain, limit the duration of disease, and prevent com-
plications. Systemic antivirals such as aciclovir, valaciclovir, and 
famciclovir can reduce pain intensity and reduce the duration of 
acute disease.110 They are recommended for all immunocompetent 
patients with acute herpes zoster who have one or more of the fol-
lowing: age 50 years or older, moderate to severe pain, moderate or 
severe rash, and non- truncal involvement.111 They should ideally be 
started within 72 hours after appearance of rash.110 Antivirals should 
be given intravenously for immunocompromised patients, and 
those with complicated herpes zoster.110
Mild to moderate pain can be treated with paracetamol, non- 
steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs, and weak opioids such as 
tramadol. When pain is severe, strong opioids may be required. 
Oxycodone has been shown to be more effective than gabapentin 
for severe herpes- related pain.110 Corticosteroids in combination 
with antiviral agents can reduce pain, but due to their adverse ef-
fect profile, they should only be considered in patients with severe 
pain and in the absence of any contraindications to steroid use. 
Antineuropathic pain medications such as gabapentinoids and tri-
cyclic antidepressants may also be effective. Most pharmacological 
drugs, including antivirals and corticosteroids, do not reduce the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speciﬁc chronic orofacial pain disorders
219
risk of developing PHN. Administration of low- dose amitriptyline 
(25 mg once daily for 90 days) has been shown to reduce the preva-
lence of PHN.112 Stellate ganglion nerve blocks, when performed 
early, may reduce acute pain intensity and the incidence of PHN in 
patients with trigeminal herpes zoster.113
Post- herpetic neuralgia
PHN can be defined as pain that persists for >3 months after acute 
herpes zoster. It causes chronic neuropathic pain, and results in im-
pairment of general activity, sleep, mood, and quality of life. Patients 
with PHN are more likely to have symptoms of anxiety and depres-
sion.114 Risk factors for PHN include the presence of severe acute 
pain, prodromal pain, severe rash, and old age.109 In addition, pa-
tients with ophthalmic herpes zoster are twice as likely to develop 
PHN compared to those with other types of herpes zoster.
Clinical features
Patients with PHN can experience one or more of the following 
three types of pain: spontaneous continuous pain, paroxysmal pain, 
and evoked pain. Continuous pain is described as burning, throb-
bing, and gnawing over the affected dermatome. Paroxysmal pain 
usually occurs spontaneously without provocation, and typically has 
a lancinating quality. Evoked pain occurs in response to normally in-
nocuous stimuli. The most common form of evoked pain is dynamic 
mechanical allodynia, which occurs in around half of the patients.115 
This is a hallmark feature of PHN and is often the most distressing 
and debilitating clinical feature. It can adversely affect everyday ac-
tivities such as cleaning the face. Patients may also have pinprick 
hyperalgesia and heat or cold allodynia. Numbness and paraesthesia 
are also common. One out of six patients experience itchiness.103 The 
pain eventually disappears in >95% of patients with PHN, and rarely 
recurs after spontaneous remission.116
Epidemiology
The incidence and prevalence of PHN may differ depending on the 
duration used to define persistent pain. The incidence rate has been 
suggested to be 3.9 per 100,000 person years.4 The incidence in-
creases steeply with increased age. The incidence rate increases from 
2 in people aged between 40 and 49 to 11.9 in people between 70 
and 79 years old, and up to 44.2 per 100,000 person years in those 
>80 years old.
Aetiology
PHN is caused by neuronal injury affecting both the peripheral and 
central nervous system. The injury results in spontaneous discharges 
and lowering of activation threshold in both the peripheral and cen-
tral neurons. In the ‘irritable nociceptor’ model, cutaneous C- fibres 
become sensitized, which lowers their threshold for activation and 
increases the rate and magnitude of nerve discharge.117 This results 
in spontaneous pain and allodynia, as well as minimal sensory loss. 
In the ‘deafferentation model’, there is peripheral deafferentation that 
causes reorganization in the spinal dorsal horn. There is loss of sen-
sitized peripheral C- fibres, and this leads to sprouting of A- β fibres 
that are responsible for mechanical stimuli. This sprouting results in 
connection of the A- β fibres with pain transmitting neurons in the 
spinal cord. Such reorganization causes sensory loss and allodynia 
in response to light moving mechanical stimuli. The above mech-
anisms may exist together in the same patient. Constant barrage of 
nerve signals from the peripheral nervous system to the spinal cord 
can lead to central sensitization with chronic excitability of second- 
order neurons.118
Treatment
Pharmacological management of PHN generally follows guidelines 
for neuropathic pain treatment.119 Antivirals and corticosteroids are 
not useful. First- line treatment includes tricyclic antidepressants, 
and gabapentinoids.120 Serotonin– noradrenaline reuptake inhibi-
tors are first- line drugs for neuropathic pain, but no published ran-
domized controlled trials have looked at these drugs specifically for 
PHN. Tramadol, an opioid agonist and serotonin– noradrenaline 
reuptake inhibitor, and topical lidocaine are recommended as 
second- line therapy,120 and 5% lidocaine patches can be beneficial, 
especially in elderly patients who may not tolerate the side effects 
Fig. 19.5 Fluoroscopic images of the needle position for pulsed 
radiofrequency of the sphenopalatine ganglion.
Reproduced with permission from Bayer E, Racz GB, Miles D, Heavner J. Sphenopalatine 
ganglion pulsed radiofrequency treatment in 30 patients suffering from chronic face and 
head pain. Pain practice: the ofﬁcial journal of World Institute of Pain. 2005;5(3):223– 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orofacial pain
220
of systemic drugs. Strong opioids and botulinum toxin are recom-
mended as third- line therapy. Botulinum toxin has been shown to 
be effective in reducing PHN pain, but the follow- up duration of the 
studies were only up to 3 months.121,122 Strong opioids, such as oxy-
codone, should only be used in patients with severe pain refractory 
to other treatments, as they are only mildly effective, and are not 
associated with long- term analgesic benefit.119 Furthermore, there is 
increasing concern about opioid- related overdose, death, diversion, 
misuse, and morbidity.123 Capsaicin 8% patch is effective for man-
aging cervical, thoracic, and lumbar PHN, and is recommended 
as a second- line therapy for PHN.101 However, it is not licensed for 
PHN affecting the trigeminal and geniculate nerves. Peripheral nerve 
stimulation has the potential to be a useful therapeutic option for fa-
cial PHN, but there is currently a paucity of studies in this area.124,125
The most evidence- based method for preventing acute herpes 
zoster and PHN is vaccination. Live attenuated varicella zoster vac-
cine is available. Vaccination of people aged >60 years has been 
shown to reduce the incidence of herpes zoster by 51%, and the in-
cidence of PHN by 66%.126 It should be recommended in immuno-
competent patients aged ≥60 years.127
Conclusion
Orofacial pain disorders are an important clinical problem that can 
adversely impact psychosocial health, quality of life, and function. 
Innervation of the face, head, and neck is complex and closely inter-
linked. This results in complex referral patterns that make diag-
nosis particularly challenging. Previous classification systems did 
not comprehensively cover all headache and orofacial pain condi-
tions. The new IASP classification for headache and orofacial pain 
disorders provides a more comprehensive and standardized classi-
fication system that also adequately covers orofacial pain disorders. 
Orofacial pain is difficult to manage. Therefore, a biopsychosocial 
approach is needed in the assessment and management. Red flag 
pathologies that require definitive treatment should be identified if 
present. Many patients with orofacial pain also have comorbid psy-
chological conditions, and these need to be adequately managed 
in order to achieve optimal outcomes. Both pharmacological and 
non- pharmacological therapies should be used. In patients who are 
refractory to conservative treatment, more invasive interventional 
pain procedures should be considered.
REFERENCES
 1. Shueb SS, Nixdorf DR, John MT, Alonso BF, Durham J. What is 
the impact of acute and chronic orofacial pain on quality of life? J 
Dent. 2015;43(10):1203– 1210.
 2. McMillan AS, Wong MC, Zheng J, Lam CL. Prevalence of orofacial 
pain and treatment seeking in Hong Kong Chinese. J Orofac Pain. 
2006;20(3):218– 225.
 3. Benoliel R, Svensson P, Evers S, Wang SJ, Barke A, Korwisi B, 
et al. The IASP classification of chronic pain for ICD- 11: chronic 
secondary headache or orofacial pain. Pain. 2019;160(1):60– 68.
 4. Koopman JS, Dieleman JP, Huygen FJ, de Mos M, Martin 
CG, Sturkenboom MC. Incidence of facial pain in the general 
population. Pain. 2009;147(1– 3):122– 127.
 5. Le Doare K, Akerman S, Holland PR, Lasalandra MP, Bergerot 
A, Classey JD, et al. Occipital afferent activation of second order 
neurons in the trigeminocervical complex in rat. Neurosci Lett. 
2006;403(1– 2):73– 77.
 6. Bartsch T, Goadsby PJ. The trigeminocervical complex and 
migraine: current concepts and synthesis. Curr Pain Headache 
Rep. 2003;7(5):371– 376.
 7. Headache Classification Committee of the International 
Headache Society (IHS). The International Classification of 
Headache Disorders, 3rd edition. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):1– 211.
 8. Schiffman E, Ohrbach R, Truelove E, Look J, Anderson G, 
Goulet JP, et al. Diagnostic criteria for temporomandibular 
disorders (DC/ TMD) for clinical and research 
applications: recommendations of the International RDC/ TMD 
Consortium Network and Orofacial Pain Special Interest Group. J 
Oral Facial Pain Headache. 2014;28(1):6– 27.
 9. De Leeuw R, Klasser G. Orofacial Pain: Guidelines for Assessment, 
Diagnosis, and Management, 5th ed. Chicago, IL: Quintessence 
Publishing Company; 2013.
 10. Nicholas M, Vlaeyen JWS, Rief W, Barke A, Aziz Q, Benoliel R, 
et al. The IASP classification of chronic pain for ICD- 11: chronic 
primary pain. Pain. 2019;160(1):28– 37.
 11. Cruccu G, Finnerup NB, Jensen TS, Scholz J, Sindou M, Svensson 
P, et al. Trigeminal neuralgia: new classification and diagnostic 
grading for practice and research. Neurology. 2016;87(2):220– 228.
 12. Maarbjerg S, Gozalov A, Olesen J, Bendtsen L. Trigeminal 
neuralgia— a prospective systematic study of clinical 
characteristics in 158 patients. Headache. 2014;54(10):1574– 1582.
 13. Maarbjerg S, Di Stefano G, Bendtsen L, Cruccu G. 
Trigeminal neuralgia— diagnosis and treatment. Cephalalgia. 
2017;37(7):648– 657.
 14. Maarbjerg S, Gozalov A, Olesen J, Bendtsen L. Concomitant 
persistent pain in classical trigeminal neuralgia— evidence for 
different subtypes. Headache. 2014;54(7):1173– 1183.
 15. Katusic S, Beard CM, Bergstralh E, Kurland LT. Incidence and 
clinical features of trigeminal neuralgia, Rochester, Minnesota, 
1945– 1984. Ann Neurol. 1990;27(1):89– 95.
 16. Mueller D, Obermann M, Yoon MS, Poitz F, Hansen N, Slomke 
MA, et al. Prevalence of trigeminal neuralgia and persistent 
idiopathic facial pain: a population- based study. Cephalalgia. 
2011;31(15):1542– 1548.
 17. MacDonald BK, Cockerell OC, Sander JW, Shorvon SD. The 
incidence and lifetime prevalence of neurological disorders in a 
prospective community- based study in the UK. Brain. 2000;123 
(Pt 4):665– 676.
 18. De Simone R, Marano E, Brescia Morra V, Ranieri A, Ripa P, 
Esposito M, et al. A clinical comparison of trigeminal neuralgic 
pain in patients with and without underlying multiple sclerosis. 
Neurol Sci. 2005;26 Suppl 2:S150– S151.
 19. Rappaport ZH, Govrin- Lippmann R, Devor M. An electron- 
microscopic analysis of biopsy samples of the trigeminal root 
taken during microvascular decompressive surgery. Stereotact 
Funct Neurosurg. 1997;68(1– 4 Pt 1):182– 186.
 20. Lutz J, Thon N, Stahl R, Lummel N, Tonn JC, Linn J, et al. 
Microstructural alterations in trigeminal neuralgia determined 
by diffusion tensor imaging are independent of symptom 
duration, severity, and type of neurovascular conflict. J 
Neurosurg. 2016;124(3):823– 830.
 21. Obermann M, Yoon MS, Ese D, Maschke M, Kaube H, Diener 
HC, et al. Impaired trigeminal nociceptive processing in patients 
with trigeminal neuralgia. Neurology. 2007;69(9):835– 841.
Conclusion
221
 22. Nomura T, Ikezaki K, Matsushima T, Fukui M. Trigeminal 
neuralgia: differentiation between intracranial mass lesions and 
ordinary vascular compression as causative lesions. Neurosurg 
Rev. 1994;17(1):51– 57.
 23. Jensen TS, Rasmussen P, Reske- Nielsen E. Association of 
trigeminal neuralgia with multiple sclerosis: clinical and 
pathological features. Acta Neurol Scand. 1982;65(3):182– 189.
 24. Devor M, Amir R, Rappaport ZH. Pathophysiology of 
trigeminal neuralgia: the ignition hypothesis. Clin J Pain. 
2002;18(1):4– 13.
 25. Calvin WH, Devor M, Howe JF. Can neuralgias arise from 
minor demyelination? Spontaneous firing, mechanosensitivity, 
and afterdischarge from conducting axons. Exp Neurol. 
1982;75(3):755– 763.
 26. Dubner R, Sharav Y, Gracely RH, Price DD. Idiopathic trigeminal 
neuralgia: sensory features and pain mechanisms. Pain. 
1987;31(1):23– 33.
 27. Cruccu G, Gronseth G, Alksne J, Argoff C, Brainin M, Burchiel 
K, et al. AAN- EFNS guidelines on trigeminal neuralgia 
management. Eur J Neurol. 2008;15(10):1013– 1028.
 28. Di Stefano G, Truini A, Cruccu G. Current and innovative 
pharmacological options to treat typical and atypical trigeminal 
neuralgia. Drugs. 2018;78(14):1433– 1442.
 29. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Carbamazepine for 
acute and chronic pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2011;1:CD005451.
 30. Chen CB, Hsiao YH, Wu T, Hsih MS, Tassaneeyakul W, Jorns 
TP, et al. Risk and association of HLA with oxcarbazepine- 
induced cutaneous adverse reactions in Asians. Neurology. 
2017;88(1):78– 86.
 31. Tassaneeyakul W, Tiamkao S, Jantararoungtong T, Chen P, Lin 
SY, Chen WH, et al. Association between HLA- B*1502 and 
carbamazepine- induced severe cutaneous adverse drug reactions 
in a Thai population. Epilepsia. 2010;51(5):926– 930.
 32. Chouchi M, Kaabachi W, Tizaoui K, Daghfous R, Aidli SE, Hila 
L. The HLA- B*15:02 polymorphism and Tegretol((R))- induced 
serious cutaneous reactions in epilepsy: an updated systematic 
review and meta- analysis. Revue Neurol. 2018;174(5):278– 291.
 33. Tangamornsuksan W, Chaiyakunapruk N, Somkrua R, Lohitnavy 
M, Tassaneeyakul W. Relationship between the HLA- B*1502 
allele and carbamazepine- induced Stevens- Johnson syndrome 
and toxic epidermal necrolysis: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149(9):1025– 1032.
 34. Beydoun A. Safety and efficacy of oxcarbazepine: results of 
randomized, double- blind trials. Pharmacotherapy. 2000;20(8 Pt 
2):152s– 158s.
 35. Di Stefano G, La Cesa S, Truini A, Cruccu G. Natural history and 
outcome of 200 outpatients with classical trigeminal neuralgia 
treated with carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine in a tertiary centre 
for neuropathic pain. J Headache Pain. 2014;15:34.
 36. Bendtsen L, Zakrzewska JM, Abbott J, Braschinsky M, Di Stefano 
G, Donnet A, et al. European Academy of Neurology guideline 
on trigeminal neuralgia. Eur J Neurol. 2019;26(6):831– 849.
 37. Brisman R. Microvascular decompression vs. gamma knife 
radiosurgery for typical trigeminal neuralgia: preliminary 
findings. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2007;85(2– 3):94– 98.
 38. Linskey ME, Ratanatharathorn V, Penagaricano J. A prospective 
cohort study of microvascular decompression and Gamma 
Knife surgery in patients with trigeminal neuralgia. J Neurosurg. 
2008;109 Suppl:160– 172.
 39. Pollock BE, Schoeberl KA. Prospective comparison of posterior 
fossa exploration and stereotactic radiosurgery dorsal root 
entry zone target as primary surgery for patients with idiopathic 
trigeminal neuralgia. Neurosurgery. 2010;67(3):633– 638.
 40. Haridas A, Mathewson C, Eljamel S. Long- term results of 
405 refractory trigeminal neuralgia surgeries in 256 patients. 
Zentralbl Neurochir. 2008;69(4):170– 174.
 41. Jellish WS, Benedict W, Owen K, Anderson D, Fluder E, Shea JF. 
Perioperative and long- term operative outcomes after surgery 
for trigeminal neuralgia: microvascular decompression vs 
percutaneous balloon ablation. Head Face Med. 2008;4:11.
 42. Wang DD, Raygor KP, Cage TA, Ward MM, Westcott S, 
Barbaro NM, et al. Prospective comparison of long- term pain 
relief rates after first- time microvascular decompression and 
stereotactic radiosurgery for trigeminal neuralgia. J Neurosurg. 
2018;128(1):68– 77.
 43. Barker FG, 2nd, Jannetta PJ, Bissonette DJ, Larkins MV, Jho HD. 
The long- term outcome of microvascular decompression for 
trigeminal neuralgia. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(17):1077– 1083.
 44. O’Neill F, Nurmikko T, Sommer C. Other facial neuralgias. 
Cephalalgia. 2017;37(7):658– 669.
 45. Blumenfeld A, Nikolskaya G. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Curr 
Pain Headache Rep. 2013;17(7):343.
 46. Pearce JM. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Eur Neurol. 
2006;55(1):49– 52.
 47. Tanrikulu L, Hastreiter P, Dorfler A, Buchfelder M, 
Naraghi R. Classification of neurovascular compression in 
glossopharyngeal neuralgia: three- dimensional visualization of 
the glossopharyngeal nerve. Surg Neurol Int. 2015;6:189.
 48. Wang Y, Yu CY, Huang L, Riederer F, Ettlin D. Familial neuralgia 
of occipital and intermedius nerves in a Chinese family. J 
Headache Pain. 2011;12(4):497– 500.
 49. Patel A, Kassam A, Horowitz M, Chang YF. Microvascular 
decompression in the management of glossopharyngeal 
neuralgia: analysis of 217 cases. Neurosurgery. 
2002;50(4):705– 710.
 50. Rey- Dios R, Cohen- Gadol AA. Current neurosurgical 
management of glossopharyngeal neuralgia and technical 
nuances for microvascular decompression surgery. Neurosurg 
Focus. 2013;34(3):E8.
 51. Isamat F, Ferran E, Acebes JJ. Selective percutaneous 
thermocoagulation rhizotomy in essential glossopharyngeal 
neuralgia. J Neurosurg. 1981;55(4):575– 580.
 52. Ma Y, Li YF, Wang QC, Wang B, Huang HT. Neurosurgical 
treatment of glossopharyngeal neuralgia: analysis of 103 cases. J 
Neurosurg. 2016;124(4):1088– 1092.
 53. O’Connor JK, Bidiwala S. Effectiveness and safety of Gamma 
Knife radiosurgery for glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Proc (Bayl 
Univ Med Cent). 2013;26(3):262– 264.
 54. List T, Jensen RH. Temporomandibular disorders: old ideas and 
new concepts. Cephalalgia. 2017;37(7):692– 704.
 55. Durham J, Newton- John TR, Zakrzewska JM. 
Temporomandibular disorders. BMJ. 2015;350:h1154.
 56. Hoffmann RG, Kotchen JM, Kotchen TA, Cowley T, Dasgupta 
M, Cowley AW, Jr. Temporomandibular disorders and associated 
clinical comorbidities. Clin Pain. 2011;27(3):268– 274.
 57. List T, Dworkin SF. Comparing TMD diagnoses and clinical 
findings at Swedish and US TMD centers using research 
diagnostic criteria for temporomandibular disorders. J Orofac 
Pain. 1996;10(3):240– 253.
 58. Schiffman EL, Truelove EL, Ohrbach R, Anderson GC, 
John MT, List T, et al. The research diagnostic criteria for 
temporomandibular disorders. I: overview and methodology for 
assessment of validity. J Orofac Pain. 2010;24(1):7– 24.
Orofacial pain
222
 59. Cairns B, List T, Michelotti A, Ohrbach R, Svensson P. JOR- CORE 
recommendations on rehabilitation of temporomandibular 
disorders. J Oral Rehabil. 2010;37(6):481– 489.
 60. Nilsson IM, List T, Drangsholt M. Prevalence of 
temporomandibular pain and subsequent dental treatment in 
Swedish adolescents. J Orofac Pain. 2005;19(2):144– 150.
 61. Macfarlane TV, Glenny AM, Worthington HV. Systematic review 
of population- based epidemiological studies of oro- facial pain. J 
Dent. 2001;29(7):451– 467.
 62. Slade GD, Bair E, Greenspan JD, Dubner R, Fillingim RB, 
Diatchenko L, et al. Signs and symptoms of first- onset TMD and 
sociodemographic predictors of its development: the OPPERA 
prospective cohort study. J Pain. 2013;14(12 Suppl):T20– T32.  
e1– 3.
 63. Dworkin SF. The OPPERA study: act one. J Pain. 2011;12(11 
Suppl):T1– T3.
 64. Smith SB, Maixner DW, Greenspan JD, Dubner R, Fillingim 
RB, Ohrbach R, et al. Potential genetic risk factors for chronic 
TMD: genetic associations from the OPPERA case control study. 
J Pain. 2011;12(11 Suppl):T92– T101.
 65. Visscher CM, Lobbezoo F. TMD pain is partly heritable. 
A systematic review of family studies and genetic association 
studies. J Oral Rehabil. 2015;42(5):386– 399.
 66. Berger M, Szalewski L, Bakalczuk M, Bakalczuk G, Bakalczuk 
S, Szkutnik J. Association between estrogen levels and 
temporomandibular disorders: a systematic literature review. Prz 
Menopauzalny. 2015;14(4):260– 270.
 67. LeResche L, Mancl LA, Drangsholt MT, Huang G, Von Korff 
M. Predictors of onset of facial pain and temporomandibular 
disorders in early adolescence. Pain. 2007;129(3):269– 278.
 68. Macfarlane TV, Kenealy P, Kingdon HA, Mohlin B, Pilley JR, 
Mwangi CW, et al. Orofacial pain in young adults and associated 
childhood and adulthood factors: results of the population study, 
Wales, United Kingdom. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 
2009;37(5):438– 450.
 69. Fillingim RB, Ohrbach R, Greenspan JD, Knott C, Diatchenko 
L, Dubner R, et al. Psychological factors associated with 
development of TMD: the OPPERA prospective cohort study. J 
Pain. 2013;14(12 Suppl):T75– T90.
 70. Greene CS. The etiology of temporomandibular 
disorders: implications for treatment. J Orofac Pain. 
2001;15(2):93– 105.
 71. Story WP, Durham J, Al- Baghdadi M, Steele J, Araujo- Soares 
V. Self- management in temporomandibular disorders: a 
systematic review of behavioural components. J Oral Rehabil. 
2016;43(10):759– 770.
 72. List T, Axelsson S. Management of TMD: evidence from 
systematic reviews and meta- analyses. J Oral Rehabil. 
2010;37(6):430– 451.
 73. Ekberg EC, Nilner M. Treatment outcome of short- and 
long- term appliance therapy in patients with TMD of 
myogenous origin and tension- type headache. J Oral Rehabil. 
2006;33(10):713– 721.
 74. Mujakperuo HR, Watson M, Morrison R, Macfarlane TV. 
Pharmacological interventions for pain in patients with 
temporomandibular disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2010;10:CD004715.
 75. Greene CS. Managing patients with temporomandibular 
disorders: a new ‘standard of care’. Am J Orthod Dentofacial 
Orthop. 2010;138(1):3– 4.
 76. Al- Baghdadi M, Durham J, Araujo- Soares V, Robalino S, 
Errington L, Steele J. TMJ disc displacement without reduction 
management: a systematic review. J Dent Res. 2014;93(7 
Suppl):37s– 51s.
 77. Ruiz M, Porta- Etessam J, Garcia- Ptacek S, de la Cruz C, 
Cuadrado ML, Guerrero AL. Auriculotemporal neuralgia: eight 
new cases report. Pain Med. 2016;17(9):1744– 1748.
 78. Speciali JG, Goncalves DA. Auriculotemporal neuralgia. Curr 
Pain Headache Rep. 2005;9(4):277– 280.
 79. Tang IP, Freeman SR, Kontorinis G, Tang MY, Rutherford SA, 
King AT, et al. Geniculate neuralgia: a systematic review. J 
Laryngol Otol. 2014;128(5):394– 399.
 80. Maarbjerg S, Wolfram F, Heinskou TB, Rochat P, Gozalov A, 
Brennum J, et al. Persistent idiopathic facial pain— a prospective 
systematic study of clinical characteristics and neuroanatomical 
findings at 3.0 Tesla MRI. Cephalalgia. 2017;37(13):1231– 1240.
 81. Siqueira SR, Siviero M, Alvarez FK, Teixeira MJ, Siqueira JT. 
Quantitative sensory testing in trigeminal traumatic neuropathic 
pain and persistent idiopathic facial pain. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 
2013;71(3):174– 179.
 82. Baad- Hansen L, Abrahamsen R, Zachariae R, List T, Svensson P. 
Somatosensory sensitivity in patients with persistent idiopathic 
orofacial pain is associated with pain relief from hypnosis and 
relaxation. Clin J Pain. 2013;29(6):518– 526.
 83. Nobrega JC, Siqueira SR, Siqueira JT, Teixeira MJ. Differential 
diagnosis in atypical facial pain: a clinical study. Arq 
Neuropsiquiatr. 2007;65(2A):256– 261.
 84. Benoliel R, Zadik Y, Eliav E, Sharav Y. Peripheral painful 
traumatic trigeminal neuropathy: clinical features in 91 
cases and proposal of novel diagnostic criteria. J Orofac Pain. 
2012;26(1):49– 58.
 85. Lang E, Kaltenhauser M, Seidler S, Mattenklodt P, Neundorfer 
B. Persistent idiopathic facial pain exists independent of 
somatosensory input from the painful region: findings from 
quantitative sensory functions and somatotopy of the primary 
somatosensory cortex. Pain. 2005;118(1– 2):80– 91.
 86. Jaaskelainen SK, Forssell H, Tenovuo O. Electrophysiological 
testing of the trigeminofacial system: aid in the diagnosis of 
atypical facial pain. Pain. 1999;80(1– 2):191– 200.
 87. Derbyshire SW, Jones AK, Devani P, Friston KJ, Feinmann C, 
Harris M, et al. Cerebral responses to pain in patients with 
atypical facial pain measured by positron emission tomography. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1994;57(10):1166– 1172.
 88. Hagelberg N, Forssell H, Aalto S, Rinne JO, Scheinin H, Taiminen 
T, et al. Altered dopamine D2 receptor binding in atypical facial 
pain. Pain. 2003;106(1– 2):43– 48.
 89. Weiss AL, Ehrhardt KP, Tolba R. Atypical facial pain: a 
comprehensive, evidence- based review. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 
2017;21(2):8.
 90. Cornelissen P, van Kleef M, Mekhail N, Day M, van Zundert 
J. Evidence- based interventional pain medicine according to 
clinical diagnoses. 3. Persistent idiopathic facial pain. Pain Pract. 
2009;9(6):443– 448.
 91. Forssell H, Tasmuth T, Tenovuo O, Hampf G, Kalso E. 
Venlafaxine in the treatment of atypical facial pain: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Orofac Pain. 2004;18(2):131– 137.
 92. Nagashima W, Kimura H, Ito M, Tokura T, Arao M, Aleksic 
B, et al. Effectiveness of duloxetine for the treatment of 
chronic nonorganic orofacial pain. Clin Neuropharmacol. 
2012;35(6):273– 277.
 93. Zakrzewska JM. Multi- dimensionality of chronic pain of the oral 
cavity and face. J Headache Pain. 2013;14:37.
 94. Zakrzewska JM. Chronic/ persistent idiopathic facial pain. 
Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2016;27(3):345– 351.
Conclusion
223
 95. Abrahamsen R, Baad- Hansen L, Svensson P. Hypnosis in the 
management of persistent idiopathic orofacial pain— clinical 
and psychosocial findings. Pain. 2008;136(1– 2):44– 52.
 96. Nguyen CT, Wang MB. Complementary and integrative 
treatments: atypical facial pain. Otolaryngol Clin N Am. 
2013;46(3):367– 382.
 97. Bayer E, Racz GB, Miles D, Heavner J. Sphenopalatine ganglion 
pulsed radiofrequency treatment in 30 patients suffering from 
chronic face and head pain. Pain Pract. 2005;5(3):223– 227.
 98. Akbas M, Gunduz E, Sanli S, Yegin A. Sphenopalatine ganglion 
pulsed radiofrequency treatment in patients suffering from 
chronic face and head pain. Braz J Anesthesiol. 2016;66(1):50– 54.
 99. Klein J, Sandi- Gahun S, Schackert G, Juratli TA. Peripheral 
nerve field stimulation for trigeminal neuralgia, trigeminal 
neuropathic pain, and persistent idiopathic facial pain. 
Cephalalgia. 2016;36(5):445– 453.
 100. Cuadrado ML, Garcia- Moreno H, Arias JA, Pareja JA. 
Botulinum neurotoxin type- A for the treatment of atypical 
odontalgia. Pain Med. 2016;17(9):1717– 1721.
 101. Haanpää M, Rice A, Rowbotham M. Treating herpes zoster and 
postherpetic neuralgia. Pain Clin Updates. 2015;23(4):1– 8.
 102. Haanpaa M, Laippala P, Nurmikko T. Allodynia and pinprick 
hypesthesia in acute herpes zoster, and the development 
of postherpetic neuralgia. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
2000;20(1):50– 58.
 103. van Wijck AJM, Aerssens YR. Pain, itch, quality of life, and costs 
after herpes zoster. Pain Pract. 2017;17(6):738– 746.
 104. Liesegang TJ. Herpes zoster ophthalmicus natural history, risk 
factors, clinical presentation, and morbidity. Ophthalmology. 
2008;115(2 Suppl):S3– S12.
 105. Nagel MA, Gilden D. Complications of varicella zoster virus 
reactivation. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2013;15(4):439– 453.
 106. Johnson RW, Bouhassira D, Kassianos G, Leplege A, Schmader 
KE, Weinke T. The impact of herpes zoster and post- herpetic 
neuralgia on quality- of- life. BMC Med. 2010;8:37.
 107. Cohen JI. Clinical practice: herpes zoster. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369(3):255– 263.
 108. Kawai K, Gebremeskel BG, Acosta CJ. Systematic review of 
incidence and complications of herpes zoster: towards a global 
perspective. BMJ Open. 2014;4(6):e004833.
 109. Forbes HJ, Bhaskaran K, Thomas SL, Smeeth L, Clayton 
T, Langan SM. Quantification of risk factors for herpes 
zoster: population based case- control study. BMJ. 
2014;348:g2911.
 110. Werner RN, Nikkels AF, Marinovic B, Schafer M, Czarnecka- 
Operacz M, Agius AM, et al. European consensus- based (S2k) 
guideline on the management of herpes zoster— guided by 
the European Dermatology Forum (EDF) in cooperation with 
the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology 
(EADV). Part 2: treatment. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 
2017;31(1):20– 29.
 111. Dworkin RH, Johnson RW, Breuer J, Gnann JW, Levin MJ, 
Backonja M, et al. Recommendations for the management of 
herpes zoster. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44 Suppl 1:S1– S26.
 112. Bowsher D. The effects of pre- emptive treatment of 
postherpetic neuralgia with amitriptyline: a randomized, 
double- blind, placebo- controlled trial. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
1997;13(6):327– 331.
 113. Makharita MY, Amr YM, El- Bayoumy Y. Effect of early stellate 
ganglion blockade for facial pain from acute herpes zoster 
and incidence of postherpetic neuralgia. Pain Physician. 
2012;15(6):467– 474.
 114. Bouhassira D, Chassany O, Gaillat J, Hanslik T, Launay 
O, Mann C, et al. Patient perspective on herpes zoster 
and its complications: an observational prospective study 
in patients aged over 50 years in general practice. Pain. 
2012;153(2):342– 349.
 115. Truini A, Galeotti F, Haanpaa M, Zucchi R, Albanesi A, 
Biasiotta A, et al. Pathophysiology of pain in postherpetic 
neuralgia: a clinical and neurophysiological study. Pain. 
2008;140(3):405– 410.
 116. Reda H, Greene K, Rice FL, Rowbotham MC, Petersen KL. 
Natural history of herpes zoster: late follow- up of 3.9 years (n= 
43) and 7.7 years (n= 10). Pain. 2013;154(10):2227– 2233.
 117. Fields HL, Rowbotham M, Baron R. Postherpetic 
neuralgia: irritable nociceptors and deafferentation. Neurobiol 
Dis. 1998;5(4):209– 227.
 118. Dworkin RH, Gnann JW Jr, Oaklander AL, Raja SN, Schmader 
KE, Whitley RJ. Diagnosis and assessment of pain associated 
with herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia. J Pain. 2008;9(1 
Suppl 1):S37– S44.
 119. Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, McNicol E, Baron R, 
Dworkin RH, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in 
adults: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Lancet Neurol. 
2015;14(2):162– 173.
 120. Colloca L, Ludman T, Bouhassira D, Baron R, Dickenson AH, 
Yarnitsky D, et al. Neuropathic pain. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 
2017;3:17002.
 121. Apalla Z, Sotiriou E, Lallas A, Lazaridou E, Ioannides D. 
Botulinum toxin A in postherpetic neuralgia: a parallel, 
randomized, double- blind, single- dose, placebo- controlled trial. 
Clin J Pain. 2013;29(10):857– 864.
 122. Xiao L, Mackey S, Hui H, Xong D, Zhang Q, Zhang D. 
Subcutaneous injection of botulinum toxin a is beneficial in 
postherpetic neuralgia. Pain Med. 2010;11(12):1827– 1833.
 123. Ray WA, Chung CP, Murray KT, Hall K, Stein CM. Prescription 
of long- acting opioids and mortality in patients with chronic 
noncancer pain. JAMA. 2016;315(22):2415– 2423.
 124. Kurklinsky S, Palmer SC, Arroliga MJ, Ghazi SM. 
Neuromodulation in postherpetic neuralgia: case reports and 
review of the literature. Pain Med. 2018;19(6):1237– 1244.
 125. Lerman IR, Chen JL, Hiller D, Souzdalnitski D, Sheean G, 
Wallace M, et al. Novel high- frequency peripheral nerve 
stimulator treatment of refractory postherpetic neuralgia: a brief 
technical note. Neuromodulation. 2015;18(6):487– 493.
 126. Oxman MN, Levin MJ, Johnson GR, Schmader KE, Straus 
SE, Gelb LD, et al. A vaccine to prevent herpes zoster 
and postherpetic neuralgia in older adults. N Engl J Med. 
2005;352(22):2271– 2284.
 127. Le P, Sabella C, Rothberg MB. Preventing herpes zoster 
through vaccination: new developments. Cleve Clin J Med. 
2017;84(5):359– 366.
Index
For the benefit of digital users, indexed terms that span two pages (e.g., 52– 53) may, on occasion, appear on only one of those pages. 
Tables, figures, and boxes are indicated by t, f, and b following the page number
abscess 
dental 135– 36, 136t 
intracranial 141 
ACE inhibitors 14– 15
adrenaline 
aesthetic surgery 96 
systemic absorption 53 
advance directives 85– 86
adverse events 201 
aesthetic surgery 93– 105
anaesthesia for 94– 96
analgesia 97 
autologous fat transfer 98t, 102 
bleeding points 97 
blepharoplasty 98– 99, 98t 
blood pressure management 97 
Botox 102 
browlift 98t, 99 
controlled hypotension 96– 97
cooling masks 97 
dry surgical field 96– 97
emergence from anaesthesia 97 
eye protection 95– 96, 103 
face lift (rhytidectomy) 98t, 
99– 100
facial augmentation 102 
fillers 102 
general anaesthesia 95– 96
genioplasty 98t, 102, 121t 
laser surgery 98t, 102– 3
liposuction 98t, 102 
local anaesthesia 96 
medical assessment 94 
non- surgical 93, 102– 3
on- lay implants 98t, 102 
otoplasty 98t, 101– 2
postoperative priorities 97 
preoperative assessment 93– 94
psychological assessment 94 
regional anaesthesia 96 
revision surgery 104 
rhinoplasty 98t, 100– 1
sedation 95 
surgical 93, 97– 102
tracheal extubation 97 
Aintree Intubation Catheter 21 
air sinuses 47– 48
AIRVO™ 2 74 
airway 
oedema 159 
thermal injury 159– 60, 161– 62
trauma- related obstruction 148 
airway assessment 
malignancy 169 
preoperative 1– 2, 19– 20
sedation 73 
airway compromise 
infections 139– 40
postoperative 126– 27,  
192– 93
airway management 
burns 156 
dental anaesthesia 87 
difficult airway 19– 28, 124– 25, 
181– 82
emergency management in 
trauma 147– 49
infection 139– 40
malignancy 170– 72
orthognathic surgery 110– 12
surgical complications 191– 92
airway plan 20 
airway wire 171, 174 
alcohol withdrawal 180 
American College of Cardiology/ 
American Heart Association 
(ACC/ AHA) guidelines 5– 9, 6f, 
8t, 12– 13, 14, 15 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Physical Status (ASA- PS) 
score 10– 11
Ametop™ 86– 87
anaemia 9– 10
anaesthetic non- technical skills 
(ANTS) 201, 203– 5
analgesia 
aesthetic surgery 97 
burns 157 
dental surgery 88 
malignancy 174 
orthognathic surgery 116, 119 
paediatric surgery 126 
postoperative 182– 83
andexanet 14 
Anesthesia Responsiveness Monitor 
(ARM) 74 
angiotensin II receptor blockers 
(ARBs) 14– 15
angiotensin- converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors 14– 15
ankyloglossia 131 
anterior ethmoid nerve 44 
anterior tracheal ring  
removal 32 
antibiotic prophylaxis 
dental anaesthesia 88– 89
infection 138, 142 
orthognathic surgery 117 
antibiotic treatment 
dental infections 137 
postoperative 184 
antiemetics 88, 97, 116– 17, 126, 
180– 81
ANTS framework 201, 203– 5
Apert syndrome 129t, 130 
apixaban 13– 14
apnoeic oxygenation 21 
arrhythmia 195t 
articaine 54t 
ASA- PS score 10– 11
aspirin 12– 13
Association of Anaesthetists, 
hypertension guidelines 9 
auriculotemporal nerve 46 
auriculotemporal nerve block 47 
auriculotemporal neuralgia 217 
autologous fat transfer 98t, 102 
autoregulation 77– 78
awake fibreoptic intubation 22– 23
awake tracheal intubation 22, 52– 53
awake tracheostomy 24, 172 
awake videolaryngoscopy 24 
azithromycin 137, 137t 
 
bag mask ventilation 21 
Bailey manoeuvre 97 
balloon dilatational technique 30 
base of skull complications 195t 
beta- blockers 
hypotensive anaesthesia 80 
perioperative management 15 
bimaxillary osteotomy 121t 
biomarker assays 11 
bleeding 
assessment of surgical risk 12t 
burns 163 
delayed perioperative 195t 
intraoperative 194 
non- pharmacological techniques to 
minimize blood loss 81t 
orthognathic surgery 115, 118 
tracheostomy 33
blepharoplasty 98– 99, 98t 
blind nasal intubation 25 
blood conservation 130– 31
blood pressure 
assessment 9 
management 97 
blowout fracture 62 
blunt trauma 145– 46
Botox 102 
brain injury 147 
brain natriuretic peptide 11 
bridging therapy 13 
browlift 98t, 99 
buccal cavity, sensory innervation 49 
bupivacaine 54t 
burns 155– 66
airway management 156 
anaesthesia 162– 63
blood loss 163 
chemical burns 155, 161 
critical care 162 
debridement 162 
emergency department 
admission 155– 56
epidemiology 155 
examination 157 
fluids 156– 57
gaseous systemic toxins 158– 59
history 157 
hypothermia 163 
inhalation injury 155, 157, 158 
long- term issues 164 
mechanical ventilation 161– 62
monitoring 157 
pain management 157 
pharmacology 163– 64
prognosis 162 
referral to specialist  
unit 157– 58
resuscitation 156– 57
secondary survey 157– 58
smoke inhalation complex 158 
smoke injury to lungs 160– 61
temperature regulation 157, 163 
thermal airway injury 159– 60, 
161– 62
tracheal extubation 162 
tracheal intubation 160, 161b 
wound care 157 
BURP 21– 22
 
calcium channel antagonists 81t 
cancer see malignancy 
‘can’t intubate, can’t oxygenate’ 20, 29, 
see also surgical airway 
capnography 74 
carbamazepine 214 
carbon monoxide poisoning 158– 59
carboxyhaemoglobin 158– 59
cardiac complication 
prediction 11– 12
cardiac murmurs 8– 9
cardiopulmonary exercise testing 11 
carotid artery haemorrhage 187– 88
 
 Index
226
carotid blow- out syndrome 187– 88
cavernous sinus thrombosis 142 
cellulitis, orbital 141 
cerebrospinal fluid leak 147 
cervical necrotizing fasciitis 142 
cervical spine injury 62– 63, 147, 148 
CHA2DS2– VASc score 13t 
chemical burns 155, 161 
ciprofloxacin 137t 
cleft lip and palate 2– 3, 3t, 127, 193, 
197– 98
clindamycin 137, 137t 
clonidine 81t 
clopidogrel 12 
cloverleaf skull 128f 
co- amoxiclav 137, 137t 
codeine 88 
cognitive aids 207 
cognitive behavioural  
therapy 216 
cognitive decline 181 
Coleman technique 102 
combitubes 149 
communication 205– 6
computed tomography (CT) 57– 58
cone- beam 60 
conchae 47 
cone- beam CT 60 
congenital heart disease 8– 9
conscious level 148, 150 
conscious sedation 65– 66, 90t 
consent 84– 86, 110 
continuous positive airway 
pressure 183 
Cook® Enk oxygen flow 
modulator 39– 40
cooling masks 97, 119 
co- phenylcaine 48 
coronary artery bypass  
grafting 8 
coronary artery disease 5– 8
coronary revascularization 5– 8
cranial nerve injuries 184 
craniofacial procedures 128– 29, 
130– 31
craniosynostosis 128 
cranium 60 
cricothyroidotomy 25
needle 34– 35
scalpel- bougie 35 
scalpel- finger- cannula 35– 36
crisis resource management 206– 7
Crouzon syndrome 129t, 129f,  
130 
cryoanaesthesia 103 
CSF leak 147 
cuff leak test 142 
culture of safety 207 
cyanide poisoning 159 
cyclizine 97 
cyst, dental 141 
 
dabigatran 13– 14
decision- making 201t, 204– 5
deep extubation 89, 97 
deep neck space infection 194 
deep sedation 66, 66t, 90t, 95 
dental abscess 135– 36, 136t 
dental anaesthesia 83– 92
airway management 87 
analgesia 88 
antibiotic prophylaxis 88– 89
antiemesis 88 
conduct of anaesthesia 86– 89
consent 84– 86
emergence from anaesthesia 89 
fasting 84 
follow- up 89 
history 83– 84
indications for general 
anaesthesia 83 
induction of anaesthesia 87 
information for patients 84 
intravenous access 86– 87
maintenance of anaesthesia 89 
paediatrics 131– 32
postoperative complications 89 
premedication 86– 87
preoperative assessment 4, 84 
sedation 89– 90
throat packs 88 
dental caries 135– 36
dental cyst 141 
dental injury, perioperative 195t 
dental nomenclature 59 
dentition imaging 59– 60
dermal fillers 102 
descending necrotizing 
mediastinitis 141– 42
dexamethasone 88, 96, 97, 116, 119, 
126 
dexmedetomidine 
aesthetic surgery 95 
dental anaesthesia 90 
hypotensive anaesthesia 80 
paediatrics 123 
sedation 68t, 69– 70, 71, 71t, 123 
difficult airway 19– 28, 124– 25, 
181– 82
Difficult Airway Society 
guidelines 35, 53, 125, 143f, 
162, 170 
direct laryngoscopy 21– 22, 148 
direct oral anticoagulants 13– 14
distraction osteogenesis 121t, 130 
Down syndrome 3t 
dual anti- platelet therapy 12 
dural tears 147 
 
EEG, sedation monitoring 74 
EMLA™ 86– 87, 103 
endoscopic surgery 175 
enhanced recovery after surgery 
(ERAS) 119– 21, 179– 80
erythromycin 137, 137t 
esmolol 80 
European Society of Cardiology/ 
European Society of 
Anaesthesiology (ESC/ ESA) 
guidelines 5– 9, 7f, 8t, 12– 13, 
14, 15 
external nasal nerve block 48 
extubation see tracheal extubation 
eye 
injury 147 
perioperative complications 195t 
protection 95– 96, 103, 110,  
114 
 
face 
bones 60 
regional anaesthesia 43– 47
face lift (rhytidectomy) 98t, 99– 100
facial augmentation 102 
fasting 
dental anaesthesia 84 
paediatrics 124 
sedation 73 
fatigue 206 
FDI/ ISO notation system 59 
fentanyl 68t, 69, 70, 71 
fibreoptic tracheal intubation 22– 23, 
38, 125, 148, 171 
field blocks 
face 46 
larynx 52 
mouth 49 
nasal cavity 48 
fillers 102 
flexion teardrop fracture 62 
floating palate 61 
fluids 
burns 156– 57
orthognathic surgery 117, 119 
paediatric surgery 126 
flumazenil 68 
forceps dilatational technique 30 
‘4– 2– 1’ rule 126 
fractures 
blowout 62 
cervical spine 62– 63, 147, 148 
flexion teardrop 62 
floating palate 61 
Guérin 61 
hangman’s fracture 63 
imaging 60– 63
Le Fort classification 61, 145, 146f 
lower third (mandibular) 61, 145, 
196 
middle third 61, 145, 196 
open door 62 
orbital 62 
tetrapod 61 
trapdoor 62 
upper third 59, 145 
white- eyed blowout 62 
zygomaticomaxillary  
complex 61 
free flap reconstruction 3– 4, 176– 77, 
188, 195t, 197 
frontal nerve 43– 44
front of neck airway 34– 36, 149– 50
 
gaseous systemic toxins 158– 59
general anaesthesia 
aesthetic surgery 95– 96
burns 163 
definition 65, 66t, 95 
dental surgery 83 
geniculate neuralgia 217 
genioplasty 98t, 102, 121t 
Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) 148, 150 
glossopharyngeal nerve 51 
glossopharyngeal nerve block 51 
glossopharyngeal neuralgia 215 
glyceryl trinitrate 81t 
great auricular nerve 47 
great auricular nerve block 47 
greater occipital nerve 47 
greater occipital nerve block 47 
Guérin fracture 61 
 
Hagen– Poiseuille equation 156 
hangman’s fracture 63 
hard palate 47 
hazard control 207 
head and neck cancer see 
malignancy 
heart murmurs 8– 9
hemifacial microsomia 3t 
herpes zoster 218– 19
heuristics 204 
hilotherapy 96, 119 
HLA- B*15:02 polymorphism 214 
H- shaped tracheal opening 32– 33
hyaluronic acid 102 
hyaluronidase 96 
hydrogen cyanide poisoning 159 
hyperbaric oxygen 159 
hypertension 
postoperative management 97, 
100 
preoperative management 9, 94 
hypnosis 86 
hypotensive anaesthesia 77– 82
aesthetic surgery 96– 97
blood pressure level 78, 79 
conduct 79 
contraindications 78– 79
discontinuation 79 
history 77 
indications 78 
information for patients 79 
monitoring 79 
orthognathic surgery 115 
paediatrics 130– 31
pharmacological 
techniques 79– 80
physiology 77– 78
uses 77 
 
iatrogenic trauma 147 
ibuprofen 88 
idarucizumab 14 
iLMA 112 
imaging 57– 64
dentition 59– 60
fractures 60– 63
infection 63 
modalities 57– 58
trauma 58 
tumours 63– 64
infection 135– 44
airway compromise 139– 40
antibiotic prophylaxis 138, 142 
antibiotic therapy 137 
clinical assessment 138 
deep neck space 194 
dental abscess 135– 36, 136t 
epidemiology 135 
imaging 63 
microbiology 136 
pathophysiology 135– 36
postoperative management 142 
preassessment 138 
preoperative assessment 2 
secondary infections 142– 43
sepsis 140– 41
serious complications 139– 42
spreading infection 141– 42
surgical wound 194 
tracheal extubation 142 
tracheal intubation 140 
uncomplicated patients 139 
infective endocarditis 88– 89
inferior alveolar nerve 46 
inferior alveolar nerve block 50 
information for patients 79, 84 
 Index
227
infraorbital nerve 45, 48 
infraorbital nerve block 46 
infrared red intubation system 
(IRRIS) 23 
infratrochlear nerve 44 
inhalational anaesthetics 
aesthetic surgery 96 
dental surgery 87, 89 
hypotensive anaesthesia 80 
orthognathic surgery 115– 16
inhalation injury 155, 157, 158 
intermaxillary fixation devices 118, 
151, 192– 93
internal jugular vein injury 197 
intracranial abscess 141 
Intralipid 54 
iron deficiency anaemia 10 
ischaemic stroke 12 
 
jaw exercises 216 
jet ventilation 39– 40, 171, 172– 73
 
ketamine 
dental anaesthesia 87
paediatrics 123 
postoperative analgesia 182 
sedation 68t, 69, 71, 71t, 123 
ketofol 71 
Klippel– Feil syndrome 3t 
 
labetalol 80 
lacrimal nerve 45 
lacrimal nerve block 46 
laminar flow 156 
laryngeal handshake 25, 35, 35f 
laryngeal mask airway 
aesthetic surgery 95– 96, 97 
dental surgery 87 
malignancy 173 
submental intubation 112 
laryngectomy 175 
laryngopharynx 51 
laryngoscopy, direct 21– 22, 148 
larynx, regional anaesthesia 51– 52
laser surgery 
aesthetics 98t, 102– 3
malignancy 175 
Lee’s Revised Cardiac Risk Index 11 
Le Fort I/ II/ III osteotomy 129– 30, 
196– 97
Le Fort classification 61, 145, 146f 
Lemierre’s syndrome 142 
lesser occipital nerve 47 
lesser occipital nerve block 47 
lidocaine 54t, 182 
liposuction 98t, 102 
local anaesthesia 
aesthetic surgery 96 
allergy to agents 54 
commonly used preparations 54t 
creams 86– 87, 103 
dental surgery 88 
orthognathic surgery 116 
toxicity of agents 54 
see also regional anaesthesia 
Ludwig’s angina 2, 139, 139b 
 
magnesium 80 
magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) 58 
malignancy 167– 78
airway assessment 169 
airway devices 173 
airway management 170– 72
analgesia 174 
common locations 167 
comorbidities 169 
endoscopic surgery 175 
free flap reconstruction 176– 77
imaging 63– 64
induction of anaesthesia 173– 74
laryngectomy 175 
laser surgery 175 
maintenance of anaesthesia 174 
NAP4 170 
neck dissection 175 
oxygenation 172– 73
perioperative emergencies 174 
preoperative assessment 3, 169 
radiotherapy 169 
rare tumour resection 175 
reconstructive surgery 175– 77
risk factors 167 
robotic surgery 175 
surgical complications 197 
tracheal extubation 174– 75
tracheal resection 175 
treatment options 167– 68
types of surgery 167 
Mallampati score 19 
mandibular division, trigeminal 
nerve 45– 46, 45f 
mandibular fractures (lower 
third) 61, 145, 196 
mandibular osteotomy 121t 
Manujet™ 39, 40 
Marsh model 71 
maxillary division, trigeminal 
nerve 45, 45f 
maxillary nerve block 46, 50 
maxillary osteotomy 121t, 196– 97
maxillary sinusitis 141 
maxillofacial trauma see trauma 
maxillomandibular fixation, 
intubation 25– 26
mean arterial pressure (MAP) 77, 
78, 79 
medical errors 201 
medications management 12– 15, 94 
Melker™ Emergency Cricothyrotomy 
Catheter set 37 
mental nerve block 46– 47
mepivacaine 54t 
metronidazole 137, 137t 
microvascular 
decompression 214– 15
midazolam 67– 68, 68t, 87, 123 
midfacial fracture 61, 145, 196 
minimal sedation/ anxiolysis 65, 66t, 
90t, 95 
Minto model 71 
moderate sedation 65– 66, 66t, 90t, 
95 
Moffett’s solution 48, 101 
monitoring 
burns 157 
hypotensive anaesthesia 79 
nerve injury 152, 184 
postoperative 180 
sedation 74 
morbidity prediction 10– 11
mortality prediction 10– 11
mouth, regional anaesthesia 49– 50
multiple sclerosis 214 
naloxone 69 
nasal cannulae 21 
nasal cavity, regional 
anaesthesia 47– 48
nasal septum 47 
nasociliary nerve 44, 48 
nasociliary nerve block 48 
nasopalatine nerve 48 
nasopharynx 50 
nasotracheal intubation 23, 25,  
110– 12, 148, 151 
National Audit Project 4 (NAP4) 34, 
170 
National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Project (NSQIP) 
NSQIP- MICA 11 
surgical risk calculator 11 
National Tracheostomy Safety 
Project 184– 85
nausea and vomiting, 
postoperative 97, 116– 17, 118, 
126, 180– 81
neck dissection 175, 187– 88, 197 
neck haematoma 187– 88
neck space infection 194 
needle cricothyroidotomy 34– 35
nerve blocks 
face 46– 47
larynx 52 
mouth 50 
nasal cavity 48 
pharynx 51 
nerve injury 
monitoring for 151, 184 
regional anaesthesia 53 
surgical complication 195t 
neuroablation, trigeminal 
ganglion 214– 15
neuromuscular blockade 20– 21, 100, 
125, 151, 163 
NICE guidelines, antibiotic 
prophylaxis 88– 89, 138 
nicotine withdrawal 180 
nitrous oxide 68t, 70 
NODESAT 21 
noise distraction 205 
non- technical skills 
ANTS framework 201, 203– 5
cognitive aids 207 
crisis resource management and 
simulation training 206– 7
decision- making 201t, 204– 5
patient safety 207 
situation awareness 201t,  
202– 4
task management 201t, 202 
team communication 205– 6
team performance 206 
teamworking 201t, 205 
non- VKA direct oral 
anticoagulants 13– 14
NSQIP (National Surgical Quality 
Improvement Project) 
NSQIP- MICA 11 
surgical risk calculator 11 
nutrition, postoperative 183– 84
 
obesity 4– 5
obstructive sleep apnoea 
syndrome 4– 5, 107, 108– 9, 123, 
130, 180, 183 
occlusal appliances 216 
ocular complications, 
perioperative 195t 
ocular injury 147 
ocular protection 95– 96, 103, 110, 
114 
oculocardiac reflex 196 
oedema 
airway 159 
postoperative 181 
reduction in orthognathic 
surgery 119 
oesophageal injury 147 
olfactory nerve 48 
ondansetron 97 
on- lay implants 98t, 102 
open door fracture 62 
ophthalmic division, trigeminal 
nerve 43– 45, 45f 
opioids 69, 70, 164 
Optiflow™ 74, 172 
orbit 
cellulitis 141 
fracture 62 
trauma 196 
orofacial pain 211– 23
assessment 211– 12
auriculotemporal neuralgia 217 
classification 212– 13
definition 211 
geniculate neuralgia 217 
glossopharyngeal neuralgia 215 
herpes zoster 218– 19
history- taking 211– 12
investigations 212 
persistent idiopathic facial 
pain 217– 18
physical examination 212 
post- herpetic neuralgia 219– 20
temporomandibular joint 
disorders 215– 17
trigeminal neuralgia 213– 15
oropharynx 50 
orthognathic surgery 107– 21
airway management 110– 12
analgesia 116, 119 
antibiotics prophylaxis 117 
antiemetics 116– 17
bimaxillary osteotomy 121t 
bleeding 115, 118 
consent 110 
critical care 119 
distraction osteogenesis 121t, 130 
emergence from 
anaesthesia 117– 18
enhanced recovery 119– 21
eye protection 110, 114 
fluids 117, 119 
genioplasty 121t 
intermaxillary fixation devices 118 
Le Fort III osteotomy 129– 30
maintenance of 
anaesthesia 115– 16
mandibular osteotomy 121t 
maxillary osteotomy 121t, 196– 97
oedema reduction 119 
orthodontist contribution 107 
paediatrics 129– 31
positioning 114– 15, 118 
postoperative management 118– 
21, 188 
postoperative nausea and 
vomiting 116– 17, 118 
 Index
228
premedication 110 
preoperative assessment 107– 9
psychological assessment 107– 8
respiratory support 118– 19
temperature control 115 
temporomandibular joint 
surgery 121t 
throat packs 112– 14
tracheal extubation 117– 18
trigeminocardiac reflex 115 
venous thromboprophylaxis 115 
orthopantomogram 57, 58f 
osteomyelitis 141 
otoplasty 98t, 101– 2
oxcarbazepine 214 
 
paediatric surgery 123– 34
analgesia 126 
antiemetics 126 
blood conservation 130– 31
cleft lip and palate 2– 3, 3t, 127, 
193, 197– 98
craniofacial procedures 128– 29, 
130– 31
dental surgery 131– 32
difficult airway 124– 25
distraction osteogenesis 130 
fasting 124 
fluids 126 
induction of anaesthesia 125 
Le Fort III osteotomy 129– 30
obstructive sleep apnoea 123, 130 
orthognathic procedures 129– 31
postoperative care 188– 89
postoperative compromised 
airway 126– 27
postoperative nausea and 
vomiting 126 
premedication 123– 24
preoperative assessment 123 
sedation 123– 24
temporomandibular joint 
surgery 127– 28
tongue tie 131 
tracheal tube selection 125– 26
tracheostomy 189 
trauma 131 
pain management see analgesia 
Palmer notation 59 
paracetamol 
intravenous 88 
postoperative 182 
Parkland formula 157 
patient blood management 9– 10
patient- controlled sedation 71– 72
patient safety 207 
penetrating trauma 146– 47
percutaneous coronary 
intervention 8, 12 
percutaneous dilatational 
tracheostomy 30– 31, 33 
percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG) 183– 84
persistent idiopathic facial 
pain 217– 18
Pfeiffer syndrome 129t, 129f, 130 
pharyngeal wall 50 
pharynx, regional anaesthesia 50– 51
Pierre Robin sequence 3t 
positioning 20, 114– 15, 118 
POSSUM 11 
post- herpetic neuralgia 219– 20
postoperative care 179– 90
aesthetic surgery 97 
airway compromise 126– 27, 
192– 93
alcohol withdrawal 180 
analgesia 182– 83
antibiotics 184 
cognitive recovery 181 
cranial nerve injuries 184 
difficult airway 181– 82
enhanced recovery after surgery 
(ERAS) 119– 21, 179– 80
free flap reconstruction 188 
infection 142 
monitoring 180 
nausea and vomiting 97, 116– 17, 
118, 126, 180– 81
neck haematoma 187– 88
nicotine withdrawal 180 
nursing care 180 
nutrition 183– 84
obstructive sleep apnoea 183 
oral hygiene 181 
orthognathic surgery 118– 21, 188 
paediatric surgery 188– 89
robotic surgery 186– 87
room temperature 180 
tissue oedema 181 
tracheostomy 184– 86
trauma 153 
venous thromboprophylaxis 183 
P- POSSUM 11 
prasugrel 12 
premedication 
dental anaesthesia 86– 87
orthognathic surgery 110 
paediatric surgery 123– 24
preoperative assessment 1– 17
aesthetic surgery 93– 94
airway 1– 2, 19– 20
comorbidities 4– 10
congenital anomalies 2– 3
dental anaesthesia 4, 84 
environmental considerations 4 
free flap transfer 3– 4
infection 2 
malignancy 3, 169 
medications management 12– 15
orthognathic surgery 107– 9
paediatric surgery 123 
risk stratification 10– 12
sedation 73 
trauma 2, 150– 51
preoxygenation 20, 172 
processed EEG, sedation 
monitoring 74 
propofol 
aesthetic surgery 96 
dental anaesthesia 87 
hypotensive anaesthesia 80 
sedation 68– 69, 68t, 71 
psychological assessment 
aesthetic surgery 94 
orthognathic surgery 107– 8
pterygopalatine ganglion block 48 
 
qSOFA 140 
 
radiofrequency therapy 103 
radiotherapy 169 
Rainbow Acoustic Monitor® 74 
Ramsay Hunt syndrome 218 
Rapid- O2™ cricothyroidotomy 
insufflation device 40 
read- back technique 205 
reconstructive surgery 175– 77, 197 
regional anaesthesia 43– 55
aesthetic surgery 96 
anaesthetic preparations 54t 
awake tracheal intubation 52– 53
complications 53– 54
face 43– 47
larynx 51– 52
mouth 49– 50
nasal cavity 47– 48
pharynx 50– 51
postoperative 182– 83
scalp 47 
RELAX Anaesthetics™ 86 
remifentanil 
hypotensive anaesthesia 80 
sedation 69, 71
respiration 
monitoring during sedation 74 
support after orthognathic 
surgery 118– 19
retrograde intubation 24, 38– 39
retromolar intubation 25, 112, 152 
return to theatre 193– 94
Revised Cardiac Risk Index 11 
rhinoplasty 98t, 100– 1
rhytidectomy 98t, 99– 100
Ring– Adair– Elwyn (RAE) tubes 87, 173 
risk stratification 10– 12
rivaroxaban 13– 14
robotic surgery 175, 186– 87
‘rule of three’ 204 
 
Saethre– Chotzen syndrome 129t 
scalp (block) 47 
scalpel- bougie cricothyroidotomy 35 
scalpel- finger- cannula 
cricothyroidotomy 35– 36
screw- action dilatational 
technique 31 
SEDARA® 70 
sedation 65– 76
advantages 66 
aesthetic surgery 95 
aims of 65– 66
analgesia and 66 
complications 66– 67
conduct of 71– 72
conduct of surgery 72 
dental surgery 89– 90
depth of 65– 66, 66t, 90t, 95 
equipment for safe practice 74 
fasting 73 
ideal sedative agent 67 
monitoring 74 
paediatric surgery 123– 24
patient- controlled 71– 72
pharmacology of agents 67– 70
preoperative assessment and 
preparation 73 
recovery and discharge 75 
safety and guidelines 72– 73
synergy of agents 70– 71
target- controlled infusion 68, 
71– 72
training and personnel 74– 75
sepsis 140– 41
serial dilatational technique 30 
sevoflurane 
dental anaesthesia 89 
sedation 70 
shared airway 151, 174, 175, 192b 
simulation- based crisis resource 
management training 206– 7
single dilator technique 31 
sinusitis, maxillary 141 
situation awareness 201t, 202– 4
skull/ skull base 60 
smoke inhalation complex 158 
SNAPPI 205– 6
sodium bicarbonate 96 
sodium nitroprusside 81t 
soft tissue damage 53, 195t 
SORT 11 
‘speaking up’ culture 206 
‘spray- as- you- go’ 53 
statins 14 
Stickler syndrome 3t 
STOP- BANG questionnaire 4– 5, 
5t, 183 
submental intubation 25– 26, 33, 
112, 152 
superficial muscular aponeurotic 
system (SMAS) facelifts 99 
supraglottic airway devices 21, 87, 
125, 148– 49, 173 
supraorbital nerve 43 
supraorbital nerve block 46 
supratrochlear nerve 43 
supratrochlear nerve block 46 
surgical airway 29– 42
conversion techniques 37– 38
front of neck airway 34– 36, 
149– 50
submental intubation 25– 26, 33, 
112, 152 
ultrasound use 36– 37
see also tracheostomy 
surgical complications 191– 99
airway management 191– 92
arrhythmia 195t 
base of skull complications 195t 
bleeding 194, 195t 
circulatory complications 195t 
cleft lip and palate 197– 98
dental injury 195t 
extubation planning 192– 93
flap perfusion issues 195t 
infection 194 
malignancy 197 
nasolacrimal complications 195t 
neurological injury 195t 
ophthalmic complications 195t 
oral surgery 195 
postoperative airway 
compromise 192– 93
reconstructive surgery 197 
return to theatres 193– 94
soft tissue injury 195t 
thrombotic complications 195t 
trauma 195– 96
unsatisfactory surgical 
outcome 195t 
Surgical Outcome Risk Tool 
(SORT) 11 
Surgical Safety Checklist 
(WHO) 201, 207 
surgical tracheostomy 31– 33, 112 
‘Surviving Sepsis’ 140, 141t 
suxamethonium 163 
orthognathic surgery (cont.)
 Index
229
target- controlled infusion 68, 71– 72
target sign 147 
task management 201t, 202 
team communication 205– 6
team performance 206 
teamworking 201t, 205 
teeth 
imaging 59– 60
injury during surgery 195t 
nomenclature 59 
sensory innervation 49 
temperature control 
burns 157, 163 
orthognathic surgery 115 
temporomandibular joint 
disorders 121t, 127– 28,  
215– 17
10- seconds- for- 10- minutes 206 
tetrapod fracture 61 
THRIVE 21, 125, 139– 40, 153, 172 
throat packs 88, 112– 14, 151 
ticagrelor 12 
tongue 
anatomy 49 
tongue tie 131 
tonsillar fossa 50 
tonsillar pillars 50 
topical anaesthesia 
larynx 52 
laser surgery 103 
mouth 49 
nasal cavity 48 
pharynx 51 
total intravenous anaesthesia 
aesthetic surgery 96 
dental anaesthesia 87, 89 
malignancy 174 
orthognathic surgery 115– 16
tracheal extubation 
aesthetic surgery 97 
burns 162 
deep 89, 97 
dental anaesthesia 89 
difficult airway 26– 27
indications for delayed 
extubation 192b 
infection 142 
malignancy 174– 75
orthognathic surgery 117– 18
planning 192– 93
trauma 152– 53
tracheal intubation 
airway burns 160, 161b 
anaesthetizing the airway 52– 53
awake 22, 52– 53
dental anaesthesia 87 
fibreoptic 22– 23, 38, 125, 148, 171 
infection 140 
nasotracheal 23, 25, 110– 12, 148, 
151 
retrograde 24, 38– 39
retromolar 25, 112, 152 
submental 25– 26, 33, 112, 152 
trauma 151 
tracheal resection 175 
tracheal stenosis 186 
tracheo- innominate artery fistula 33, 
185– 86
tracheostomy 
awake 24, 172 
bleeding 33, 185– 86
dysphagia 185b 
elective 30 
emergency airway rescue 33, 
184– 85
mucous plugs 185 
orthognathic surgery 112 
paediatrics 189 
percutaneous dilatational 30– 31, 
33 
postoperative care 184– 86
surgical 31– 33, 112 
tracheal stenosis 186 
trauma 151 
tranexamic acid 96, 131 
translaryngeal technique 31 
transtracheal cannula 172 
trapdoor fracture 62 
trauma 145– 54
aetiology 145 
airway guidelines 149– 50
airway management 147– 49
airway obstruction 148 
blunt trauma 145– 46
brain injury 147 
cervical spine injury 147, 148 
conscious level 148, 150 
CSF leak 147 
dural tears 147 
epidemiology 145 
fractures see fractures 
full stomach 148 
haemorrhage 151 
iatrogenic 147 
imaging 58 
intermaxillary fixation 151 
intraoperative 
management 151– 52
intraoperative tube 
changes 151– 52
nasotracheal intubation 148, 151 
nerve monitoring 151 
ocular injury 147 
oesophageal injury 147 
oral tracheal tubes 151 
orbital 196 
paediatrics 131 
penetrating trauma 146– 47
postoperative considerations 153 
preoperative assessment 2, 
150– 51
retromolar intubation 152 
shared airway 151 
submental intubation 152 
surgical complications 195– 96
throat packs 151 
tracheal extubation 152– 53
tracheostomy 151 
trismus 150 
Treacher Collins syndrome 3t 
trigeminal nerve 43– 46, 51, 211 
trigeminal neuralgia 213– 15
trigeminocardiac reflex 115 
trismus 140, 150 
T- shaped tracheal opening 32 
tumours see malignancy 
two- challenge rule 206 
 
ultrasound 36– 37, 57 
Universal notation system 59 
U- shaped tracheal opening 32– 33
 
vagus nerve 51 
valvular heart disease 8 
varicella zoster vaccine 220 
vault 60 
velocardiofacial syndrome 3t 
venous thromboprophylaxis 115, 183 
Ventrain™ 40 
videolaryngoscopy 
awake 24 
burns 160 
difficult airway 22 
malignancy 171– 72
trauma 148, 149 
vitamin K antagonists 13 
Vulcan hand grip 38f 
 
warfarin 13 
white- eyed blowout fracture 62 
WHO Surgical Safety Checklist 201, 
207 
wounds 
burns 157 
deep neck space infection 194 
surgical wound infection 194 
 
X- ray 57 
 
Zsigmondy Palmer notation 59 
zygomatic nerve 45 
zygomaticofacial nerve 45 
zygomaticomaxillary complex 
fractures 61 
zygomaticotemporal nerve 45 
zygomaticotemporal nerve block 47 
