SBAs and MCQs for Drugs in 
Anaesthesia and Intensive Care
 
SBAs and MCQs 
for Drugs in 
Anaesthesia and 
Intensive Care
Edited by
Dr Edward Scarth
Consultant in Anaesthesia & Intensive Care Medicine
Torbay & South Devon NHS Foundation Trust
Torbay Hospital, UK
Dr Claire Blandford
Consultant Anaesthetist
Torbay & South Devon NHS Foundation Trust
Torbay Hospital, UK;
and Clinical Subdean
University of Exeter Medical School
Exeter, UK
 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Oxford University Press 2023
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
98 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 006, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022945863
ISBN 978–0–9–882698–9
DOI: 0.093/​med/​978098826989.00.000
Printed in the UK by 
Ashford Colour Press Ltd, Gosport, Hampshire
Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or implied, that the
drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must therefore always check
the product information and clinical procedures with the most up-​to-​date
published product information and data sheets provided by the manufacturers
and the most recent codes of conduct and safety regulations. The authors and
the publishers do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the
text or for the misuse or misapplication of material in this work. Except where
otherwise stated, drug dosages and recommendations are for the non-​pregnant
adult who is not breast-​feeding
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.
 
v
Foreword
An in-​depth understanding of pharmacology is essential within anaes­
thetic and intensive care medical practice. However, it is an area that 
many trainees preparing for exams (and indeed more experienced col­
leagues) find particularly challenging. This exam preparation book is an 
excellent companion to the already well-​recognized publication Drugs in 
Anaesthesia and Intensive Care.
The authors draw on an impressive range of experience in this field, 
Dr Scarth having co-​authored the fourth and fifth editions of the com­
panion text and Dr Blandford having established and run for many years 
the extremely successful South West Intensive Primary Examination day 
(SWIPED) with accompanying published Structured Oral Examination 
(SOE) exam preparation text (Passing the Primary FRCA SOE).
The chapters are arranged to cover all the main pharmacological 
topics required within anaesthetic/​intensive care practice and a wide 
range of both multiple-​choice and single best answer questions ensure 
that a candidate will be fully prepared to tackle the finer details of the 
pharmacology syllabuses of these professional examinations. I imagine 
that this book will prove invaluable to both trainees and trainers, and 
both will be more fully educated in the finer points of pharmacology 
after working through these questions together!
Dr Mary Stocker MA Chemistry (Oxon), MBChB, FRCA
Consultant Anaesthetist, Torbay and South Devon
 
vii
Preface
This book has been a collaboration between two consultant colleagues 
at Torbay & South Devon NHS Foundation Trust. Drs Blandford and 
Scarth have almost 40 years of combined experience in the field of an­
aesthetics and intensive care medicine.
Dr Blandford is a consultant anaesthetist with clinical interests in 
orthopaedics, regional anaesthesia, day surgery, and clinical pathway 
quality improvement. She has a strong educational background, having 
established and led as course director a well-​respected national exam 
preparation course for the primary FRCA examination for over a decade 
and published her first educational text in 206, Passing the Primary FRCA 
SOE—​A Practical Guide. Dr Blandford continues to support trainees 
as an educational supervisor, IAC programme lead for her depart­
ment, and since 209 has been a Clinical Subdean for the University 
of Exeter Medical School, jointly holding the position of Director of 
Undergraduate Medical Education at her trust.
Dr Scarth is a consultant in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine. 
He has clinical interests that include the transfer of critically ill patients 
and has previously supported the regional transfer medicine service as 
a consultant coordinator. He also has clinical experience in delayed pri­
mary and secondary aeromedical retrieval medicine. Dr Scarth holds a 
senior clinical governance position in the trust’s management structure 
and is responsible for overseeing governance across numerous clinical 
departments. He has an interest in incident investigation and patient 
safety. In 206 Dr Scarth co-​authored the revised 5th edition of the 
much-​respected pharmacology book, Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, which I’m sure most of us (both authors included!) had an edition 
of on the pile of revision resources when examinations came around.
This new book is designed as a companion to Drugs in Anaesthesia and 
Intensive Care, however, it can also be used as a standalone preparation 
text. Pharmacology is often an area of examination syllabuses in which 
learners struggle. The breadth of the topics covered and the detail within 
which questions may be asked is frequently daunting. This book acts as 
a dedicated pharmacology resource to help you hone your learning and 
examination practice. It has been designed to cover multiple syllabuses 
across the anaesthesia and intensive care postgraduate examinations of­
fering an adaptable resource for your preparation.
We both wish you well in your examination success and hope this 
book helps you along the way.
Dr Claire Blandford
Dr Edward Scarth Torbay 
May 2022
 
ix
Contents
Abbreviations  xi
Contributors  xiii
	
	 Inhaled anaesthetic agents	

	
2	 Intravenous anaesthetic agents	
5
	
3	 Local anaesthetic agents	
27
	
4	 Drugs affecting neuromuscular function	
39
	
5	 Analgesics: opioids	
5
	
6	 Analgesics: non-​opioids	
63
	
7	 Antimicrobial agents	
75
	
8	 Intravenous fluids and blood products	
89
	
9	 Pharmacological principles	
0
	
0	 Drugs affecting the central nervous system	
3
	
	 Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system	
3
	
2	 Drugs affecting the respiratory system	
43
	
3	 Drugs affecting the gastrointestinal system	
55
	
4	 Drugs affecting the renal tract	
67
	
5	 Drugs affecting the endocrine system	
77
	
6	 Drugs affecting the haematological and 
immune systems	
93
	
7	 Drugs in overdose	
205
Index  25
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xi
Abbreviations
ADH	
Antidiuretic hormone
AKI	
Acute kidney injury
AMPK	
Adenosine monophosphate kinase
ARDS	
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
ATD	
Adult therapeutic dose
CK	
Creatinine kinase
CKD	
Chronic kidney disease
CMR	
Cerebral metabolic rate
CNS	
Central nervous system
CPP	
Cerebral perfusion pressure
CRS	
Cytokine-​release syndrome
DI	
Diabetes insipidus
ED	
Effective dosages
ED	
Emergency department
EDAIC	
European Diploma in Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care
EDIC	
European Diploma in Intensive Care
FFICM	
Fellowship of the Faculty of Intensive Care Medicine
FFP	
Fresh frozen plasma
FRC	
Functional residual capacity
FRCA	
Fellowship of the Royal College of Anaesthetists
GCS	
Glasgow Coma Scale
GvHD	
Graft versus host disease
HAS	
Human albumin solution
ICU	
Intensive care unit
LVOT	
Left ventricular outflow tract
MAP	
Mean arterial pressure
MCQ	
Multiple-​Choice Questions
MH	
Malignant hypertermia
NMDA	
N-​methyl D-​aspartate
PABA	
Para-​amino benzoic acid
PAS	
Platelet additive solution
PBPC	
Peripheral blood progenitor cells
PEP	
Post-​exposure prophylaxis
PPI	
Proton pump inhibitor
 
Abbreviations
xii
PSE	
Present State Examination
PUD	
Peptic ulcer disease
RBC	
Red blood cell
RRT	
Renal replacement therapy
RSI	
Rapid sequence induction
SBA	
Single Best Answer
SCRA	
Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists
SIADH	
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
SSRI	
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
SVP	
Saturated vapour pressure
SVR	
Systemic vascular resistance
TIVA	
Total intravenous anaesthesia
TLS	
Tumour lysis syndrome
TOF	
Train-​of-​four
VD	
Volume of distribution
xiii
Contributors
Dr Claire Blandford
Consultant Anaesthetist, Torbay 
& South Devon NHS Foundation 
Trust, Torbay Hospital, UK; and 
Clinical Subdean, University 
of Exeter Medical School, 
Exeter, UK
Chapters , 3, 6
Dr David Hutchins
Consultant in Anaesthesia 
and Pain Medicine, University 
Hospitals Plymouth, 
Plymouth, UK
Chapter 6 co-author
Dr David Levy
Consultant Anaesthetist, Torbay 
& South Devon NHS Foundation 
Trust, Torbay Hospital, UK
Chapters 2, 0, 5
Dr Graham C. McCracken
Registrar in Intensive Care 
Medicine and Anaesthesia, Belfast 
Health and Social Care Trust, 
Northern Ireland, UK
Chapters 4, 9, 3
Dr Helen Marshall
Consultant Anaesthetist, Royal 
Devon University Hospital 
(Eastern), NHS Foundation 
Trust, Exeter, UK
Chapters , 2, 4
Dr Sarah Shaw
Anaesthetic Registrar, Torbay & 
South Devon NHS Foundation 
Trust, Torbay Hospital, 
Torquay, UK
Chapters 5, 8
Dr Edward Scarth
Consultant in Anaesthesia & 
Intensive Care Medicine, Torbay 
& South Devon NHS Foundation 
Trust, Torbay Hospital, UK
Chapters 7, 6, 7
 
1
Chapter 
Inhaled anaesthetic 
agents
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	 

Which of the following statements are true? 
A	 The potency of an inhaled anaesthetic agent can be indicated by its 
blood:gas partition coefficient
B	 A high oil:gas partition coefficient indicates an inhaled anaesthetic 
agent with a rapid onset/​offset time
C	 An ‘ideal’ volatile anaesthetic agent would have a high oil:gas 
coefficient value and a low blood:gas coefficient value
D	 Pyrexia lowers the blood:gas coefficient value of sevoflurane
E	 MACbar is the brain concentration of an anaesthetic agent which 
blocks adrenergic responses to a standardized skin incision in 50% of 
patients
2.	
 
Regarding xenon: 
A	 Xenon has a high blood:gas partition coefficient
B	 Xenon is an odourless gas
C	 Xenon inhibits GABAA receptors
D	 Xenon is a potent analgesic
E	 Xenon is contraindicated in patients with malignant hyperpyrexia
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Inhaled anaesthetic agents 
2
3.	
Which of the following drugs are correctly matched with their 
chemical formulae?
A	 Desflurane =​ C3H2F6O
B	 Enflurane =​ C3H2ClF5O
C	 Halothane =​ C4H3F7O
D	 Isoflurane =​ C3H2BrF5O
E	 Sevoflurane =​ C2H3ClF7O
4.	
 
Concerning methoxyflurane, which of the following are true? 
A	 Concerns about hepatic toxicity led to it being withdrawn 
from the UK
B	 When used as an anaesthetic, an analgesic effect persists into the 
postoperative period
C	 Onset time is rapid
D	 Has a higher incidence of dysrhythmia than halothane
E	 Has no effect on APGAR scores when used in labour
5.	 

Heliox
A	 Is a mixture of 50% He: 50% O2
B	 Heliox cylinders are green with white shoulders in the UK
C	 Has approximately 33% of the density of air
D	 Has approximately the same viscosity as air
E	 Is approved as a definitive treatment for acute severe asthma
6.	
Which of the following statements concerning inhalational anaes­
thetics are true?
A	 Desflurane has been shown experimentally to enhance activity of 
pre-​ and postsynaptic ‘two-​pore domain potassium channels’
B	 Volatile anaesthetic agents prolong the GABAA receptor-​mediated 
excitatory chloride ion current
C	 Nitrous oxide has an inhibitory action at N-​methyl-​D-​aspartate 
(NMDA) receptors
D	 Volatile anaesthetic agents are agonists at neuronal glutamate 
receptors
E	 Volatile anaesthetic agents are antagonists at neuronal glycine 
receptors
 
 
 
 
QUESTIONS
3
7.	
When inducing anaesthesia with volatile agents, which of the fol­
lowing statements are true?
A	 A large functional residual capacity (FRC) results in faster onset of 
anaesthesia
B	 A lower breathing system volume increases the FA/​Fi ratio
C	 Lower levels of albumin may contribute to a more rapid onset of 
volatile anaesthesia
D	 The ‘second gas effect’ of nitrous oxide reduces the alveolar partial 
pressures of co-​administered volatile agents during induction
E	 Increasing haematocrit increases the solubility of enflurane
Single Best Answers
.	
Bloods taken from a 62-​year-​old female patient a week following 
spinal surgery showed macrocytic anaemia and an elevated plasma 
homocysteine level. Preoperatively results were all within normal limits. 
Which one of the following is most likely to be associated with these 
findings?
A	 Desflurane
B	 Isoflurane
C	 Nitrous oxide
D	 Oxygen
E	 Sevoflurane
2.	
A new inhaled anaesthetic drug ‘R’ has been discovered. You are 
told the following information:
	Molecular weight =​ 144
	Boiling point =​ 49°C
	Blood:Gas partition coefficient =​ 0.20
	Oil:Gas partition coefficient =​ 150
	MAC =​ 0.9
Which statement is most likely to be true about this drug?
A	 Drug ‘R’ is a structural isomer of sevoflurane
B	 Drug ‘R’ is less potent than isoflurane
C	 Drug ‘R’ is likely to require a vaporizer similar in design to a 
desflurane vaporizer
D	 Drug ‘R’ will have a faster rate of onset than desflurane
E	 Drug ‘R’ would be expected to have a MACaw value of 0.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Inhaled anaesthetic agents 
4
3.	
A 2-​year primigravida has laboured to 9 cm cervical dilatation. 
She now requires general anaesthesia for an emergency caesarean 
section due to profound foetal bradycardia. Which of the following 
gas mixtures would you expect to result in the least intraoperative 
blood loss?
A	 29% Oxygen/​70% nitrous oxide/​0.8% isoflurane
B	 40% Oxygen/​57% medical air/​3% isoflurane
C	 45% Oxygen/​50% medical air/​5% sevoflurane
D	 60% Oxygen/​38% nitrous oxide/​.5% isoflurane
E	 96% Oxygen/​4% isoflurane
4.	
A 20-​year-​old ASA  man is undergoing the removal of metal work 
from his ankle. His general anaesthetic was induced with propofol, 
fentanyl, and atracurium. He is intubated and ventilated with a gas mix­
ture comprising oxygen, medical air, and sevoflurane. Approximately 
30 minutes into the case, tachycardia and a substantial rise in end-​tidal 
carbon dioxide are noted. This patient has had two previous uneventful 
general anaesthetics.
Which of the following drugs is likely to be the most useful in this 
patient’s management?
A	 Adrenaline :000
B	 Cyproheptadine
C	 Dantrolene
D	 Phentolamine
E	 Propylthiouracil
5.	
You are given the following data about an inhaled anaesthetic agent:
Saturated vapour pressure (SVP) at 20ºC: 32 kPa
	Blood:gas partition coefficient: 1.40
	Oil:gas partition coefficient: 97
Which of the following is this agent most likely to be?
A	 Desflurane
B	 Enflurane
C	 Halothane
D	 Isoflurane
E	 Sevoflurane
 
 
 
 
 
QUESTIONS
5
6.	
Seven days post surgery, a 50-​year-​old woman develops pyrexia, 
non specific gastrointestinal upset and a rash. An eosinophilia is 
noted on her full blood count. Which drug is she most likely to have 
been exposed to that could account for these symptoms?
A	 Desflurane
B	 Enflurane
C	 Halothane
D	 Methoxyflurane
E	 Nitrous oxide
7.	
A 50-​year-​old man is having an inhalational anaesthetic at 3000 m 
altitude. Which statement about the conduct of his anaesthetic is 
most accurate:
A	 At this altitude the dial on an isoflurane vaporizer should be set to 
half of the desired ‘sea level’ % setting
B	 A sevoflurane vaporizer set to 4% will produce a partial pressure of 
70% of its ‘sea level’ value
C	 A Tec-​6 desflurane vaporizer can be used at this altitude with no 
compensation required for atmospheric pressure changes due to its 
design features
D	 Setting the dial on an isoflurane vaporizer to % will produce the 
same partial pressure at this altitude as it would at sea level
E	 The SVP of a volatile agent is reduced by low ambient pressure
 
 
Chapter   Inhaled anaesthetic agents 
6
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FFTTT
Potency of anaesthetic agents is associated with the oil:gas partition 
coefficient, not the blood:gas partition coefficient. The oil:gas coefficient 
increases as the potency of an agent increases. The blood:gas partition 
coefficient is a measure of the agent’s solubility. A high blood:gas solu­
bility value means a greater amount is taken up in the blood and it takes 
longer for partial pressure equilibrium to be reached, thus induction 
times will be slower.
An ‘ideal’ volatile anaesthetic agent would therefore have a high oil:gas 
coefficient value (for potency) and a low blood:gas coefficient value 
(for speed of induction). Pyrexia reduces the blood:gas coefficients of 
inhaled anaesthetic agents, which typically makes induction in hyper­
thermic patients more rapid.
MAC defines the minimum alveolar concentration of anaesthetic gas 
at  atmosphere required to prevent a movement response in 50% of 
subjects undergoing a standard surgical stimulus. Its units are percent­
ages. MACbar uses changes in heart rate and arterial pressure as indi­
cators of adrenergic responses to incision. Values are presented as 
fractions of MAC. Opiates significantly reduce MACbar values but have 
a ceiling of effect.
Further reading
Charlton M, Thompson JP. Pharmacokinetics in sepsis. BJA Education, 
209;9():7–​3.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. APPENDIX A..
White D. Uses of MAC. Br J Anaesth, 2003;9(2):67–​69.
2.  FTFTF
Xenon, a noble gas, has many advantageous anaesthetic properties. 
It has an extremely low blood:gas partition coefficient (0.4)—​lower 
than all the other agents that are currently available. A low blood:gas 
partition coefficient is associated with rapid onset and offset of ac­
tion. It is indeed an odourless gas. Xenon’s mechanism of action is 
thought to be potent non-​competitive inhibition of NMDA receptors 
with little effect on GABAA receptors. Xenon does indeed have a 
potent analgesic effect, it is thought to be superior to nitrous oxide in 
this property. Nitrous oxide promotes release of endogenous ligands 
for opiate receptors, yet the mechanism for xenon is thought to be 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
7
antinociceptive at a spinal cord level. In-​vivo and in-​vitro studies indicate 
that xenon is not a trigger for malignant hyperpyrexia in susceptible 
individuals.
Further reading
Sanders RD, Franks NP, Maze M. Xenon: no stranger to anaesthesia. Br J 
Anaesth, 2003;9(5):709–​77.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Nitrous Oxide, Xenon.
3.  TTFFF
Correct answers are:
Desflurane =​ C3H2F6O
Halothane =​ C2HBrClF3
Isoflurane/​Enflurane =​ C3H2ClF5O
Sevoflurane =​ C4H3F7O
Isoflurane and enflurane are structural isomers thus they have the 
same chemical formulae but a different spatial arrangement of atoms. 
Halothane is the only agent to contain bromine (which of note also 
makes it radio-​opaque).
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Desflurane, Enflurane, Halothane, 
Isoflurane, Sevoflurane.
4.  FTTFT
Methoxyflurane is a halogenated volatile anaesthetic agent which was 
commonly used in the 960s–​970s. It had a rapid time to onset, car­
diovascular stability (low incidence of dysrhythmias) and particularly of 
interest, an analgesic effect which extended into the postanaesthetic 
period. Its use declined due to concerns about nephrotoxicity following 
deep anaesthesia with this agent and ultimately lead to it being with­
drawn from the UK. There have been rare reports of hepatic toxicity but 
these were felt to be idiosyncratic reactions.
Methoxyflurane continued to be used at subanaesthetic doses, espe­
cially in Australia and New Zealand—​exploiting its function as an in­
haled analgesic agent and has now been re-​registered in Europe under 
the brand name Penthrox® (205). It is licenced for use in conscious 
adults to alleviate moderate/​severe pain, especially in trauma. At 
subanaesthetic doses, fluoride levels are below the renal threshold 
of concern. It has also been used for obstetric analgesia where it has 
been found to be better tolerated than Entonox® and does not affect 
APGAR scores.
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Inhaled anaesthetic agents 
8
Further reading
Jephcott C, Grummet J, Nguyen N, Spruyt O. A review of the safety and 
efficacy of inhaled methoxyflurane as an analgesic for outpatient pro­
cedures. Br J Anaesth, 208:20(5);040–​048.
Porter KM, Dayan AD, Dickerson S, Middleton PM. The role of inhaled 
methoxyflurane in acute pain management. Open Access Emerg Med, 
208;0:49–​64.
5.  FFTTF
Helium is an inert gas of low molecular weight (atomic weight 4). 
It is presented in the UK in brown cylinders as 00% helium, or if 
presented as heliox (a mixture of 79% helium: 2% oxygen) the cy­
linders are white with brown and white shoulders. Heliox has a spe­
cific gravity of 0.337, significantly lower than either air () or oxygen 
(.09) (for reference, the specific gravity of Helium is 0.78). It is this 
low specific gravity conferring low density which gives Helium its key 
property for medical use. The lower the density of a gas, the propor­
tionally higher the flow rate. Heliox also assists in converting areas of 
turbulent flow within the bronchial tree into laminar flow by reducing 
Reynolds (Re) number (note: flow is predominantly laminar when Re 
<2000 and turbulent when Re >4000). This lowered resistance in­
creases ventilation and reduces the work of breathing. It has been 
successfully used as a temporizing measure in severe asthma or other 
causes of airway obstruction while definitive treatment is instituted 
but it is not classed as a definitive treatment in its own right. Despite 
having a much lower density than air, heliox has a viscosity very similar 
to air. This is because nitrogen and helium have very similar viscosities 
and are present in approximately similar proportions in air and heliox, 
respectively.
Further reading
Reuben AD, Harris AR. Heliox for asthma in the emergency department: 
a review of the literature. Emerg Med J, 2004;2:3–​35.
6.  TFTFF
Two-​pore domain potassium channels are found pre-​ and postsynpatically 
throughout the central nervous system. Desflurane (along with 
isoflurane, sevoflurane, and halothane) has been found to enhance the 
activity of these channels leading to membrane hyperpolarization.
Halogenated volatile anaesthetic agents prolong the GABAA receptor-​
mediated inhibitory chloride current whereas nitrous oxide and xenon 
have been found to have inhibitory actions at NMDA receptors. Volatile 
agents are antagonists at presynaptic excitatory glutamate receptors and 
agonists at inhibitory postsynaptic glycine receptors.
Further reading
Khan KS, Hayes I, Buggy DJ. Pharmacology of anaesthetic agents II: 
inhalation anaesthetic agents. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 
204;4(3):06–​.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
9
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Desflurane, Halothane, Isoflurane, 
Nitrous Oxide, Sevoflurane.
7.  FTTFT
Large FRCs lead to dilution of the inspired anaesthetic agent and hence 
a lower alveolar partial pressure. This means there is a slower onset of 
anaesthesia. A breathing circuit with a lower volume will tend to have a 
higher inspired gas concentration, which results in more rapid increase 
of the alveolar concentration of agent (FA) towards the inspired concen­
tration (Fi) and faster speed of induction.
Lower levels of albumin (seen in children and elderly adults) reduce 
the blood:gas solubility coefficients of volatile agents and contribute to 
more rapid onset of anaesthesia. This effect is clinically seen less with 
sevoflurane and desflurane due to their relatively low blood:gas solubility 
coefficient values. The second gas effect occurs because nitrous oxide 
(N2O) is 30 times more soluble than nitrogen. N2O is rapidly taken up 
from the alveolus resulting in a loss of alveolar volume which relatively 
concentrates and increases the alveolar partial pressures of other co-​
administered volatile agents.
Enflurane has affinity for red blood cells so increasing haematocrit results 
in more enflurane binding, thus increasing its solubility as the red blood 
cells are acting as a binding ‘sink’
Further reading
Khan KS, Hayes I, Buggy DJ. Pharmacology of anaesthetic agents II: inhalation 
anaesthetic agents. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 204;4(3):06–​.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Enflurane, Nitrous Oxide, Appendix A..
Single Best Answers
.  C
Megaloblastic anaemia can develop following exposure to nitrous oxide. 
There are many drug-​induced causes of megaloblastic anaemia but of 
the list presented, only nitrous oxide is associated. It can occur in pa­
tients with previously normal levels of vitamin B2 but is more common 
in those with pre-​existing (often undiagnosed) vitamin B2 deficiency and 
is significantly associated with duration of exposure to the agent. Nitrous 
oxide irreversibly oxidizes cobalamin contained within vitamin B2 into 
an inactive form. This inactive form prevents methionine synthase from 
converting homocysteine to form methionine (and thus leads to ele­
vated homocysteine levels). The transmethylation reaction is essential 
for DNA synthesis and its absence leads to nuclear immature red blood 
cells being released into the circulation. Neurological deficits such as 
numbness, weakness, and paraesthesia can also present and in rare cases 
subacute combined degeneration of the cord has been diagnosed.
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Inhaled anaesthetic agents 
10
Further reading
Hadzic A, Glab K, Sanborn K, Thys D: severe neurological deficit after 
nitrous oxide anaesthesia. Anaesthesiology, 995;83:863–​866.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Nitrous oxide.
2.  D
The agent quoted has a higher oil:gas coefficient value than isoflurane 
(97) and thus is a more potent agent. MACaw refers to MACawake. It is 
typically expressed as a fraction of MAC. Studies on modern anaesthetic 
agents have concluded its typical value to be one-​third of the MAC value 
of that specific agent so in the case of drug R above you would expect 
a value near 0.3. The blood:gas partition coefficient indicates an agent’s 
solubility. A low value suggests a relatively insoluble gas which will rap­
idly achieve partial pressure equilibrium between blood and alveolar gas 
and thus have a rapid onset time, as the value quoted is lower than that 
of desflurane (0.45) and therefore it will have a faster onset/​offset time 
than desflurane. The molecular weight is the sum of the atomic weights 
of the molecule’s constituent atoms. Structural isomers will have iden­
tical molecular weights and as the molecular weight of sevoflurane is 
200, drug ‘R’ cannot be a structural isomer of it.
Drug ‘R’ has a boiling point much higher than the UK room tempera­
ture range, so compensation beyond the conventional temperature-​
compensated plenum vaporizer design is unlikely to be required.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Desflurane, Isoflurane, Sevoflurane, 
Appendix A..
White D. Uses of MAC. Br J Anaesth, 2003;9(2):67–​69.
3.  A
All volatile halogenated anaesthetic agents cause uterine relaxation 
(tocolysis), dilate uterine arteries, and increase uterine blood flow in a 
dose-​related relationship. Post delivery, the re-​establishment of uterine 
tone is a key factor which modifies the degree of blood loss, especially 
for a lower segment caesarean section (LSCS) performed at almost full 
cervical dilation. Uterine atony is one of the major causes of post-​partum 
haemorrhage. Nitrous oxide does not cause uterine relaxation and thus 
its use to contribute to the necessary MAC of anaesthesia reduces the 
required contribution of volatile anaesthetic agent and will be associ­
ated with less uterine relaxation and less bleeding. Therefore answer ‘D’, 
which quotes the lowest volatile agent %, is the correct response.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edi­
tion. Oxford University Press, 206. Isoflurane, Nitrous oxide, 
Sevoflurane.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
11
4.  C
The diagnosis is malignant hyperthermia (MH), a hypermetabolic state 
triggered by volatile agents and neuromuscular blocking drugs in sus­
ceptible individuals. Clinical features include rising end-​tidal carbon 
dioxide (or tachypnoea in the spontaneously ventilating patient), 
muscle rigidity, masseter spasm, pyrexia, and unexplained tachycardia. 
Previous uneventful anaesthesia is common. Key management in­
cludes cessation of all trigger agents, administration of dantrolene, 
active cooling, and supportive care. Dantrolene acts to inhibit calcium 
release in muscle fibres, thus uncoupling the dysregulated cellular 
system.
Adrenaline :000 (IM) is used as part of the management of ana­
phylaxis (although a potential differential, the high end-​tidal carbon 
dioxide makes MH the more likely answer). Other differentials for 
MH include thyroid storm, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, sero­
tonin syndrome, and phaeochromocytoma; however, the description 
of the patient as ASA would indicate these are not likely in this scen­
ario. For reference: cyproheptadine has been used to manage severe 
serotonin syndrome reactions, phentolamine is an alpha blocker, and 
propylthiouracil reduces the synthesis and peripheral conversion of 
thyroid hormones.
Further reading
Gupta PK, Hopkins PM. Diagnosis and management of malignant hyper­
thermia. BJA Education, 207;7 (7):249–​254.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Adrenaline, Atracurium, Dantrolene, 
Fentanyl, Phentolamine, Propofol, Sevoflurane.
5.  D
The data provided corresponds to isoflurane.
For comparison, see Table ..
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. Oxford 
University Press, 206. Desflurane, Enflurane, Isoflurane, Sevoflurane, 
Appendix A..
6.  C
The clinical features are descriptive of halothane hepatitis. An unex­
plained postoperative pyrexia is characteristically the initial presenting 
feature, classically occurring seven days post exposure initial exposure 
or earlier following multiple exposures to halothane. Other clinical fea­
tures include arthralgia and jaundice. Bloods reveal eosinophilia in up to 
one-​third of patients. Type  halothane hepatitis is generally mild and 
self-​limiting. Type 2 is a severe hepatotoxicity reaction and can be fatal. 
Halothane use has largely been replaced by more modern agents in the 
developed world, yet it is still used in Africa and the Middle East.
 
 
 
 
 
Table .  Comparison table of volatile anaesthetic agents and their pharmacochemical properties
Sevo­flurane
Des­flurane
Enflur­ane
Haloth­ane
Isoflur­ane
N2O
MW
200
68
84.5
97.4
84.5
44
BP °C
58.6
22.8
56.5
50.2
48.5
–​88.5
SVP (kPa) at 20°C
22.7
88.5
23.3
32
32
5200
MAC %
.8
6.6
.68
0.75
.5
05
B:G coeff
0.7
0.45
.9
2.5
.4
0.47
O:G coeff
50
29
98
224
97
.4
Key: MW =​ molecular weight; MAC =​ minimum alveolar concentration; BP =​ boiling point; B:G coeff =​ blood:gas partition coefficient; SVP =​ 
saturated vapour pressure; 
O:G coeff =​ oil:gas partition coefficient.
Answers
13
Further reading
Ray DC, Drummond GB. Halothane hepatitis. Br J Anaesth, 99;67:84–​99.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Halothane.
7.  D
At 3000 m atmospheric pressure will be approx. 70 kPa (0.7bar). The 
SVP of an agent is unaffected by ambient pressure alone, providing tem­
perature compensation occurs. Modern vaporizers together with envir­
onmental insulation from buildings or aircraft will be able to temperature 
compensate for operating at this altitude. The net effect of increasing 
altitude is that the output of the vaporizer actually increases but the 
agent’s partial pressure is maintained so no additional calibration/​com­
pensation is required when using a isoflurane/​sevoflurane/​halothane 
vaporizer at altitude. The different design features of a desflurane vapor­
izer means that the concentration delivered is unaffected by ambient 
pressure and thus a reduced agent partial pressure will be produced, 
unless the unit is recalibrated or the dial setting appropriately adjusted.
Further reading
Boumphrey S, Marshall N. Understanding vaporizers. Cont Educ Anaesth 
Crit Care Pain, 20;(6):99–​203.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Desflurane, Halothane, Isoflurane, 
Sevoflurane, Appendix A..
 
 
 
15
Chapter 2
Intravenous anaesthetic 
agents
QUESTIONS
Multiple Choice Questions
.	
 
Regarding ketamine:
A	 the R-​(–​) enantiomer has four times greater affinity for its receptor
B	 it has poor oral bioavailability
C	 ketamine may be administered extradurally and intrathecally
D	 it is highly protein bound
E	 metabolism produces norketamine, which is an active metabolite
2.	
Following a 0.3 mg/​kg dose of etomidate, which of the following 
effects might you expect?
A	 analgesia
B	 coughing
C	 hypotension
D	 laryngospasm
E	 pain on injection
3.	
Which of the following statements regarding the following intra­
venous induction agents are true?
A	 etomidate has a large volume of distribution
B	 ketamine is poorly protein bound
C	 propofol is highly protein bound
D	 thiopental, in comparison to other IV agents, has the longest 
elimination half-​life
E	 thiopental is highly unionized at physiological pH
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
16
4.	
The dose of propofol required for induction can be decreased by 
which of the following drugs?
A	 clonidine
B	 ephedrine
C	 midazolam
D	 ondansetron
E	 remifentanil
5.	
 
Regarding propofol:
A	 it has a hydroxyl group on its first carbon
B	 it contains 2.25 mg/​ml glycerol
C	 it may be administered intramuscularly
D	 it should not be used in infusion in liver disease due to risk of 
accumulation
E	 it may increase the energy required for successful cardioversion
6.	 

The following are features of propofol infusion syndrome:
A	 bradycardia
B	 convex ST elevation
C	 hyperlipidaemia
D	 hyperthermia
E	 myoglobinuria
7.	
 
The following drugs are incompatible when mixed:
A	 ketamine–​propofol
B	 ketamine–​thiopental
C	 propofol–​suxamethonium
D	 thiopental–​mivacurium
E	 thiopental–​rocuronium
 
 
 
 
Questions
17
Single Best Answers
.	
Epileptiform movements are noted during IV induction in a 52-​
year-​old woman. Which drug is the patient most likely to have 
been given?
A	 etomidate
B	 ketamine
C	 midazolam
D	 propofol
E	 thiopental
2.	
A patient has been given a 2 mg/​kg intravenous bolus of ketamine. 
Which of these clinical effects would be the most likely to occur?
A	 bradycardia
B	 bronchospasm
C	 decreased uterine tone
D	 increased gastric mobility
E	 salivation
3.	
Which of these statements is the most appropriate explanation of 
how etomidate administration inhibits steroidogenesis?
A	 inhibition of 5-​α-​reductase
B	 inhibition of aromatase
C	 inhibition of 3-​β dehydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
D	 inhibition of -​β hydroxylase
E	 inhibition of 2-​hydroxylase
4.	
Which of the following factors increases potency and onset of 
action when compared to other barbiturates?
A	 a hydrogen at N and oxygen at C2
B	 a hydrogen at N and sulphur atom at C2
C	 a methyl side group at N and oxygen at C2
D	 a pair of oxygen atoms at C4 and C6
E	 a phenyl side chain at C5 and nitrogen atom at C2
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
18
5.	
 
What best describes the main mechanism of action of ketamine?
A	 antagonism of the effect of glutamate
B	 blockade of voltage-​gated calcium channels
C	 γ-​Aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonism
D	 it is a highly selective α-​2 agonist
E	 it is a sodium channel blocker
6.	
 
Which factor makes propofol well-​suited for neuroanaesthesia?
A	 cerebral metabolic rate (CMR) remains unchanged
B	 it increases cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)
C	 metabolic blood flow coupling remains unchanged
D	 there is an increase in synaptic activity
E	 unchanged cerebral oxygen consumption
7.	
Which is the best statement explaining why thiopental is not suit­
able for total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)?
A	 It has a hepatic extraction coefficient of 0.
B	 It has a small volume of distribution
C	 It has many active metabolites
D	 It irreversibly binds to GABA receptors
E	 It is poorly lipid soluble
 
 
 
Answers
19
ANSWERS
Multiple Choice Questions
.  FTTFT
Ketamine is a phencyclidine derivative made up of equal proportions 
of S-​(+​) and R-​(–​) ketamine, with the cyclohexanone rings producing 
a chiral centre. It is available as both a racemic mixture and as the S-​
(+​) enantiomer. S-​(+​) ketamine has four times greater affinity for its 
receptor and is three times as potent as the R-​(–​) form.
pH of preparations varies from 3.5 to 5.5. It is highly lipid soluble and 
has a pKa of 7.5 and so is 44% unionized at physiological pH. It may be 
administered intravenously, intramuscularly, orally, rectally, and nasally. 
It can be given extradurally and intrathecally but the preservative-​free 
preparation must be used in this case.
Bioavailability orally is 20–​25%, nasally is 25–​50% and intramuscularly is 
93%. Ketamine is 20–​50% protein bound with a volume of distribution 
(VD) of 3 L/​kg with recovery occurring due to redistribution of the drug. 
It is metabolized in the liver by N-​demethylation and hydroxylation via 
the CYP450 system. It forms norketamine, which has 30% the activity of 
ketamine, which is then conjugated to form inactive metabolites.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ketamine.
2.  FTTTT
Although etomidate is traditionally thought of as the drug of cardiovas­
cular stability for induction of general anaesthesia, it still causes a mild 
degree of hypotension. There may be a slight compensatory tachycardia. 
There is a dose-​dependent reduction in respiratory rate and tidal volume. 
Hiccupping may accompany induction in 20% of patients and coughing and 
laryngospasm may occur. Pain on injection is common, occurring in 25–​
50% of cases. There is a 20–​30% decrease in cerebral blood flow with a 
reduction in intracranial and intraocular pressure. It is emetogenic, and this 
is particularly apparent in patients also receiving opioids. Unlike ketamine, 
etomidate does not have intrinsic analgesic properties and the haemo­
dynamic response to laryngoscopy will not be attenuated. Prolongation 
of the bleeding time may occur with its use due to its antiplatelet activity.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
20
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Etomidate.
3.  TTTFT
See Table 2.. VD is the apparent volume that a drug distributes to achieve 
its final concentration. Drugs that are highly ionized and have high protein 
binding generally have low VD. Albumin binds to acidic drugs, while α-​-​
acid glycoprotein binds to basic drugs. Protein binding has importance, 
in that it is the free drug that is biologically active and certain diseases or 
other drugs will affect this proportion. Drugs which are unionized can 
pass through cell membranes to exert their action, while ionized drugs 
are trapped extracellularly. The acid-​base environment and the chem­
ical structure determining whether a drug is acid or base in nature will 
influence how ionized or unionized a drug is. The pKa is an intrinsic fea­
ture of a molecule. It is the pH at which 50% of hydrogen ions are dis­
sociated from the molecule. Acids will exist in the unionized state below 
their pKa. In contrast, bases will exist in the unionized state above their 
pKa. Elimination of drugs occurs when the drug is removed from the 
plasma by the kidneys unchanged or when it is metabolized (usually by 
the liver).
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of 
Anaesthesia. Oxford University Press, 207. Drug distribution and 
elimination in anaesthetic practice.
Table 2.  Drug comparison table of the common intravenous 
induction agents
pH
pKa % Unioni­
zed at 
physio­
logical 
pH
% Pro­
tein 
binding
Volume 
of 
distribu­
tion 
L/​kg)
Half 
life
Clear­
ance
Propofol
7.4
.0 99.7
98
4
9.3–​69.3 
mins
8.8–​40.3 
ml/​kg/
min
Ketamine
3.5–​5.5
7.5 44
20–​50
3
2.5 
hours
7 
ml/​kg/​
min
Thiopental 0.8
7.6 6
65–​86
.96
3.4–​22 
hours
2.7–​4. 
ml/​kg/​
min
Etomidate 8.
4.2 99
76.5
4.5
–​4.7 
hours
870–​700 
ml/​min
 
 
Answers
21
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Etomidate, Ketamine, Propofol, 
Thiopental.
Williams GW, Williams ES. Basic Anesthesiological Examination Review. 
Oxford University Press, 205. General concepts in pharmacology.
4.  TFTFT
Co-​induction is the administration of two or more synergistic classes of 
drugs in order to induce general anaesthesia. Advantages of this tech­
nique include i) benefiting from the effect profile of the separate drugs; ii) 
reducing the doses of the drugs required to a greater degree than could 
be achieved with one drug.
Midazolam, if given 90–​20 seconds prior to propofol induction, will 
reduce the amount of propofol required by 30–​40%. Opioids and 
clonidine have been shown to reduce the required amount of propofol 
for induction and may improve the conditions for siting of supraglottic 
airways.
Ondansetron has no effect on the administered propofol dose and is 
non-​sedative. Ephedrine, in contrast, has a stimulatory effect that is 
similar to that of amphetamine.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Management of anaesthesia.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ephedrine, Ondansetron, Propofol.
5.  TFFFT
Propofol is a phenol derivative. A phenol is a phenyl ring with a hydroxyl 
group at the first carbon. Propofol has two isopropyl groups at carbons 
2 and 6. Propofol preparations contain 00 mg/​ml soybean oil, 2 mg/​
ml egg lecithin,  mg benzyl alcohol, 22.5 mg/​ml glycerol, and sodium 
hydroxide to adjust the pH. It is highly lipid soluble with an octanol:water 
partition coefficient of 676: at a pH of 6–​8.
Propofol can only be administered intravenously with a suggested dose 
for induction of –​2.5 mg/​kg in adults, with a 50% dose increase for 
children.
Propofol rapidly results in the induction of general anaesthesia with 
an offset of effects after 0 minutes due to redistribution. Propofol is 
highly lipid soluble and has a large VD. It is rapidly metabolized in the 
liver to inactive glucuronide and sulphate conjugates and quinols via the 
CYP450 system. It is likely that extrahepatic metabolism occurs. The 
hepatic extraction ratio is >0.89, and the clearance of propofol is 8.8–​
40.3 ml/​kg/​min. Hepatic disease has no significant clinical effect on its 
metabolism.
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
22
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition, 
Oxford University Press, 206. Propofol.
6.  TTTFT
Propofol infusion syndrome is a complex of symptoms and signs 
that develops as a result of propofol infusion. It is not currently clear 
whether this is because of the propofol itself, or the additives present 
in the preparation. It typically occurs at day three but with a range of 
–​6 days. The annual incidence is estimated as .% with mortality 
rates of 8%. There is an apparently higher incidence in the paediatric 
population.
Clinical features include:
●	 intractable bradycardia
●	 arrhythmias
●	 metabolic (usually lactic) acidosis
●	 rhabdomyolysis
●	 myoglobinuria
●	 hyperlipidaemia
●	 fatty liver
●	 ECG changes similar to Brugada syndrome (convex ST elevation 
in V–​3)
●	 T-​wave inversion if circulatory failure develops
●	 multiorgan failure
The exact aetiology remains unclear, but it is thought to result from 
impaired mitochondrial fatty acid chain uptake and through an uncoup­
ling of intracellular oxidative phosphorylation and energy production 
inhibiting electron flow.
Treatment is largely supportive, involving discontinuation of propofol 
and instituting organ support as required.
Further reading
Loh NHW, Nair P. Propofol infusion syndrome. BJA Education, 
203;3(6):200–​202.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Propofol.
7.  FTFTT
The physiochemical properties of drugs are determined by the func­
tional groups present in the molecule. This will govern its solubility and 
stability in solution. Incompatibility is a reversible physiochemical change 
that occurs due to any of a number of factors including change in pH, 
dilution of co-​solvent, salting out, and cation-​anion interactions. This 
may result in precipitation or insolubility, which may not always be visible, 
 
 
 
 
Answers
23
and may occur slowly. It may lead to a reduced effect of the active com­
pound through irreversible chemical degradation.
Ketamine and thiopental are pharmaceutically incompatible and should 
not be mixed. Mivacurium is incompatible with alkaline solutions 
and so should not be mixed with thiopental. Rocuronium has several 
incompatibilities, including thiopental, dexamethasone, erythromycin, 
vancomycin, and diazepam.
Further reading
Dickman A, Schneider J. The Syringe Driver: Continuous Subcutaneous 
Infusions in Palliative Care, 4th edition. Oxford University Press, 206. 
Chemistry of drug incompatibility and stability.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ketamine, Mivacurium, Rocuronium, 
Suxamethonium.
Single Best Answers
.  A
Etomidate may produce generalized epileptiform activity on electro­
encephalogram (EEG) in 20% of patients. Induction may be associated 
with involuntary muscle movements in up to 50% of patients, along with 
tremor and hypertonus. Although up to 0% of patients given propofol 
may manifest excitatory dystonic movements, EEG does not indicate 
seizure activity and it is likely that propofol has anticonvulsant properties. 
Ketamine produces dissociative anaesthesia and patients typically exhibit 
pupillary dilatation, nystagmus, eyes remaining open, and hypertonus. 
EEG does not demonstrate seizure activity with its use. Thiopental and 
midazolam have anticonvulsant effects and do not produce involuntary 
movements.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Etomidate, Ketamine, Propofol, 
Thiopental.
2.  E
Ketamine causes dissociative anaesthesia. It leads to increased cere­
bral blood flow, metabolic rate, intracranial and intraocular pressure. 
It typically causes tachycardia and increased vascular tone. Apnoeas 
are uncommon and it is traditionally said to preserve airway reflexes. 
There is bronchial smooth muscle relaxation and bronchodilation. 
Gastric mobility is unchanged while uterine tone is increased. Salivation 
is a common problem and an antisialagogue may be used prior to 
administration to reduce this feature. Pain on injection may occur and 
postoperative nausea and vomiting is common. Movement at induc­
tion and hiccups are unlikely to occur. The incidence of hallucinations, 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
24
restlessness, unpleasant dreams, and emergence delirium may be re­
duced by premedication with a benzodiazepine.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ketamine.
3.  D
Etomidate is a potent inhibitor of steroid synthesis, both after a bolus or 
infusion. This is because of inhibition of the enzyme -​β-​hydroxylase 
which is responsible for cortisol synthesis from -​deoxycortisol. This 
effect lasts for 24–​48 hours. It is likely that because of this, etomidate has 
been linked to increased mortality following infusion. However, there is 
no conclusive evidence to suggest a single dose is linked with morbidity 
or mortality.
Cortisol is produced in the zona fasiculata of the adrenal gland. All 
steroid hormone synthesis begins with cholesterol. Initially side chains 
are cleaved to produce pregnenolone. This is converted to 7-​α-​
hydroxypregnenolone 
by 
7-​α-​hydroxylase. 
3-​β-​hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase converts this to 7-​α-​hydroxyprogesterone, which is 
converted to -​deoxycortisol by 2-​hydroxylase. -​β-​hydroxylase 
produces cortisol from -​deoxycortisol.
The adrenal androgens and oestrogens are produced in the zona 
reticularis. 
5-​α-​reductase 
produces 
dihydrotestosterone, 
while 
aromatase produces oestradiol and estrone from testosterone and 
androstenedione.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
Herring N, Wilkins R. Basic Science for Core Medical Training and the 
MRCP. Oxford University Press, 205. Endocrinology.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Etomidate.
4.  B
The barbiturate ring structure is formed from malonic acid and urea. 
Barbiturates can be divided into four main groups based on the side 
groups of this structure, which confer various properties.
Thiopental is a thiobarbiturate and has a hydrogen at N and a sul­
phur atom at C2. The sulphur group confers increased lipid solubility 
and so results in increased potency and onset of action. In contrast 
methohexital, a methylbarbiturate, gains anticonvulsant properties 
through a methyl side group at N and oxygen at C2, while a fatty acid 
chain leads to greater lipid solubility. Oxybarbiturates have a hydrogen at 
 
 
 
 
Answers
25
N and oxygen at C2 and have a slower onset and more prolonged dur­
ation of action. Methylthiobarbiturates are not used in clinical practice as 
they show marked excitatory effects.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anaesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Barbiturates.
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
5.  A
N-​methyl D-​aspartate (NMDA) receptors are excitatory ionotropic re­
ceptors located within the central nervous system. Glutamate, which is 
stimulated in response to noxious peripheral stimuli, acts as an agonist 
at these receptors. Their activation leads to an influx of calcium and 
cellular depolarization. Ketamine is a non-​competitive antagonist of the 
NMDA receptor calcium channel pore, but also inhibits channel action 
through a specific receptor binding site. It is independent of glutamate, 
and so its action cannot be overcome by increased neurotransmitter 
concentrations. It provides both supraspinal and spinal analgesia and 
produces dissociative anaesthesia. There is also evidence to suggest that 
ketamine has several other mechanisms of action, including antagonism 
at monoaminergic, opioid, muscarinic, and nicotinic receptors. In higher 
doses it may also act as a sodium channel blocker.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
Ruskin KJ, Rosenbaum SH, Rampil IJ. Fundamentals of Neuroanaesthesia: 
A Physiologic Approach to Clinical Practice. Oxford University Press, 
203. Pharmacology of intravenous sedative-​hypnotic agents.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ketamine.
6.  C
Propofol has many desirable features, particularly for neurosurgical pa­
tients. Propofol administration results in reduced intracranial pressure 
(ICP), reduced CMR, and reduced CPP. It does not interfere with cere­
bral autoregulation. When compared to volatiles, propofol administra­
tion results in relatively higher cerebral perfusion pressures with lower 
ICP and less cerebral oedema.
In contrast, ketamine increases cerebral blood flow and ICP. CMR in­
creases as a result of increased synaptic activation. Despite this, there 
is no convincing evidence that ketamine is contraindicated in the brain-​
injured patient for this reason and the cardiovascular stability provided 
by it is likely to be beneficial.
Etomidate and thiopental decrease ICP, CBF, and CMR for oxygen.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Intravenous anaesthetic agents 
26
Further reading
Ruskin KJ, Rosenbaum SH, Rampil IJ. Fundamentals of Neuroanaesthesia: 
A Physiologic Approach to Clinical Practice. Oxford University Press, 
203. Pharmacology of intravenous sedative-​hypnotic agents.
7.  A
Thiopental has a rapid action due to high blood flow to the brain, 
lipophilicity, and relatively low degree of ionization. The duration is brief 
and this is mainly due to redistribution to other tissues from the plasma, 
based on their local blood flow, tissue partition coefficients, and the 
blood-​tissue gradients. Thiopental is hepatically metabolized by side-​arm 
oxidation, oxidation to pentobarbital, and ring cleavage to form urea and 
3-​carbon fragments via the CYP450 system.
It is not suitable for TIVA due to its low hepatic extraction ratio. 
Thiopental clearance is dependent on hepatic clearance (roughly 5% 
being metabolized per hour) rather than hepatic blood flow. At high con­
centrations clearance assumes zero-​order kinetics due to enzyme satur­
ation. This combined with its relatively high VD result in accumulation of 
the drug and therefore very slow offset with infusion or repeated doses.
Further reading
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Intravenous anaesthetics.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Thiopental.
 
 
 
27
Chapter 3
Local anaesthetic agents
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
The following statements about ropivacaine are true:
A	 Ropivacaine is available as racemic and enantio-​pure preparations
B	 The pKa of ropivacaine is 9.4
C	 The recommended maximal dose is 2 mg/​kg
D	 The addition of sodium bicarbonate to ropivacaine will significantly 
increase its duration of action
E	 The combination of adrenaline with ropivacaine increases the 
maximal recommended dose threshold
2.	
 
Local anaesthetics have been associated with the following effects:
A	 Antithrombosis
B	 Anti-​inflammatory action
C	 Prevention of lung injury
D	 Antimicrobial effects
E	 Reduced airway hyper-​responsiveness in asthmatics
3.	
 
Regarding 2-​chloroprocaine
A	 Is an amide anaesthetic
B	 Duration of action is similar to low-​dose bupivacaine for spinal 
anaesthesia
C	 In common with cocaine, it has vasoconstrictor actions
D	 Should be avoided in patients taking trimethoprim
E	 Serum half-​life is prolonged with co-​administration of IV morphine
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Local anaesthetic agents
28
4.	
The following statements relating to local anaesthetic toxicity are 
correct:
A	 The S-​enantiomer of bupivacaine binds with less affinity to cardiac 
sodium channels than the R+​ enantiomer
B	 Risk of toxicity is influenced by the site of injection where intercostal 
> epidural > caudal > brachial plexus
C	 Doses of local anaesthetics should be reduced by 5% for patients 
aged <4 months old
D	 Administration of 8 ml 2% lidocaine +​ :200,000 adrenaline would 
be considered within recommended maximal dose parameters for a 
60 kg adult
E	 The cardiovascular collapse: seizure dose ratio (CC:CNS) is 7.: 
for lidocaine
5.	
 
Regarding local anaesthetics
A	 The ionized form of local anaesthetic has a high affinity for resting-​
state sodium channels
B	 The membrane expansion theory is mediated by the unionized drug 
fraction
C	 A-​alpha nerve fibres are less susceptible to blockade by local 
anaesthetics than A-​delta fibres
D	 Procaine is an agonist at the N-​methyl D-​aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor
E	 Local anaesthetic agents have been shown to inhibit the ryanodine 
receptor at the sarcoplasmic reticulum
6.	
 
The following statements about lidocaine are true
A	 Fluconazole reduces plasma clearance of lidocaine
B	 Is effectively removed by haemodialysis
C	 Is more likely to trigger an allergic reaction than benzocaine
D	 Cimetidine can increase the blood concentration of lidocaine
E	 Is safe to use in patients with porphyria
 
 
 
Questions
29
7.	
 
Regarding the use of cocaine as a local anaesthetic:
A	 Cocaine is hydrolysed by serum and hepatic esterases
B	 In common with many local anaesthetics, cocaine has a biphasic 
vasoactive effect
C	 The toxic dose is 3 mg/​kg for topical administration
D	 Is antiemetic
E	 Increases body temperature through direct actions on the pons
Single Best Answers
.	
 
Which of the following is the best definition for pKa?
A	 The acid dissociation constant
B	 The negative logarithm of the base dissociation constant of an 
alkaline solution
C	 The pH at which 50% of molecules exist in the ionized form and 
50% exist in the unionized form
D	 The pH at which the drug is 00% associated with an acidic 
compound
E	 The pH at which the drug undergoes autoionization
2.	
A 55-​year-​old patient presents to the emergency department 
six hours following a day case operation. She is complaining of a 
headache, fatigue, and mild dyspnoea. Her oxygen saturation at room 
air record at 85%. An arterial blood gas is noted to look ‘chocolate’ in 
colour when it is taken and returns a value of 4.8 kPa PO2.
Which of the following drugs do you consider most likely that the patient 
has been given, which could account for her presentation?
A	 2-​chlorprocaine
B	 EMLA™ cream
C	 Prilocaine
D	 Proxymetacaine
E	 Ropivacaine
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Local anaesthetic agents
30
3.	
Which of the following statements about the physicochemical 
properties of local anaesthetics is the most accurate?
A	 Aliphatic substitutions in the aromatic ring enhance potency
B	 Increasing hydrocarbon chain length reduces lipid solubility
C	 Protein binding primarily determines the speed of onset
D	 The potency of a local anaesthetic is primarily determined by its 
pKa value
E	 The addition of sodium bicarbonate to an amide local anaesthetic 
increases the ionized fraction
4.	
A patient complains of perioral tingling and auditory disturbance 
approx. four mins after an interscalene nerve block has been per­
formed. She rapidly loses consciousness, convulses, and broad com­
plexes are noted on her electrocardiograph (ECG). Treatment for local 
anaesthetic systemic toxicity is instituted. The patient weighs 60 kg.
Which of the following is the most appropriate initial treatment regimen?
A	 0% lipid emulsion: 60 ml IV bolus +​ infusion of 600 ml/​hr
B	 0% lipid emulsion: 00 ml IV bolus +​ infusion of 000 ml/​hr
C	 20% lipid emulsion: 90 ml IV bolus +​ infusion of 900 ml/​hr
D	 20% lipid emulsion: 90 ml IV bolus +​ infusion of 800 ml/​hr
E	 20% lipid emulsion: 20 ml IV bolus, repeated at 5 min intervals for a 
further two doses
5.	
A 28-​year-​old male has an area of inflamed, acidotic tissue, which 
requires a local anaesthetic to allow the removal of a foreign body. 
Which local anaesthetic drug is most likely to be effective?
A	 Amethocaine
B	 Levobupivacaine
C	 Lidocaine
D	 Mepivacaine
E	 Procaine
 
 
 
 
Questions
31
6.	
Concerning binding plasma binding of local anaesthetics, which of 
the following statements is the most accurate statement?
A	 Albumin binds local anaesthetics with higher affinity than α-​acid 
glycoprotein
B	 Foetal ion trapping is more likely with bupivacaine than lidocaine
C	 Higher unbound fractions of local anaesthetics would be expected in 
pregnancy
D	 Neonates have approximately 25% of the adult plasma 
concentration of α-​acid glycoprotein
E	 Patients with severe renal impairment have a reduced concentration 
of α-​acid glycoprotein
7.	
You are told that a local anaesthetic agent ‘Y’ has a percentage 
unionized fraction at pH 7.4 of 25%. Which of the following pKa 
values is this agent ‘Y’ most likely to have?
A	 pKa =​ 7.6
B	 pKa =​ 7.9
C	 pKa =​ 8.
D	 pKa =​ 8.7
E	 pKa =​ 8.9
 
 
Chapter 3  Local anaesthetic agents
32
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TFFTF
Ropivacaine has a pKa of 8., a maximal recommended dose of 3 mg/​
kg and is available as racemic and an ‘S’ enantiopure preparation (the 
S-​isomer is less cardiotoxic and more potent than the ‘R’ isomer). 
Alkalinization of ropivacaine increases its duration of action. The add­
ition of adrenaline however does not increase the recommended dose 
threshold or the duration of effect. Ropivacaine has intrinsic vasocon­
strictive properties.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ropivacaine.
2.  TTTTT
Local anaesthetics have been associated with antithrombotic actions, 
including reduced platelet aggregation and reduced maximum ampli­
tude recordings on thromboelastography. They have also been shown 
to reduce inflammation via non-​sodium channel-​mediated mechanisms. 
Leucocyte adhesion and migration, cell signalling with protein kinase 
C/​phospholipase D, and phagocytosis have all been shown to reduce 
with local anaesthetics. Prevention of acute lung injury and myocardial 
injury has also been shown with local anaesthetic agents. Bacterial inhib­
ition of various strains of pathogens has also been demonstrated (e.g. 
Pseudomonas, E.coli, and Staph aureus) as have antiviral and antifungal 
effects. The mechanism of reduced airway hyper-​responsiveness is 
thought to be the vagal blockade of bronchoconstriction reflexes.
Further reading
Cassuto J, Sinclair R, Bonderovic M. Anti-​inflammatory properties of 
local anesthetics and their present and potential clinical implications. 
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand, 2006;50:265–​282.
Hollmann MW, Durieux ME. Local anesthetics and the inflamma­
tory response: a new therapeutic indication? Anesthesiology, 
2000;93:858–​875.
3.  FFFTT
2-​chloroprocaine is an ester local anaesthetic agent. It has a rapid onset 
time and a short duration of action. It is commonly used as a spinal 
anaesthetic agent to facilitate day-​case surgery. The typical time to onset 
is 3–​5 minutes, motor block duration of 40 minutes, and time to ambu­
lation 90 minutes. When compared with low-​dose spinal bupivacaine, 2-​
chloroprocaine has a similar onset time but a faster offset time. Cocaine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
33
is a vasoconstrictor, however chloroprocaine is a vasodilator. The para-​
aminobenzoic acid metabolite of chloroprocaine inhibits the action of 
sulfonamides and may decrease their therapeutic effect. Examples of 
drugs in this class include trimethoprim, sulfonylureas, some diuretics 
(e.g. bumetanide) and antiretrovirals. Morphine has been found to inhibit 
pseudocholinesterase by up to 5%. Pseudocholinesterase hydrolyses the 
ester linkage in 2-​chloroprocaine and thus any inhibition of pseudo­
cholinesterase will prolong the serum half-​life of 2-​chloroprocaine. This 
has not clinically been shown to be of significance.
Further reading
Bailey D, Briggs JR. Studies of the inhibition of serum pseudocholin­
esterase activity in vitro by commonly used drugs. Am J Clin Pathol, 
2005;24:226–​228.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Chloroprocaine.
4.  TFTTT
Levobupivacaine comprises only the S-​enantiomer and has been mar­
keted as an enantiopure preparation due to its enhanced cardiac safety 
benefits. The risk of toxicity reactions is influenced by the block site; 
however, the correct ‘risk order’ is intercostal > caudal > epidural > 
brachial plexus. Neonates and infants <4 months old should have doses 
of local anaesthetic reduced by 5% due to immature hepatic enzyme 
systems and reduced plasma protein binding.
Maximal recommended doses are 3 mg/​kg for lidocaine without adren­
aline and 7 mg/​kg for lidocaine +​ adrenaline. While the lowest possible 
dose should always be used, this patient’s maximal dose would be 420 
mg, therefore the 360 mg dose presented is within acceptable limits. 
The CC:CNS dose ratio shows the differences in the dose required to 
produce cardiovascular collapse vs. induce seizures. For lidocaine, this is 
quoted as 7.. Bupivacaine is much more likely to progress from central 
nervous system signs to cardiovascular collapse as shown by its CC:CNS 
ratio of just 2.
Further reading
Christie LE, Picard J, Weinberg GL. Local anaesthetic systemic toxicity. 
Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 205;5(3):36–​42.
El-​Boghdadly K, Pawa A, Chin KJ. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: cur­
rent perspectives. Local Reg Anesth, 208;:35–​44.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Lidocaine.
5.  FTTFT
Sodium channels may be in the open, inactive, or resting state. Local 
anaesthetic agents have the greatest affinity for sodium channels in 
their open or inactive states. Blockade occurs from within the cell—​the 
unionized form of the local anaesthetic drug diffuses into the cell. There 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Local anaesthetic agents
34
it becomes protonated (ionized) and blocks the sodium channel thus 
preventing action potential conduction. Nerve fibres with high rates of 
firing are more likely to have sodium channels in the non-​resting state 
and thus be susceptible to local anaesthetic blockade (e.g. pain fibres, 
cardiac pacemaker cells). Equally cells with long action potentials are 
more likely to have ‘open’ sodium channels (again seen in pain fibres 
and cardiac muscle cells). A-​alpha fibres are large-​diameter nerve fibres 
and also have much shorter action potential durations. For both of these 
reasons, they are much less likely to be blocked by local anaesthetic 
agents than the smaller long-​action potential a-​delta fibres.
It is the unionized drug fraction which is thought to interact with the 
cell membrane from outside of the cell (membrane expansion theory) 
and also disrupt action potential conduction. Procaine is an antagonist 
at NMDA receptors. Local anaesthetic agents have indeed been shown 
to modulate the ryanodine receptor and reduce calcium-​dependent 
myofilament contractility. Other demonstrated effects include inhibition 
of mitochondrial metabolism and various cell signalling mechanisms.
Further reading
El-​Boghdadly K, Pawa A, Chin KJ. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: cur­
rent perspectives. Local Reg Anesth, 208;:35–​44.
6.  TFFTT
Amide local anaesthetics are hepatically metabolized by the cytochrome 
p450 system. Fluconazole inhibits CYP3A4 hence co-​administration 
will reduce lidocaine plasma clearance by up to 5% although this is 
rarely clinically of significance. Lidocaine is not removed by haemo­
dialysis. True IgE-​mediated local anaesthetic allergy to amides is very 
rare (<% all reported reactions). Ester anaesthetics (e.g. benzocaine) 
are more likely to produce allergic reactions as they are metabolized 
to para-​amino benzoic acid (PABA) which is highly antigenic. PABA is 
also found in many cosmetics/​toiletries products and may immuno­
logically presensitize individuals. Preservatives in amide anaesthetics, 
e.g. sodium metabisulphite, methylparaben, have also been implicated 
in reactions.
Cimetidine inhibits CYP 2D6 which can lead to reduced amide metab­
olism and raised blood levels. Porphyria is a rare hereditary disorder of 
haem synthesis. Porphyric crises can be triggered by a number of drugs; 
however, lidocaine is on the ‘safe’ drugs list for this condition.
Further reading
Bhole MV, Manson AL, Seneviratne SL, Misbah SA. IgE-​mediated allergy 
to local anaesthetics: separating fact from perception: a UK perspec­
tive. Br J Anaesth, 202;08(6):903–​9.
Drugs in Porphyria. Available at: https://​www.wmic.wales.nhs.uk/​spe​
cial​ist-​servi​ces/​drugs-​in-​porphy​ria/​
Smith S, Scarth E, Sasada S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th 
edition. Oxford University Press, 206. Lidocaine.
 
 
 
Answers
35
7.  TFTFF
Cocaine blocks sodium channels to function as a local anaesthetic; it 
also inhibits noradrenaline, serotonin, and dopamine reuptake. Esters 
local anaesthetics are generally metabolized exclusively in the plasma, 
however, cocaine differs as it is hydrolysed by both serum and hepatic 
esterases. Also, in contrast to the typically biphasic vasoactive profile of 
local anaesthetics (i.e. at low doses they are vasoconstrictive to periph­
eral vascular smooth muscle and at higher doses vasodilatory), cocaine 
is purely vasoconstrictive. Use is associated with nausea, abdominal pain, 
and gastrointestinal upset—​this is thought to be part centrally mediated 
and part gut ischaemia from its vasoconstrictive actions. Hyperthermia is 
commonly associated due to both cutaneous vasoconstriction and direct 
action at the hypothalamus.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cocaine.
Single Best Answers
.  C
pKa is the negative log of the acid dissociation constant Ka. So A would 
be the correct definition of Ka but not pKa. Autoionization is a process 
where electrons are spontaneously emitted from an outer electron shell 
when an atom or molecule is in an excited state and thus changes its 
charge from a neutral to an ionized (+​) state.
Further reading
Taylor A, McLeod G. Basic pharmacology of local anaesthetics. BJA 
Education, 2020;20(2):34–​4.
2.  C
The diagnosis here is methaemoglobinaemia and the most likely causative 
agent from the list given here is prilocaine. Other causative drug agents 
include: benzocaine, lidocaine, tetracaine, phenytoin, metoclopramide, 
sulphonamides, sodium nitroprusside, and glyceryl trinitrate.
Prilocaine generates O-​toluidine which oxidizes Hb. Peak levels of 
MetHb occur approximately 4–​8 hours following administration. EMLA™ 
cream is also a recognized trigger (as it contains prilocaine) but given the 
mass of an adult and the likely maximum amount of EMLA™ that could 
have been applied, prilocaine is a much more likely option.
Methaemoglobinaemia is a condition where the Fe2+​ ions of haem 
are oxidized from ferrous to ferric Fe3+​. This renders them unable to 
bind oxygen, left shifts the oxy-​haemoglobin dissociation curve, and 
makes it more difficult for oxygen to be released to tissues. Low levels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Local anaesthetic agents
36
of methaemoglobin (MetHb) are normal (<%) but levels >40% can 
become life-​threatening.
Significant methaemoglobinaemia is more common in infants, with co-​
administration of other causative agents, repeated doses, and in pre-​
existing anaemia/​haemoglobinopathies. Management is treatment with 
methylene blue. This provides an artificial electron transporter which 
reduces MetHb to Hb. The dose is –​2 mg/​kg IV. Methylthioninium 
chloride is contraindicated in patients with glucose-​6-​phosphate dehydro­
genase (G6PD) deficiency. Other treatments induce hyperbaric oxygen 
and exchange transfusion.
Further reading
Alanazi MQ. Drugs may be induced methaemoglobinaemia. J Hematol 
Thrombo Dis, 207;5:3.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Prilocaine.
3.  A
An agent’s pKa determines the percentage of drug which will be unionized 
at physiological pH and thus primarily influences the speed of onset. 
Protein binding influences the duration of action with highly protein-​
bound drugs tending to have longer durations of action. Alkalinization 
will environmentally create a pH closer to the agent’s pKa and therefore 
proportionally increases the unionized drug fraction. Increasing hydro­
carbon chain length and aromatic ring aliphatic substitutions will increase 
lipid solubility. Lipid solubility is primarily associated with a local anaes­
thetic agent’s potency.
Further reading
Taylor A, McLeod G. Basic pharmacology of local anaesthetics. BJA 
Education, 2020;20(2):34–​4.
4.  C
AAGBI guidelines recommend treatment with 20% lipid emulsion IV. 
The regimen is .5 ml/​kg as an IV bolus over  minute, followed by an 
infusion of 5 ml/​kg/​hr. After 5 minutes further boluses doses may 
be repeated (×2 more =​ total of three doses) and the infusion rate 
doubled to 30 ml/​kg/​hr. Maximal doses of 2 ml/​kg are not recom­
mended to be exceeded. Other supportive care including airway man­
agement +​/​–​ prolonged cardiopulmonary resuscitation may also be 
required.
Further reading
AAGBI Management of Severe Local Aanesthetic Toxicity Guidelines, 
200. Available at: https://​www.aagbi.org/​sites/​defa​ult/​files/​la_​ 
toxi​city​_​20​0_​0.pdf
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Intralipid® 20%.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
37
5.  D
All local anaesthetic drugs have a pKa greater than 7.4, meaning more 
than 50% exist in the water soluble ionized form. In an acidic environ­
ment, even fewer drug molecules will exist in the lipid-​soluble unionized 
form. Thus the drug with the lowest pKa will be the most effective as it 
will proportionally have the most drug molecules in the unionized state. 
The pKas of the drugs presented are: amethocaine 8.5; levobupivacaine 
8.; lidocaine 7.9; mepivacaine 7.6; and procaine 8.9. Therefore, 
mepivacaine is most likely to be effective.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. APPENDIX A.3.
6.  C
Plasma binding of local anaesthetic agents reduces the free fraction 
and hence the risk of toxicity reactions occurring. α-​acid glycoprotein 
has a higher affinity for binding local anaesthetics, but albumin binds a 
greater fraction due to its abundance. Neonates have approximately 
50% of the adult level of α-​acid glycoprotein which means they have 
an increased risk of toxicity and delayed elimination. Pregnancy reduces 
levels of albumin and α-​acid glycoprotein which increases the unbound 
fraction of local anaesthetics. Patients with severe renal impairment 
actually have elevated levels of α-​acid glycoprotein, although remain 
at increased risk of toxicity reactions due to reduced renal clearance. 
Placental transfer of lidocaine is greater than for bupivacaine as there is 
a higher free fraction of drug (lower maternal protein binding of lido­
caine) and a higher % unionized fraction at maternal pH 7.4 due to the 
lower pKa of lidocaine, thus risk of an acidotic foetus trapping ions is 
lower with bupivacaine.
Further reading
Christie LE, Picard J, Weinberg GL. Local anaesthetic systemic toxicity. 
Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 205;5(3):36–​42.
Johnson RF, et al. Effects of fetal pH on local anaesthetic transfer across 
the human placenta. Anaesthesiology, 996;85:608–​65.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. APPENDIX A.3.
7.  B
The pKa describes the pH at which 50% of the drug molecules exist in 
the ionized form and 50% exist in the unionized form. All local anaes­
thetic drugs are weak bases with pKa values greater than 7.4. The closer 
the agent’s pKa value is to pH 7.4 the closer to 50% unionized the drug 
fraction will be. Drugs with a high pKa will have a much smaller per­
centage of drug unionized at physiological pH 7.4. The drug being de­
scribed is actually lidocaine, which at pH 7.4 is 25% unionized but at pH 
7.0 would be ~% unionized.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Local anaesthetic agents
38
For comparison: mepivacaine (pKa 7.6) is 39% unionized at pH 7.4, 
bupivacaine (pKa 8.) is 5% unionized, and chloroprocaine (pKa 8.7) 
is 4.8% unionized.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Lidocaine.
Werdehausen R, et al. Apoptosis induction by different local anaesthetics 
in a neuroblastoma cell line. Br J Anaesth, 2009;03(5):7–​78.
 
39
Chapter 4
Drugs affecting 
neuromuscular function
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
For sugammadex:
A	 A dose of 4 mg/​kg is recommended when recovery of 
neuromuscular function has reached T2
B	 The recommended dose for ‘rescue reversal’ in a ‘can’t intubate, 
can’t oxygenate’ scenario is 6 mg/​kg
C	 Dose calculation should be based on ideal body weight
D	 A dose reduction is recommended in older people
E	 Less than 30% of a given dose is excreted within 24 hours
2.	 

Rocuronium
A	 Is a benzylisoquinolinium
B	 Is less potent than atracurium
C	 Dose calculation should be based on ideal body weight in morbidly 
obese patients
D	 Has a higher volume of distribution compared to atracurium
E	 Pain on injection with rocuronium is worse in conjunction with 
propofol compared to thiopental
3.	
Regarding the effective dosages (ED) of neuromuscular blocking 
agents:
A	 Double the ED90 dosage of rocuronium should be administered 
during rapid sequence induction
B	 ED90 is a measure of drug efficacy
C	 Rocuronium has an ED90 of 0.3 mg/​kg
D	 The ED90 of rocuronium is greater than that of atracurium
E	 Standard intubating dose of vecuronium is 0. mg/​kg
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting neuromuscular function
40
4.	
 
Regarding dantrolene:
A	 The treatment dose for acute malignant hyperthermia is 6 mg/​kg
B	 Is available as a solution containing 2.5 mg/​ml
C	 Inhibits calcium release via the inhibition of ryanodine receptors
D	 Impairs skeletal muscle action potential
E	 Mean duration of action is 5 minutes
5.	
Regarding the metabolism of drugs affecting neuromuscular 
function:
A	 Rocuronium has no active metabolites
B	 Vecuronium is deacetylated in the liver to active metabolites
C	 The majority of mivacurium isomers are hydrolysed by plasma 
cholinesterase
D	 Hofmann degradation is the minor pathway of cisatracurium 
metabolism
E	 30% of suxamethonium is hydrolysed before reaching the 
neuromuscular junction
6.	
 
Neostigmine
A	 Binds to the anionic site of acetylcholinesterase
B	 Prolongs the duration of action of suxamethonium
C	 Peak action occurs within –​2 minutes post intravenous bolus
D	 Predominantly undergoes plasma esterase metabolism
E	 Does not cross the blood–​brain barrier
7.	
 
Suxamethonium
A	 Is an ester of succinic acid
B	 Prevents skeletal muscle action potential repolarization
C	 Increases lower oesophageal tone
D	 Is appropriate in the immediate management of a patient with 
severe burns
E	 Has a shortened duration of action in pregnancy
 
 
 
 
Questions
41
Single Best Answers
.	
You have performed a modified rapid sequence induction 
(RSI) of anaesthesia for a 67-​year-​old patient undergoing rigid 
oesophagoscopy for a retained food bolus. The procedure proceeds 
uneventfully and is over within 5 minutes. Which property of rocuronium 
best informs the ‘reversal’ dose of sugammadex?
A	 It is non-​cumulative with repeated administration
B	 Its ED90 is 0.3 mg/​kg
C	 Its effect is augmented by the recent co-​administration of propofol
D	 Rocuronium non-​competitively antagonizes acetylcholine at nicotinic 
(N2) receptors
E	 The recovery index of an RSI dose reaches  hour
2.	
You have anaesthetised a 24-​year-​old woman for a laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy. Following completion of the procedure you 
conduct a quantitative train-​of-​four analysis. This elicits two twitches. 
Regarding the reversal of neuromuscular antagonism due to rocuronium, 
which of the following statements represents optimal management?
A	 Administer glycopyrronium 500 mcg/​neostigmine 0.05–​0.07 mg/​kg
B	 Administer sugammadex 2 mg/​kg
C	 Administer sugammadex 4 mg/​kg
D	 Administer sugammadex 6 mg/​kg
E	 Delay administration of glycopyrronium 500 mcg/​neostigmine 0.05–​
0.07 mg/​kg
3.	
Which of the following features best characterizes a 
suxamethonium-​induced phase I neuromuscular block?
A	 Poorly sustained tetanus during stimulation
B	 Reversibility with anticholinesterases
C	 Tachyphylaxis
D	 The absence of post-​tetanic facilitation
E	 Train-​of-​four ratio of <0.3
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting neuromuscular function
42
4.	
A 32-​year-​old female is undergoing a laparoscopic appendicectomy 
on the emergency list. She was given suxamethonium as part of 
her anaesthetic induction. Two hours later at the end of surgery, you try 
to wake the patient. Her observations are pulse 20, BP 65/​95, but no 
return of spontaneous ventilation. What is the most likely explanation?
A	 The effect of suxamethonium is prolonged as the patient is on the 
oral contraceptive pill
B	 The patient has a genotype of Ea:Ea
C	 The patient has a genotype of Es:Es
D	 The patient has a genotype of Eu:Ea
E	 The patient has reduced plasma cholinesterase due to liver disease
5.	
You are pre-​assessing a 68-​year-​old patient who has severe chronic 
renal failure. When considering the use of neuromuscular blocking 
drugs in planning his anaesthetic, which statement is the most accurate?
A	 Atracurium: elimination half-​life will be little altered by renal 
impairment
B	 Mivacurium: duration of action increases threefold in renal 
impairment
C	 Rocuronium: the mean duration of action will be prolonged with 
significant renal impairment
D	 Suxamethonium: 60% will be excreted unchanged in the urine
E	 Vecuronium: half-​life will be unchanged by renal failure
6.	
A 36-​year-​old male remains in intensive care six days 
postoperatively following an emergency fasciotomy to treat 
compartment syndrome of his right leg caused by a crush injury. He 
has a background of epilepsy. He remains sedated, facilitating treat­
ment for rhabdomyolysis. His trachea is intubated and ventilated. He 
has developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), for which 
he is receiving continuous neuromuscular blockade. He is persistently 
tachycardic at 30 bpm and pyrexic at 39.3oC. His transaminases are 
elevated and he has developed an acute kidney injury necessitating 
haemofiltration. Which of the following is best included in the reasoning 
for administering a cisatracurium infusion to this patient?
A	 It is safe to administer to those susceptible to malignant 
hyperthermia
B	 Its dose does not require alteration in patients with hepatic 
impairment
C	 Its duration of action is shortened with chronic anticonvulsant 
therapy
D	 Laudanosine levels are lower compared to atracurium
E	 Levels are minimally altered following haemofiltration
 
 
 
Questions
43
7.	
You are reviewing a 55-​year-​old woman in the general medical 
ward who has been admitted with profound muscle weakness. 
Edrophonium is considered in facilitating diagnosis. What feature best 
informs its role in the ‘Tensilon® test’ in comparison to neostigmine?
A	 Edrophonium has a more rapid onset of action
B	 It has reduced potency than neostigmine
C	 It is hydrolysed by acetylcholinesterase
D	 It resolves weakness in a cholinergic crisis
E	 It reversibly binds to acetylcholinesterase
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting neuromuscular function
44
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FTFFF
2 mg/​kg is recommended when recovery of neuromuscular function 
has reached T2 (second evoked response on a train-​of-​four pattern of 
nerve stimulation). 6 mg/​kg is recommended for immediate emer­
gent reversal. In contrast to rocuronium, sugammadex dosing is based 
on actual body weight. No dose reduction is recommended in elderly 
patients. The time of recovery of 0.9 T4:T ratio may be slightly pro­
longed. Sugammadex is not recommended for severe renal or hep­
atic impairment. More than 90% of a given dose is excreted within 
24 hours. A 24-​hour delay is recommended before repeat dosing of 
rocuronium.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Sugammadex.
2.  FTTTT
Rocuronium is an aminosteroid, which is structurally related to 
vecuronium. Atracurium is a benzylisoquinolinium ester. Rocuronium 
(ED90 0.3 mg/​kg) is less potent than atracurium (ED90 0.9 mg/​kg). 
This fact necessitates the administration of an increased dose. The con­
centration gradient at the neuromuscular junction is therefore increased, 
leading to faster diffusion of drug molecules and a reduction in drug 
onset time. Dose calculation should be based on ideal body weight in 
morbidly obese patients.
The volume of distribution of rocuronium is 0.27 L/​kg, while that of 
atracurium is 0.6–​0.8 L/​kg. 6% of patients experience pain on injec­
tion of rocuronium in combination with propofol, compared to 0.5% of 
patients when used in conjunction with thiopental.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Rocuronium.
3.  FFTFT
Rocuronium has an ED90 of 0.3 mg/​kg. Doubling the ED90 dose is re­
commended for non-​emergent induction of anaesthesia. This results in 
excellent intubating conditions within 60 seconds of administration of 
rocuronium in 80% of patients. In a modified RSI a dose of  mg/​kg is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
45
recommended, which achieves excellent intubating conditions in 93–​96% 
of cases within 60 seconds.
ED90 is a measure of drug potency. It is the dose of drug required to 
produce a 90% reduction in twitch height, whereas efficacy describes the 
maximal response attainable from a given drug.
Atracurium has an ED90 of 0.9 mg/​kg, significantly less than the ED90 
of rocuronium, thus rocuronium is a less potent drug than atracurium. 
The ED90 of vecuronium is 0.057 mg/​kg. The standard intubating dose 
of vecuronium is 0. mg/​kg.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 20. Atracurium, Rocuronium, Vecuronium.
4.  FFTFF
The treatment dose range of dantrolene is –​0 mg/​kg. 2.5 mg/​kg is the 
average requirement. It is prepared from a lyophilized orange powder 
(containing 20 mg of dantrolene, 3 g of mannitol, and NaOH), reconsti­
tuted with 60 ml of water. Dantrolene acts within skeletal muscle fibres. 
It inhibits sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+​ release through the inhibition of 
ryanodine receptors, thereby diminishing the degree of muscular con­
traction to a given electrical stimulus. It has no effect on the neuronal ac­
tion potential. It only diminishes the force of electrically induced muscle 
twitches. Therapeutic benefit is evident within 5 minutes. Its mean dur­
ation of action is 4–​6 hours.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dantrolene.
5.  TTTFF
No active metabolites of rocuronium have been detected in the plasma 
or urine.
Vecuronium is deacetylated in the liver into active metabolites. 3-​
hydroxyvecuronium has 50% potency of vecuronium. However, this is 
present at a minimal concentration, unlikely to have any clinical signifi­
cance in the absence of prolonged dosing.
Cis-​trans and Trans-​trans mivacurium isomers are hydrolysed by plasma 
cholinesterase; the cis-​cis isomer is independent of this pathway. Non-​
specific plasma esterases are also involved in its hydrolysis.
As with atracurium, Hofmann degradation to laudanosine and a qua­
ternary monoacrylate is the major metabolic pathway of cisatracurium.
80% of suxamethonium is hydrolysed before reaching the neuromus­
cular junction.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting neuromuscular function
46
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cisatracurium, Mivacurium, Rocuronium, 
Suxamethonium, Vecuronium.
6.  FTFTT
Acetylcholinesterases have two types of active site: a peripheral anionic 
site and a central esteratic site. Neostigmine binds to the esteratic site. 
Through inhibition of cholinesterase activity, neostigmine potentiates the 
effects of depolarizing muscle relaxants. Peak action occurs within 7–​
 minutes post intravenous bolus. It predominantly undergoes plasma 
esterase metabolism. A degree of hepatic metabolism and biliary excre­
tion may occur. Neostigmine is highly ionized and therefore does not 
cross the blood–​brain barrier. It has a low volume of distribution (0.4–​
 L/​kg).
Further reading
Nair VP, Hunter JM. Anticholinesterases and anticholinergic drugs. Cont 
Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 2004;4:64–​68.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Neostigmine.
7.  TTFTF
Suxamethonium is a dicholine ester of succinic acid. It is the equiva­
lent of two acetylcholine molecules bonded. It causes prolonged 
depolarization of skeletal muscle fibres to a membrane poten­
tial above which an action potential can be triggered. It prevents 
repolarization and renders the skeletal muscle cell refractory to fur­
ther depolarization.
It increases intragastric pressure by 7–​2 cmH20 while simultaneously 
decreasing lower oesophageal tone.
Suxamethonium is safe within the first 24 hours after a burn, after which 
time a marked hyperkalaemic response may occur. This is thought to 
be related to increased levels of extrajunctional acetylcholine receptors, 
which may persist for up to  year after a burn.
Plasma cholinesterase hydrolyses suxamethonium. Its concentrations 
may be reduced in pregnancy, thereby prolonging the action of suxa­
methonium. Plasma cholinesterase concentrations may also be reduced 
by genetic factors and in acquired states, such as liver disease, and car­
diac or renal failure.
Further reading
Bishop S, Maguire S. Anaesthesia and intensive care for major burns. 
Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 202;2(3):8–​22.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Suxamethonium.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
47
Single Best Answers
.  E
Rocuronium is non-​cumulative with repeated administration. This is of 
little relevance in a case where only one dose would have been required. 
Its effect is enhanced by the co-​administration of various drugs, including 
volatile anaesthetics, induction agents, fentanyl, and suxamethonium. 
Although its ED90 is 0.3 mg/​kg, this plays an indirect role in necessitating 
the administration of an increased dose to facilitate RSI. The standard 
induction dose is 0.6 mg/​kg, while that for RSI is .2 mg/​kg.
The usual recovery index is 8 to 7 minutes following a standard bolus 
dose. Following  mg/​kg bolus dose, the recovery index approaches 
 hour.
Rocuronium competitively antagonizes acetylcholine at nicotinic (N2) re­
ceptors at the post-​synaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junction. 
This property facilitates its reversal.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 20. Rocuronium.
2.  A
Sugammadex decreases the amount of free drug in the central com­
partment, creating a concentration gradient away from the neuromus­
cular junction (NMJ) effector site. It is typically utilized to antagonize 
profound neuromuscular blockade, which would be refractory to 
neostigmine.
Neostigmine binds to the esteratic site of acetylcholinesterase, allowing 
accumulation of acetylcholine, thereby antagonizing the effects of non-​
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, while potentiating the ef­
fects of depolarizing agents. Given that two twitches are evident on 
quantitative train-​of-​four (TOF) analysis, this suggests there is already 
sufficient competitive antagonism of neuromuscular blockade occurring 
that would benefit from the administration of a standard dose combin­
ation of glycopyrronium 500 mcg/​neostigmine 0.05–​0.07 mg/​kg. The 
recommended dose of sugammadex is defined by the clinical context 
and the number of twitches present on TOF analysis. 6 mg/​kg would 
be the dose required to immediately reverse deep neuromuscular block, 
for example, in the context of a failed intubation in an RSI using up to .2 
mg/​kg rocuronium.
Further reading
Moi D. Residual Neuromuscular Blockade: Anaesthesia Tutorial of the 
Week, 203. Available at: https://​www.frca.co.uk/​Docume​nts/​
290%20R​esid​ual%20Ne​urom​uscu​lar%20B​lock​ade.pdf
Schaller SJ, Fink H. Sugammadex as a reversal agent for neuromuscular 
block: an evidence-​based review. Core Evidence, 203;8:57–​67.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting neuromuscular function
48
3.  D
Suxamethonium induces skeletal muscle fasciculations followed by a phase 
I depolarizing blockade. This is characterized by well-​sustained tetanus 
during a 50–​00 MHz stimulation, with an absence of post-​tetanic facilita­
tion. TOF T4/​T ratio remains greater than 0.7, indicating a lack of fade, 
in contrast to non-​depolarizing neuromuscular blockade. Tachyphylaxis, 
describing a diminished response to repeated doses, occurs in a phase II 
block. A phase I block is potentiated by anticholinesterase activity.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Suxamethonium.
4.  B
The observations indicate she remains paralysed but her elevated 
pulse rate and blood pressure show that she is developing awareness. 
Supportive respiratory treatment along with reassurance to the patient 
and re-​anaesthesia is required. The most likely explanation is that she has 
a genetic variant of plasma cholinesterase and has a prolonged response 
to suxamethonium. Genetic testing of the patient and their family should 
be subsequently offered.
There are four alleles, the inheritance pattern of which produces 0 
genotypes. 94-​96% of the white population is homozygous Eu:Eu and 
rapidly metabolizes suxamethonium in <8 mins. The other three alleles 
are Ea (atypical), Es (silent) and Ef (fluoride resistant). Eu:Ea has a popu­
lation incidence of :25 but seldom prolongs suxamethonium effect 
beyond 20mins and is often not clinically noted. Es:Es leads to a pro­
longed block but is a very rare genotype (approx. :00,000). The more 
common genotype accounting for prolonged block is Ea:Ea, which has an 
incidence of :2800 and prolongs duration for over 2 hours. This is the 
most likely answer.
Hepatic disease is one of the causes of acquired plasma cholinesterase 
deficiency due to synthetic failure and can lead to prolongation of block. 
Other acquired factors include pregnancy, hyperthyroidism, cancer, and 
renal failure. Numerous drugs are also known to affect the duration 
of suxamethonium, e.g. procaine (competes with suxamethonium for 
pseudocholinesterase), lithium, and magnesium (potentiates the action 
of suxamethonium at the neuromuscular junction) and the oral contra­
ceptive pill (reduces plasma cholinesterase activity by up to 20%). It is 
unlikely that any of these would prolong the effect for the 2 hours dur­
ation stated in the question.
Further reading
Peck TE, Hill SA, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 2nd edition. Greenwich Medical Media, 2003.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Suxamethonium.
 
 
 
 
Answers
49
5.  A
Atracurium clearance is little altered by hepatic or renal impairment. Its 
major metabolic pathway is Hofmann degradation, resulting in metabol­
ites with insignificant neuromuscular blocking activity.
Renal impairment increases the clinical duration of action of mivacurium 
by a factor of .5, and hepatic impairment increases it by a factor of 3.
The pharmacokinetics of rocuronium are little altered by renal impair­
ment. Hepatic impairment leads to a decreased clearance by  ml/​kg/​min, 
with a corresponding increase in the duration of action. Suxamethonium 
is readily hydrolysed by plasma cholinesterase at an in vivo rate of 3–​7 
mg/​L/​min. 2–​0% of an administered dose is excreted unchanged in the 
urine. The half-​life of vecuronium is prolonged in renal failure, in which 
25–​30% of a dose is excreted unchanged. However, this has no clinically 
significant increase in its duration of action.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Atracurium, Mivacurium, Rocuronium, 
Suxamethonium, Vecuronium.
6.  E
Clearance is minimally altered by hepatic or renal impairment. Dosage 
adjustment is therefore unnecessary. In this patient’s case raised trans­
aminase levels may be associated with rhabdomyolysis and would not 
necessarily indicate hepatic impairment.
The onset of activity is likely to be lengthened in those receiving chronic 
anticonvulsant therapy, while the duration of action is shortened. As this 
patient requires a continuous infusion, this has less bearing. Its use ap­
pears to be safe in those susceptible to malignant hyperthermia and is 
not contraindicated in such cases.
Haemofiltration has a minimal effect on the plasma levels of atracurium or 
its metabolite, laudanosine. Given the use of continuous hemofiltration, 
this would be a key consideration in a patient requiring neuromuscular 
blockade for the management of ARDS.
Laudanosine, along with a quaternary monoacrylate, is a product of the 
major Hofmann degradative pathway. Hydrolysis via non-​specific plasma 
esterases is its minor metabolic pathway, producing a quaternary alcohol 
and a quaternary acid. The Cmax values of laudanosine are lower in pa­
tients receiving intravenous infusions of cisatracurium, compared with 
those receiving a continuous atracurium infusion. However, this would 
not necessarily guide its use.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Atracurium.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting neuromuscular function
50
7.  A
Edrophonium has a lesser duration of effect (0 minutes) compared to 
neostigmine (40–​60 minutes). It does, however, have a more rapid onset 
to peak effect at 0.8–​2 minutes, compared to neostigmine at 7–​ min­
utes following intravenous administration.
Neostigmine is up to 2–​6 more potent than edrophonium. The intra­
venous dose of edrophonium for reversal of competitive neuromus­
cular blockade is 0.5–​0.7 mg/​kg, while that of neostigmine is 0.05–​0.07 
mg/​kg. The muscarinic effects of the drug are correspondingly easier 
to counteract than those of neostigmine. This is important should a 
reversal of its effects be required with atropine.
Neostigmine is hydrolysed by acetylcholinesterase at a slower rate than 
acetylcholine. The metabolic pathway of edrophonium is uncertain. 
Resolution of weakness is noted following its administration in myas­
thenia. Its administration would potentiate a cholinergic crisis, thereby 
allowing differentiation between these presentations. Its binding to 
acetylcholinesterase is not a distinguishing feature. Edrophonium revers­
ibly binds to the anionic site of acetylcholinesterase, while neostigmine 
binds to the esteratic site of acetylcholinesterase.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Edrophonium.
 
 
51
Chapter 5
Analgesics
Opioids
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Effects of morphine include
A	 Bradycardia in high doses
B	 Miosis via stimulation of the Edinger–​Westphal nucleus
C	 Decreased brainstem sensitivity to carbon dioxide compared to 
hypoxia
D	 Reduced common bile duct pressure
E	 Morphine decreases the secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
2.	
 
Regarding the metabolism of opioids
A	 Diamorphine must be metabolized to be active
B	 Metabolism of alfentanil is delayed by co-​administration of 
midazolam
C	 Morphine is metabolized to morphine -​6-​glucuronide, which has 
active effects
D	 Remifentanil metabolism occurs in the liver by N-​demethylation to 
nor-​remifentanil
E	 The majority of codeine is excreted unchanged in the urine
3.	
 
Regarding drug passage across membranes
A	 Diamorphine is more lipid soluble compared to morphine
B	 Fentanyl has a faster onset of action compared to alfentanil
C	 Fentanyl is highly lipid soluble compared with alfentanil
D	 The higher the fraction of ionized drug the faster the onset
E	 The pKa value is dependent on whether the drug is acidic or basic
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 Analgesics: opioids
52
4.	
 
Regarding remifentanil
A	 Clearance is independent of renal and hepatic function
B	 Does not cause histamine release
C	 Has centrally mediated vagal activity
D	 Is a pure KOP (or Kappa) receptor agonist
E	 The administration of an anticholinergic drug will enhance the 
metabolism of remifentanil
5.	
 
Naloxone
A	 May alleviate pruritus following intrathecal administration of opioids
B	 Can be used in the treatment of clonidine overdose
C	 Is a competitive agonist to opioid receptors
D	 Is effective in the treatment of benzodiazepine overdose
E	 Is suitable for oral administration
6.	
 
Cardiovascular effects of opioids include
A	 Bradycardia of vagal origin
B	 A dose-​dependent decrease in cardiac output
C	 A decrease in systemic vascular resistance
D	 A minimal to no effect on myocardial contractility
E	 Precipitation of arrhythmias
7.	
 
Tramadol
A	 Can safely be prescribed to patients on fluoxetine
B	 Inhibits reuptake of serotonin and enhances noradrenaline release
C	 Is a partial agonist to dopamine receptors
D	 Naloxone has no impact on the analgesic effects of tramadol
E	 Ultra-​rapid metabolizers are more common in the Black compared 
with the white population
 
 
 
 
Questions
53
Single Best Answers
.	
You are asked to review a ventilated intensive care unit (ICU) 
patient who is failing to wake despite their sedation being stopped. 
Prior to admission to hospital, they were found collapsed with a reduced 
level of consciousness. A collateral history is suggestive of a morphine 
overdose. Which of the following statements is correct?
A	 A transthoracic echocardiogram is likely to demonstrate a reduced 
left ventricular ejection fraction
B	 Adults are more sensitive to opioids compared to neonates due to 
higher levels of mu-​receptor expression
C	 Morphine may precipitate coma in patients with hypopituitarism
D	 Oral ingestion of morphine is unlikely to be the cause of a reduced 
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
E	 Use of haemodialysis will reduce the patient’s time on a ventilator
2.	
You are asked to attend the emergency department to assist 
with the management of an intravenous drug user who has had 
a respiratory arrest. Drug paraphernalia consistent with opioid use was 
found at the scene. In considering the mechanism by which opioids may 
result in respiratory arrest, which of the following is most likely to have 
occurred?
A	 Opioids act through competitive enzyme inhibition
B	 Opioids exert their effect through the inhibition of Na channels, 
thereby hyperpolarizing cell membranes
C	 Opioids have an intracellular site of drug-​receptor interaction
D	 Opioids increase potassium conductance, thereby hyperpolarizing 
cell membranes
E	 Opioids interact with receptors leading to alteration of DNA 
expression
 
 
 
Chapter 5 Analgesics: opioids
54
3.	
You are asked to review a postoperative patient on the surgical 
ward. Two days ago, the patient had a revision total hip replace­
ment. Spinal anaesthesia with morphine was performed and the patient 
had a propofol target-​controlled infusion for deep sedation. The patient 
has a morphine patient-​controlled analgesia (PCA) system attached 
which they have been using for the last two days. The PCA prescription 
settings are as follows: Bolus  mg, Lockout 5 minutes, Background zero. 
They have also been receiving oral paracetamol and ibuprofen. Her past 
medical history includes mild asthma. The patient is complaining of chest 
tightness, nausea, and itching, and is experiencing urinary urgency and 
hesitancy since her catheter was removed 2 hours ago. Which of the 
following is most likely to be correct?
A	 Bronchospasm is unlikely to be caused by morphine due to its 
immunoprotective properties
B	 Nausea caused by morphine is exclusively related to decreased 
gastrointestinal motility
C	 Prolonged use of morphine causes bladder irritability
D	 Reducing the rate of morphine administration can help limit 
histamine-​induced bronchospasm
E	 The intrathecal route of administration precludes the development 
of pruritus
4.	
You are working in a chronic pain clinic. The patient you are re­
viewing has chronic lower limb pain following an industrial injury, 
after which they were unable to work. In addition to their chronic pain 
history, they also have generalized anxiety disorder and occasionally 
take diazepam for symptom control. They were originally referred to 
the clinic due to abuse of a prescribed slow-​release morphine prepar­
ation and also oral morphine for breakthrough pain. However, following 
the instigation of an opioid withdrawal programme using methadone, 
they have now been successfully converted to alternative analgesia. 
Concerning the long-​term use, dependence, and tolerance of opioids, 
which of the following is most likely to be correct?
A	 Chronic use of opioids will promote the development of further 
opioid receptors throughout the central nervous system
B	 Likelihood of receptor desensitization is greater when co-​
administered with benzodiazepines
C	 Methadone acts as a pure N-​methyl-​D-​aspartate (NMDA) receptor 
antagonist
D	 Morphine can be tested for in the urine to check for abstinence
E	 Tolerance to opioids can develop following the first use
 
 
Questions
55
5.	
You are working on a maternity unit and have been asked to 
review a patient on the post-​natal ward. The patient had a cae­
sarean section two days ago and is complaining of postoperative pain 
and a new cough. You are reviewing her prescription chart and see 
that codeine phosphate has recently been prescribed as an antitussive. 
Concerning the use of codeine phosphate, which is most likely to be 
correct?
A	 All enzymes dependent on codeine metabolism display genetic 
polymorphism
B	 Analgesic effects are mediated through specific codeine receptors
C	 Codeine can be routinely used as analgesia for breastfeeding 
mothers
D	 Codeine has a low affinity for opioid receptors
E	 Codeine is approximately half as potent as morphine
6.	
You are about to anaesthetize a 28-​year-​old female patient who 
has a penetrating eye injury. A pregnancy test performed on the 
ward reveals she is in early pregnancy. Her past medical history is unre­
markable, aside from currently taking erythromycin for otitis externa. 
You are considering your choice of induction agents which may include 
alfentanil. Regarding the use of alfentanil, which of the following is most 
likely to be correct?
A	 Alfentanil is highly lipid soluble thereby resulting in a fast onset 
of action
B	 Alfentanil is predominately albumin bound in the plasma
C	 Bolus dosing of the drug causes a temporary increase in intraocular 
pressure
D	 Concomitant use of erythromycin may significantly inhibit the 
clearance of alfentanil
E	 The molecular size of alfentanil prevents passage across the placenta
7.	
You have been asked to review a journal article for presentation 
at your department’s weekly journal club. The paper relates to 
research on opioid receptors. Which of the following statements relating 
to opioid receptors is correct?
A	 Buprenorphine is an inverse agonist at MOP/​mu receptor
B	 Dynorphin A is the endogenous ligand to the DOP receptor
C	 KOP/​kappa receptor stimulation does not cause respiratory 
depression
D	 MOP/​mu receptors are located specific to the spinal cord
E	 The NOP receptor produces the euphoric effects of opioids
 
 
 
Chapter 5 Analgesics: opioids
56
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TTTFF
Morphine has minimal effects on the cardiovascular system, the pre­
dominant effect is orthostatic hypotension secondary to a decrease 
in system vascular resistance. It may cause bradycardia when admin­
istered in high doses. Miosis is produced as a result of stimulation of 
the Edinger–​Westphal nucleus; this can be reversed by atropine. The 
principal respiratory effect of morphine is respiratory depression; it de­
creases the sensitivity of the brainstem to carbon dioxide, while the hyp­
oxia response is less affected. Morphine increases the tone of ureters, 
bladder detrusor muscle, and sphincters, which can increase common 
bile duct pressure. Morphine increases the secretion of ADH and can 
lead to impaired water excretion and hyponatraemia.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Pages 28–​3.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Morphine.
2.  TTTFF
Diamorphine undergoes rapid enzymatic hydrolysis in the plasma to 
6-​0-​acetylmorphine, which is the active form of the drug. Alfentanil is 
metabolized in the liver by N-​dealkylation to noralfentanil. Cytochrome 
P450 3A3 and 3A4 play a predominant role in alfentanil metabolism 
and may be subject to competitive inhibition by the co-​administration 
of midazolam. This can lead to the prolongation of the drug effects 
of midazolam and alfentanil. Morphine is metabolized in the liver to 
morphine-​3-​glucuronide, morphine-​6-​glucuronide, and normorphine. 
Morphine-​6-​glucuronide is more potent than morphine and has anal­
gesic effects. Morphine-​3-​glucuronide has effects on arousal. The 
metabolism of remifentanil is unique among the opioid class; it under­
goes rapid ester hydrolysis by non-​specific plasma and tissue esterases 
to remifentanil acid, 4600-​fold less potent than remifentanil. Codeine 
is extensively metabolized in the liver, and only a small proportion (5–​
5%) is excreted unchanged in the urine. There are three main mech­
anisms: by glucuronidation to codeine-​6-​glucuronide (0–​20%); by 
N-​demethylation to norcodeine (0–​20%); and by O-​demethylation to 
morphine (5–​5%).
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edi­
tion. Oxford University Press, 206. Alfentanil, Cisatracurium, 
Diamorphine, Esmolol, Remifentanil.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
57
3.  TFTFF
The cell membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer, which is lipophilic 
in nature. Drugs which are weak acids or bases can exist in ionized/​
charged and unionized/​uncharged forms depending on the pH of the 
environment it is exposed to. Only the unionized fraction of a drug is 
able to cross the lipophilic cell membrane. The higher the concentration 
of unionized drug present, the faster its onset of action will be. The pKa 
is the pH at which 50% of the drug is ionized; this value is dependent on 
the structure of the drug and not whether it is an acid or base. The pKa 
of alfentanil is 6.5; it is 89% unionized at pH of 7.4 and has a relatively 
low lipid solubility. Despite low lipid solubility, it has a faster onset of ac­
tion compared to fentanyl due to this large, unionized fraction. Fentanyl 
has a much higher lipid solubility but a higher pKa of 8.4, with only 9% 
unionized at pH 7.4. Due to its higher lipid solubility, diamorphine has a 
faster onset of action than morphine.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Factors influen­
cing the rate of diffusion pp. 5–​8, Alfentanil p. 36, Fentanyl p. 35.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Diamorphine.
4.  TTTFF
Remifentanil is a pure MOP agonist (or mu-​agonist). The MOP receptor 
appears to be specifically involved in the mediation of analgesia and is 
located throughout the central nervous system. Remifentanil is present 
as a white lyophilized powder to be reconstituted before use. It has a 
pKa of 7. and is 68% unionized at a pH of 7.4. Remifentanil is me­
tabolized rapidly by non-​specific plasma esterase. The context-​sensitive 
half-​time is fixed due to the quantity of these esterases. The clearance is 
independent of renal and hepatic function. It does not cause histamine 
release but is associated with chest wall rigidity which may be related 
to MOP receptors on GABA-​ergic interneurons. Remifentanil has cen­
trally mediated vagal activity and can decrease heart rate by 20%. As 
reminfentanil’s metabolism is independent of the plasma cholinesterase 
system, the administration of anticholinesterase drugs will not affect it.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Remifentanil.
5.  TTFFF
Naloxone is a substituted oxymorphone derivative. It is a competitive 
antagonist at mu-​, delta-​, kappa-​, and sigma-​opioid receptors. It has the 
highest affinity for mu receptors. It is used for the reversal of respira­
tory depression due to opioids and can also be used in the treatment 
of clonidine overdose. Mu-​receptor antagonists have been shown to 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 Analgesics: opioids
58
have antipruritic effects. Results on the efficacy of naloxone for treating 
opioid-​induced pruritus have been mixed but some studies show a 
positive benefit. It is not effective in the treatment of benzodiazepine 
overdose; this is flumazenil. Naloxone will precipitate acute withdrawal 
symptoms in opioid addicts. It may be administered intravenously, intra­
muscularly, or subcutaneously. It is 9% absorbed when administered 
orally but has an oral bioavailability of 2% due to extensive first-​pass 
metabolism. It has a duration of effect that may be shorter than the 
opioid it is intended to treat, additional doses may be necessary.
Further reading
Kumar K, Singh SI. Neuraxial opioid-​induced pruritus: an update. J 
Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol, 203;29(3):303–​307.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Naloxone.
6.  TFTTF
Overall, opioids have minimal effects on the cardiovascular system when 
used in normal doses. High doses of opioids, particularly remifentanil, 
will cause bradycardia, which is vagal in origin. Alfentanil and fentanyl 
will obtund the cardiovascular response to laryngoscopy and intubation. 
Opioids can cause a decrease in systemic vascular resistance, partly me­
diated by histamine release and a reduction in sympathetic tone. They do 
not have direct myocardial depressant effects and do not cause a dose-​
dependent decrease in cardiac output. They are drugs not commonly 
associated with arrhythmia generation.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice, st 
edition. Oxford University Press, 203. Chapter 3. Opioids.
7.  FFFFT
Tramadol is a cyclohexanol derivative. It is a racemic mixture of two en­
antiomers, with their own specific actions. It is a non-​selective agonist at 
mu-​, kappa-​, and delta opioid receptors. It also inhibits neural reuptake of 
norepinephrine and enhances serotonin release. Its main action is centrally 
mediated analgesia, partly through the activation of descending serotonergic 
and noradrenergic pathways. Naloxone will partially reverse the anal­
gesic effect of tramadol by 30%, but has been rarely reported associated 
with long-​term administration. Tramadol is metabolized by CYP2D6 and 
CYP3A4. Several selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), including 
fluoxetine, are moderate-​potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 and hence lead to 
increased tramadol concentrations. Co-​administration also increases the 
risk of serotonin syndrome. Other drugs that should be avoided include 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Serotonin syndrome is characterized by fea­
tures including neuromuscular hyperactivity, autonomic dysfunction, and 
altered mental state. Severe toxicity is a medical emergency.
The prevalence of ultra-​rapid metabolizers (a genetic variant of 
CYP2D6) has been quoted at 29% in the African (especially Ethiopian) 
 
 
 
 
Answers
59
population compared to 3.5–​6.5% in white people. Ultra-​rapid metab­
olizers can lead to a sudden peak in O-​desmethyltramadol (M) which 
is pharmacologically active and has a higher affinity for opioid receptors 
compared to the parent drug.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Tramadol.
Single Best Answers
.  C
Morphine inhibits the release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone, pro­
lactin, and gonadotrophic hormones. The use of this drug in patients with 
hypopituitarism may, therefore, precipitate coma. Neonates are more 
sensitive than adults to morphine due to immature liver enzymes and a 
reduced conjugating capacity, therefore, corresponding dose reduction 
is necessary. Morphine has minimal effects on the cardiovascular system 
but its anxiolytic and vasodilatory effects are used as a treatment in left 
ventricular failure. Morphine cannot be removed by haemodialysis or 
peritoneal dialysis. The drug is well absorbed orally, due to extensive 
first-​pass metabolism. The bioavailability via this route is 5–​50%.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Morphine pp. 
28–​3.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Morphine.
2.  D
Opioids interact as agonists with one or several specific opioid recep­
tors: the mu-​, kappa-​, delta-​, and NOP receptors. They are membrane-​
spanning receptors that are linked to inhibitory G proteins (Gi). The 
following sequence occurs: drug interaction with presynaptic Gi-​protein 
receptors; closure of voltage-​sensitive calcium channels, which leads to 
an increase in intracellular calcium concentration. In turn, this causes in­
creased potassium conductance and hyperpolarization of the membrane 
by potassium efflux. This leads to adenylate cyclase inhibition and reduced 
levels of cAMP. The overall effect is a decrease in membrane excitability 
that results in the inhibition of transmitter release between nerve cells.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Opioids and re­
lated drugs pp. 27–​28.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Morphine.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 Analgesics: opioids
60
3.  D
There is some evidence to show that opioids can decrease macrophage 
and T-​cell activity, but they do not exhibit immunoprotective properties. 
A common side effect of opioids is nausea and vomiting—​this is in part 
centrally mediated due to stimulation of the chemo receptor trigger zone 
via dopamine and 5-​HT receptors. Opioids increase the tone of ureters, 
bladder detrusor muscle, and sphincter, and may lead to urinary retention 
rather than irritability. Morphine results in the release of histamine which 
may lead to bronchoconstriction, rash, and pruritus. Reducing the rate of 
administration of the drug may help to limit bronchospasm. Development 
of pruritus is most marked following intrathecal and epidural administration.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice, st 
edition. Oxford University Press, 203. Chapter 3. Opioids.
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Morphine pp. 
28–​3.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Morphine.
4.  D
Opioids exhibit the phenomenon of tolerance; whereby chronic use will 
lead to altered sensitivity of receptors so that over time larger doses of 
the drug will be required to produce the same pharmacological effect. This 
will not occur after first use of the drug. Greater numbers of receptors are 
not developed following chronic use. Desensitization refers to chronic loss 
of receptor response over time; benzodiazepines have no effect on this. 
Methadone is an opioid with a high affinity for mu receptors. Due to its high 
oral bioavailability (75%) and long plasma half-​life, it is used in the treatment 
process of intravenous opioid addicts. It may also act as an antagonist at 
NMDA receptors and has a possible role in the treatment of neuropathic 
pain. Metabolites of opioids, rather than the parent drug, are removed via 
renal clearance and their presence can be detected for in urine analysis.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Tachyphylaxis, 
desensitization and tolerance pp. 38–​39, Methadone p. 39.
5.  D
Codeine is a methylated morphine derivative with a very low affinity 
for opioid receptors. It acts as a prodrug for morphine and it is this 
morphine metabolite which is responsible for the analgesic effects. The 
antitussive effects of codeine are due to interaction with high-​affinity 
specific codeine receptors. Approximately 0% of codeine is me­
tabolized to morphine and it is ten times less potent than morphine, 
not half. Codeine is metabolized in the liver via three main pathways. 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
61
The cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP2D6, which is responsible for the 
conversion to morphine, exhibits genetic variability; fast metabolizers 
produce more morphine. Poor metabolizers experience few analgesic 
effects. Codeine is not recommended for use in breastfeeding (BNF).
Further reading
NICE. Codeine Phosphate, 2022. Available at: https://​bnf.nice.org.uk/​
drug/​code​ine-​phosph​ate.html
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Codeine.
6.  D
Alfentanil is a potent mu-​receptor agonist. Cytochrome P450 3A3 and 
3A4 play a predominant role in metabolism and these enzymes may 
be subject to competitive inhibition by other drugs. Erythromycin may 
reduce the clearance of alfentanil by inhibition of hepatic CYP450. 
Alfentanil may lower intraocular pressure by approximately 45%. 
Alfentanil has a relatively low lipid solubility, although the onset of ac­
tion is fast due to the large unionized proportion at physiological pH. 
Alfentanil is 85–​92% protein bound, predominately to alpha-​ acid glyco­
protein, with a volume of distribution of 0.4–​ l /​kg. It will cross the 
placenta. Due to a small volume of distribution and short elimination 
half-​life, a single dose has a relatively short duration of action.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Alfentanil.
7.  C
Dynorphin A is the endogenous ligand for the KOP receptor, not the 
DOP receptor (this is Leu-​ or Met-​enkephalin). Buprenorphine is a par­
tial agonist at meu receptors, from which it dissociates slowly, leading to 
prolonged analgesic effects. The stimulation of specifically KOP/​kappa 
receptors does not cause respiratory depression. However, KOP/​kappa 
agonists appear to have some antagonistic effects on mu receptors which 
limits their clinical usefulness. The mu receptors are found throughout 
the central nervous system and are not exclusive to the spinal cord. The 
majority are located presynaptically in the periaqueductal grey and in 
the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. They are also present in the cerebral 
cortex. Stimulation of the mu receptors will mediate analgesia as well as 
many of the side effects associated with opioids, including respiratory 
depression and constipation. The euphoric effects of opioids are also 
mediated through the MOP/​mu receptor.
Further reading
McDonald J, Lambert DG. Opioid receptors. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care 
Pain, 205;5(5):29–​224.
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Opioids and re­
lated drugs pp. 27–​28.
 
 
 
 
 
63
Chapter 6
Analgesics
Non-​opioids
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Carbamazepine
A	 Is the first-​line agent used when a diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia is 
suspected
B	 Rashes occur in 3% of patients
C	 Is excreted unchanged in the urine
D	 Is pro-​arrhythmogenic
E	 Regular monitoring of hepatic function is required for patients taking 
long-​term carbamazepine therapy
2.	
 
Ketamine
A	 Is a non-​competitive agonist of the N-​methyl-​D-​aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor Ca2+​ channel pore
B	 Its action results in an increase of presynaptic glutamate
C	 In higher doses, has some local anaesthetic activity
D	 Is a racemic mixture, which has benefits for use in patients with 
bronchospasm
E	 Reduces salivary secretions
3.	
 
Clonidine
A	 Reduces cardiac contractility and cardiac output
B	 Is an alpha-​2 agonist
C	 Is indicated for use in migraine
D	 The analgesic effector site is the dorsal horn of the spinal cord
E	 Increases blood pressure
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 Analgesics: non-opioids
64
4.	
 
Paracetamol
A	 The mechanism of action of paracetamol is poorly understood, 
but there is evidence of action involving prostaglandin synthesis, 
serotonergic, and cannabinoid pathways
B	 The antipyretic effects are thought to be secondary to antagonism 
of prostaglandin E within the central nervous system
C	 5% of patients expressing an aspirin allergy have a cross-​sensitivity 
to paracetamol
D	 Is metabolized to N-​acetyl-​p-​benzo-​quinoneimine (NAPQI), which 
is then activated by glutathione conjugation
E	 Is not removed by haemodialysis
5.	
 
Non-​steroidal anti-​inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
A	 35% of a diclofenac dose is excreted in bile
B	 Use of NSAIDs results in reduced platelet aggregation and 
prolonged bleeding time
C	 Ibuprofen has no effect on foetal circulation if administered 
maternally
D	 Ibuprofen causes bronchoconstriction in 20% of patients suffering 
from asthma
E	 There is an association between prolonged use of NSAIDs and 
arterial thrombotic events in patients with cardiovascular disease
6.	
 
Tramadol
A	 Has agonist effects at multiple opioid receptors and enhances 
serotonin release centrally
B	 Can often be effective in managing postoperative shivering
C	 Is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers
D	 Enhances neuronal noradrenaline reuptake
E	 The analgesic effects of tramadol are fully reversed by naloxone
 
 
 
Questions
65
7.	
 
Gabapentin
A	 Is an antineuropathic analgesic
B	 Is a gamma-​aminobutyric acid (GABA) antagonist
C	 Stimulates glutamate decarboxylase
D	 Has an oral bioavailability of 40%
E	 Is removed by haemodialysis
Single Best Answers
.	
A patient is given analgesic ‘Z’. They experience tachycardia, 
nausea, rash, and an increase in salivary secretions.
Which drug are they most likely to have been given?
A	 Amitriptyline
B	 Duloxetine
C	 Ketamine
D	 Magnesium
E	 Pregabalin
2.	
A female 68-​year-​old 85 kg patient is prescribed a lidocaine infu­
sion at 3 mg/​kg to be administered intravenously over 90 minutes.
Which of the following statements is the most accurate?
A	 A blood level of 6μg/​ml is below the expected threshold for central 
nervous system toxicity
B	 A patient with chronic hypercarbia will be at higher risk of lidocaine 
central nervous system toxicity, so doses should be reduced
C	 Co-​administration of a drug that increases hepatic blood flow may 
require lidocaine dose to be reduced
D	 Doses can be increased by 25% in patients with moderate heart 
failure due to their increased volume of distribution
E	 Dosing should be based on a patient’s lean body weight
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 Analgesics: non-opioids
66
3.	
A patient who is regularly on amitriptyline is given prochlorpera­
zine. You are urgently called to review the patient. They have a 
blood pressure of 50//​30 and a heart rate of 40. Another anaesthetist 
attends to the patient with you and slowly administers a 250 mcg dose 
of diluted adrenaline intravenously. The patient’s blood pressure now 
becomes unrecordable.
Which of the following statements is the most appropriate explanation?
A	 Insufficient adrenaline has been given to the patient
B	 Prochlorperazine and amitriptyline have physically precipitated
C	 Prochlorperazine blocks alpha-​2 receptors
D	 Procyclidine should have been given to the patient before adrenaline 
administered
E	 There is unopposed beta2 receptor agonism
4.	
 
You are told the following information about a drug:
●	 Site of action: alpha-​2-​delta subunit of voltage-​gated calcium channels
●	 Bioavailability of 60% declines with increasing doses
●	 Not bound to plasma proteins
●	 Side effects include weight gain
Which drug is this most likely to be?
A	 Flunarizine
B	 Gabapentin
C	 Nimodipine
D	 Pregabalin
E	 Ziconotide
5.	
Regarding capsaicin—​who is the least suitable to use this 
medication?
A	 An asthmatic patient with idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia
B	 A diabetic patient with painful neuropathy
C	 A patient with renal impairment (eGFR 35) and peripheral 
neuropathic pain
D	 A patient with severe liver disease seeking symptomatic relief from 
osteoarthritis
E	 A pregnant patient with post-​herpetic neuralgia
 
 
 
Questions
67
6.	
You are prescribing nefopam to a patient during an acute pain 
ward round. The medical student with you asks you to tell them 
more about the drug.
Which of the following statements concerning nefopam is most accurate?
A	 It is a benzodiazepine
B	 Its analgesic potency is approximately one-​tenth of that of morphine
C	 Mechanism of action involves GABA receptors
D	 Patients should be warned of the side effect of sweating
E	 Respiratory depression is associated with this drug
7.	
You are prescribing intravenous clonidine to a patient on the 
intensive care unit.
Which of the following statements best describes clonidine’s cardiovas­
cular effects?
A	 Antagonism of vascular alpha-​2 adrenoceptors
B	 Decreases vagal tone
C	 Progressively increases the responsiveness of peripheral vessels to 
other vasoactive substances
D	 Reduces cardiac contractility
E	 Reduces noradrenaline release
 
 
Chapter 6 Analgesics: non-opioids
68
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TTFFT
Carbamazepine is the first-​choice analgesic in pharmacological treat­
ment of trigeminal neuralgia. Rashes occur in up to 3% of patients. 
Carbamazepine undergoes hepatic oxidative metabolism to an 
epoxide. In chronic use, carbamazepine is a hepatic enzyme-​inducer, 
inducing its own metabolism. This ‘inducing effect’ also results in re­
duced plasma concentrations of other medications that rely on hep­
atic metabolism. Carbamazepine has antiarrhythmic properties and 
depresses atrioventricular node conduction. Chronic carbamazepine 
therapy can result in hepatic dysfunction as well as mild neutro­
penia and rarely aplastic anaemia. Regular monitoring is therefore 
essential.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Carbamazepine.
2.  FFTTF
Ketamine is a non-​competitive antagonist of the NMDA receptor Ca2+​ 
channel pore. The use of ketamine results in reduced concentrations 
of presynaptic glutamate, therefore reducing the onward progression 
of action potentials in the pain pathway. There are also complex inter­
actions with opioid receptors. Ketamine is a racemic mixture of S-​[+​]‌-​
Ketamine and R-​[–​]-​Ketamine in equal proportions. The S-​[+​]-​Ketamine 
enantiomer has four times the affinity for the NMDA receptor com­
pared to the R-​[–​]-​Ketamine enantiomer. However, the R-​[–​]-​Ketamine 
enantiomer has greater action on bronchial smooth muscle relaxation by 
reducing acetylcholine-​mediation smooth muscle contraction. Ketamine 
increases salivary secretions and therefore an antisialogogue medication 
is usually used concomitantly.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ketamine.
3.  FTTTT
Clonidine has no effect on cardiac contractility and maintains cardiac 
output. The effects of clonidine are mainly due to the alpha-​2 agonist 
actions, reducing noradrenaline release from sympathetic nerve ter­
minals resulting in lower sympathetic tone and reduced blood pressure. 
However, initially clonidine causes a hypertensive response secondary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
69
to the activation of vascular alpha-​ receptors. In parallel, vagal tone 
is also increased. Chronic low-​dose clonidine is indicated in migraine 
prophylaxis; its mechanism of action being the reduction in responsive­
ness to vasoactive and sympathetic stimulation, resulting in reduced vas­
cular spasm. However, its use has been superseded by other forms of 
migraine prophylaxis and is no longer commonly used. Total discontinu­
ation of clonidine risks potentially life-​threatening rebound hypertension 
and tachycardia.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Clonidine.
4.  TTTFF
Paracetamol is polymodal in its mechanisms of action. As well as 
the COX-​ and COX-​2 isoenzyme inhibition, serotonergic, and 
endocannabinoid antagonism, paracetamol also inhibits peripheral 
bradykinin-​sensitive chemoreceptors. This results in reduced primary 
afferent nociceptive impulse generation. Paracetamol is hepatically 
metabolized to glucuronide (60–​80%), sulphate (20–​30%), and 0% 
by CYP2E enzymes to a highly hepatotoxic intermediate metabolite 
N-​acetyl-​p-​benzo-​quinoneimine (NAPQI). NAPQI is then conju­
gated with glutathione, rendering it inactive. –​5% of paracetamol 
is excreted unchanged in the urine. Paracetamol is removed by 
haemodialysis.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Paracetamol.
5.  TTFTT
Diclofenac is a non-​specific cyclo-​oxygenase inhibitor. It is hepatically 
metabolized. Approximately 65% is excreted renally and 35% is excreted 
in bile.
Ibuprofen is also a non-​specific COX inhibitor thus stopping the conver­
sion of arachidonic acid to endoperoxidases and preventing the forma­
tion of thromboxanes, prostaglandins, and prostacyclin. Thromboxanes 
are critical in clotting due to local platelet activation and platelet 
aggregation.
Ibuprofen can trigger premature closure of the otherwise patent ductus 
arteriosus if administered during the third trimester of pregnancy.
Reduced production of the bronchodilator PGE2 results in bronchoconstriction 
due to unopposed PGD2 and PGF2α.
Further reading
Bennett A. The importance of COX-​2 inhibition for aspirin induced 
asthma. Thorax, 2000;55(suppl 2):S54–​S56.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 Analgesics: non-opioids
70
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Diclofenac, Ibuprofen, Ketorolac.
6.  TTTFF
Tramadol has antagonistic effects at mu-​, kappa-​, and delta-​opioid re­
ceptors. It has a higher relative affinity for mu receptors. Other anal­
gesic mechanisms of action include enhanced serotonin release and 
reduced noradrenaline reuptake. This increases the effectiveness of the 
descending pain pathways resulting in greater inhibition of ascending pain 
signals. Naloxone only reverses approximately 30% of the analgesia pro­
vided by tramadol. This is likely due to the multimodal analgesic activity 
of tramadol.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Tramadol.
7.  TFTFT
Gabapentin, along with pregabalin, are analgesics used in a range of 
neuropathic pain conditions including painful diabetic neuropathy and 
post-​herpetic neuralgia. Although structurally similar to the inhibi­
tory neurotransmitter molecule GABA, the mechanism of action of 
gabapentin is one of antagonism of the alpha-​2-​delta subunit of the 
neuronal voltage-​gated calcium channels.
Gabapentin stimulates glutamate decarboxylase resulting in greater levels 
of GABA conversion from glutamate. Higher levels of GABA result in 
reduced neuronal excitability because the neuronal threshold potential is 
not reached, reducing action potential propagation. Gabapentin has an 
oral bioavailability of 60%.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Gabapentin.
Single Best Answers
.  C
Ketamine is a non-​competitive NMDA antagonist. Commonly associated 
side effects include increased saliva, transient rash (5%), postoperative 
nausea, and vomiting. Cardiovascular effects include tachycardia and 
hypertension due to increased sympathetic tone. Emergence delirium 
and hallucinations are also well-​recognized side effects. Amitriptyline (a 
tricyclic antidepressant), duloxetine (a selective serotonin and noradren­
aline reuptake inhibitor—​‘SNRI’), and pregabalin (a ‘gabapentinoid’) are 
all associated with a dry mouth in their side effect profiles. In addition to 
its uses in severe asthma, cardiac arrhythmias, pre-​eclampsia/​eclampsia, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
71
and electrolyte correction/​nutrition, etc., magnesium has also been used 
as an analgesic. Side effects other than mild gastrointestinal upset are 
rare unless overdose or toxicity results.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Clonidine.
2.  B
Although respiratory acidosis might be thought to reduce the risk of 
central nervous system toxicity with lidocaine (due to acidosis redu­
cing unionized fraction of lidocaine) it has actually been shown that 
hypercarbia reduces lidocaine binding to plasma proteins and thereby 
increases the free fraction of the drug. Conversely, hypocarbia increases 
protein binding.
Therapeutic plasma levels are quoted as 2.5–​3.5μg/​ml and central ner­
vous system toxicity can occur at 5μg/​ml hence lidocaine has a narrow 
therapeutic index. Locally determined dosing protocols vary but doses 
should be appropriately reduced in patients with heart failure, severe 
liver disease, low plasma proteins and any situation which results in de­
creased hepatic blood flow (e.g. drugs, increasing age). Lidocaine has a 
high hepatic extraction ratio and has two active metabolites that have 
been associated with toxicity (monoethylglycyxylidide [MGEX] and 
glycylxylidide [GX]). Dosing should be based on adjusted body weight =​ 
ideal body weight +​ 0.4 (actual body weight –​ ideal body weight).
Lidocaine is an amide local anaesthetic that also has benefit as a sys­
temic analgesic. It has been used by infusion to help manage chronic 
neuropathic pain and also in the context of acute postoperative pain 
as an antihyperalgesic agent. The strength of evidence of outcomes in 
acute pain literature is limited by small studies and much heterogeneity. 
Its mechanism of action as a systemic analgesic is thought to involve a 
reduction in the neo-​proliferation of sodium channels, reduced inflam­
matory markers, reduced central sensitization, and decreased NMDA 
post-​synaptic signalling.
Further reading
Budiansky AS, Margarson MP, Eipe N. Acute pain management in morbid 
obesity—​an evidence-​based clinical update. Surg Obesity & Rel Dis, 
207;3(3):523–​532.
Eipe N, Gupta S, Penning J. Intravenous lidocaine for acute pain: an 
evidence-​based clinical update. BJA Education, 206;6(9):292–​298.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Lidocaine.
3.  E
Phenothiazines (e.g. prochlorperazine) displace tricyclics from their 
plasma protein binding sites, thus increasing their activity. In high doses, 
amitriptyline can cause dysrhythmias (prolongs AV node conduction), 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 Analgesics: non-opioids
72
profound hypotension, and tachycardia. Adrenaline in this circumstance 
could induce potentially fatal ventricular arrhythmias and in the context 
of amitriptyline should generally be avoided due to the risk of exagger­
ated hypertension (due to the noradrenaline reuptake inhibition from 
the amitriptyline).
However, with phenothiazines also involved the interaction is more 
complex; in addition to the above displacement effects, phenothiazines 
will block alpha-​ adrenoceptors that can lead to ‘reversed adrenaline 
response’. Due to the blocked alpha-​ receptors, adrenaline’s action on 
beta-​2 receptors is relatively unopposed—​this triggers vasodilatation in 
skeletal muscle arterioles further lowering blood pressure and leading 
to a refractory picture. Procyclidine blocks central cholinergic receptors 
and is used to treat extra-​pyramidal symptoms, oculogyric crises, and 
Parkinson’s disease.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Amitriptyline, Prochlorperazine.
4.  B
Gabapentin is structurally related to GABA but doesn’t interact with the 
GABA receptor—​instead, it is the alpha-​2-​delta subunit of voltage-​gated 
calcium channels which is the site of action. Pregabalin also has this site 
of action, but its bioavailability exceeds 90% and is independent of the 
administered dose. Weight gain has been associated with gabapentin, 
pregabalin, and flunarizine.
Flunarizine is a selective calcium channel blocker which has been used 
in the treatment of migraine and vertigo. Its bioavailability is >80%. 
Nimodipine is most frequently associated with the treatment of cere­
bral vasospasm and migraine. It has low bioavailability (<30%) and is 
highly protein bound. Some studies have indicated that while it does 
not have analgesic action by itself, it may potentiate an enhanced anal­
gesic effect when combined with morphine or fentanyl. Ziconotide 
selectively blocks N-​type calcium channel on A-​delta and C fibres in the 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. It has been intrathecally administered 
for refractory chronic pain and has a potency 000 times greater than 
morphine.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Gabapentin, Nimodipine, Pregabalin.
5.  A
Capsaicin (a chilli pepper extract) is an exogenous agonist at the TRPV 
vanilloid receptor which is selectively expressed on nociceptive fibres. 
This receptor is activated by extreme acidosis (pH <6) and heat 
(>43ºC) but in combination, lower levels of stimuli can achieve activa­
tion. Endogenous agonists have also been determined including some 
 
 
 
 
Answers
73
leukotrienes and fatty acids. Activation of the receptor triggers the per­
ception of burn, sting, or itch by the brain. Exposure to capsaicin results 
in a persistent, overwhelming biological signal which can defunctionalize 
nociceptive cell mitochondria, leads to loss of epidermal nerve fibres, 
and give long-​lasting pain relief. Compliance with application can be im­
proved by pretreatment with local anaesthetic creams.
Current UK indications for capsaicin are osteoarthritis, post-​herpetic 
neuralgia, painful diabetic neuropathy (under expert supervision), and 
peripheral neuropathic pain. This is due to its topical application and 
thus very low systemic absorption which reduces the risk of systemic 
side effects. Although the safety of capsaicin in pregnancy has not been 
formally established, the consensus is that it is unlikely to cause adverse 
effects. It should not be used on broken skin.
No adjustments are required for renal or hepatic impairment. Some 
studies have highlighted asthma as a relative contraindication to capsa­
icin use due to a hypothesized increase in endovallinoids and thus TRV 
receptors in the airways of asthmatics, which may lead to symptom 
exacerbation.
Further reading
Anand P, Bley K. Topical capsaicin for pain management: therapeutic 
potential and mechanisms of action of the new high-​concentration 
capsaicin 8% patch. Br J Anaesth, 20;07(4):490–​502.
6.  D
Nefopam is a centrally acting non-​opioid analgesic. It is a cyclic ana­
logue of diphenhydramine and was initially developed as a muscle 
relaxant and antidepressant drug. The mechanism of action, although 
not fully elucidated, involves reuptake inhibition of serotonin, nor­
adrenaline, and dopamine. It is also thought to interact with glutamate 
receptors. Nefopam is a racemic mixture; (+​) nefopam is consider­
ably more antinociceptive than (–​) nefopam. First-​pass metabolism 
is extensive. Metabolism is hepatic, with only 5% being excreted 
unchanged in urine. Respiratory depression is not a feature. Sweating 
is a relatively commonly reported side effect, along with nausea and 
drowsiness. Pharmacologically nefopam has been suggested to be 
ten times more potent than aspirin and equianalgesic to diclofenac. 
Some studies have reported 20 mg nefopam to be equipotent to 2 
mg morphine and its use in the management of post-​surgical pain 
has been estimated to reduce morphine consumption by approxi­
mately 30%.
Further reading
Evans MS, Lysakowski C, Tramèr MR. Nefopam for the prevention of 
postoperative pain: quantitative systematic review. BJA: Br J Anaesth, 
2008;0(5):60–​67.
Kim KH, Abdi S. Rediscovery of nefopam for the treatment of neuro­
pathic pain. Korean J Pain, 204;27(2):03–​.
 
 
 
Chapter 6 Analgesics: non-opioids
74
7.  E
Clonidine is an alpha agonist. It has actions on both α and α2 receptors 
with a 200: affinity for α2. α2 actions result in the stimulation of pre­
synaptic receptors thus decreasing noradrenaline release from synaptic 
terminals. This reduces sympathetic tone and thereby increases vagal 
tone. Cardiac contractility is unaffected but systematic and coronary 
vascular resistance falls. It is common to see a transient increase in blood 
pressure on initial administration due to α stimulation, but clinically this 
is followed by a sustained decrease in blood pressure. Heart rate typic­
ally reduces slightly with clonidine use. An analgesic mechanism involves 
α2 adrenoceptor agonism both centrally at a spinal and supraspinal level, 
leading to descending modulation, dorsal horn inhibition of nociceptive 
neurons, and release of substance P.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Clonidine.
 
 
75
Chapter 7
Antimicrobial agents
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Amphotericin
A	 Is a mixture of two macrolides produced by Streptomyces nodosus
B	 Is only active against Candida albicans
C	 Binds to ribosomes thereby inhibiting fungal protein synthesis
D	 Use is associated with renal impairment
E	 Is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
2.	
 
Oseltamivir
A	 Is active against the varicella-​zoster virus
B	 Inhibits influenza A neuraminidase but not influenza B
C	 When administered orally, at least 75% of the dose reaches the 
systemic circulation as oseltamivir
D	 Exhibits high protein binding
E	 Resistance requires previous exposure to the drug
3.	
 
Fluoroquinolones
A	 Are derived from nalidixic acid
B	 Inhibits bacterial ribosomal proteins
C	 Are associated with tendon rupture
D	 May be used to treat Yersinia pestis infection
E	 May be used for post-​exposure prophylaxis (PEP) against potential 
bioterrorism organisms
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 Antimicrobial agents
76
4.	
 
Caspofungin
A	 Is derived from phencyclidine
B	 Has high oral bioavailability
C	 Inhibits mammalian beta (,3)-​D-​glucan
D	 Is highly protein bound
E	 Inhibits cytochrome P450
5.	
 
Aciclovir
A	 Is active against Sars-​CoV-​2
B	 Inhibits mammalian deoxyribonucleic acid polymerase
C	 Is activated by viral-​coded thymidine kinase
D	 Is excreted by passive tubular filtration into the urine mostly 
unchanged
E	 Dosing should be reduced in renal impairment
6.	
 
Carbapenems
A	 Bind to penicillin-​binding proteins within the bacterial cytoplasm
B	 Are available as oral preparations
C	 Exhibit low plasma protein binding
D	 Are active against anaerobic bacteria
E	 May be associated with seizure activity
7.	
 
Aminoglycosides
A	 Are not available in tablet form
B	 Are active against anaerobic bacteria
C	 Reversibly bind to specific bacterial ribosomal proteins (30S subunit)
D	 Reduce the action of non-​depolarizing muscle relaxants
E	 Can be used safely in patients with myasthenia gravis
 
 
 
 
Questions
77
Single Best Answers
.	
A 36-​year-​old woman is admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) 
for vasoactive support following a diagnosis of likely septic shock. 
She is currently undergoing chemotherapy for carcinoma of the breast. 
Pertinent findings on clinical examination include a core temperature of 
38.9ºC and occasional rigors. Her chest is clear and abdominal examin­
ation is unremarkable. Cardiovascular examination reveals a tachycardia 
of 36 bpm and a non-​invasive blood pressure of 76/​57. An indwelling 
peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line, with some erythema 
at the insertion site, and peripheral cannula are noted. She also has an 
area on her right thigh, which is hot, erythematous, and painful to touch. 
A full blood count (FBC) reveals a neutrophil count of 0.3 × 09 per litre. 
As part of her cancer treatment regimen, she is receiving G-​CSF injec­
tions and ciprofloxacin. Blood cultures have been taken from the PICC 
line and also peripherally.
The next most appropriate course of action is:
A	 Administration of an additional dose of G-​CSF together with an 
intravenous dose of ciprofloxacin (identical to the oral dose already 
taken by the patient)
B	 Administration of 2 g flucloxacillin intravenously, as an opportunistic 
skin commensal organism is the most likely septic focus of infection
C	 An intravenous dose of piperacillin with tazobactam with or without 
an aminoglycoside should be administered
D	 An intravenous dose of piperacillin with tazobactam with or 
without an aminoglycoside should be administered together with an 
intravenous dose of G-​CSF
E	 Removal of the PICC line and administration of an empiric 
glycopeptide such as teicoplanin, as line sepsis is the most likely 
septic focus of infection
 
 
Chapter 7 Antimicrobial agents
78
2.	
You are asked to review a previously fit and well 65-​year-​old 
man who is acutely unwell in the emergency department. A diag­
nosis of a lower respiratory tract infection has been made. Pertinent 
findings on clinical examination include a respiratory rate of 35 breaths 
per minute and a non-​invasive blood pressure of 84/​62. He is receiving 
oxygen via a non-​rebreathe mask. A semi-​recumbent anterior-​posterior 
(AP) chest X-​ray reveals some loss of the right heart border. Blood tests 
have been taken including blood cultures.
Regarding this patient’s antimicrobial therapy, the next most appropriate 
course of action is:
A	 Administration of a macrolide antibiotic for five days
B	 Administration of a macrolide antibiotic for seven days
C	 Administration of a macrolide and a beta-​lactamase stable penicillin-​
based antibiotic for at least seven days
D	 Administration of a macrolide and penicillin-​based antibiotic for 
five days
E	 Administration of a macrolide and penicillin-​based antibiotic for 
seven to ten days
3.	
A 4-​year-​old woman is admitted to ICU via the cardiac catheter 
lab having undergone an emergency angiogram for a suspected 
acute ST-​segment elevation myocardial infarction. No coronary inter­
vention has been performed. She has a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 
of 5/​5 but has been transferred to ICU as she is requiring low-​dose 
vasoactive support. A presumptive diagnosis of viral myocarditis has 
been made.
Regarding this patient’s antiviral therapy, the next most appropriate 
course of action is:
A	 Administration of entecavir with best supportive care
B	 Administration of foscarnet with best supportive care
C	 Administration of oseltamivir with best supportive care
D	 Administration of ribavirin with best supportive care
E	 Best supportive care but no antiviral agent
 
 
Questions
79
4.	
A 62-​year-​old female patient is on your ICU. She was admitted 
several days ago as being non-​specifically unwell, reported weight 
loss, and electrolyte derangements were detected on blood tests pre­
cipitating ICU admission for central venous access correction. A chest X-​
ray revealed multiple soft tissue densities throughout both lung fields. On 
further questioning, she reports recently working in sub-​Saharan Africa 
at a school in a rural area and was given ‘anti-​TB medication’ to protect 
her. She has no visible Bacillus Calmette–​Guérin (BCG) scar. A diagnosis 
of TB has been made with resistance to isoniazid.
The next most appropriate course of action is:
A	 Start rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for two months 
followed by rifampicin and ethambutol for seven months
B	 Start rifampicin, pyridoxine, and ethambutol for two months 
followed by rifampicin and pyridoxine for seven months
C	 Start rifampicin, pyridoxine, and pyrazinamide for two months 
followed by rifampicin and pyridoxine for four months
D	 Start rifampicin, pyridoxine, and pyrazinamide for four months 
followed by rifampicin and pyridoxine for four months
E	 Start rifampicin, pyridoxine, and pyrazinamide for six months 
followed by rifampicin and pyridoxine for four months
 
Chapter 7 Antimicrobial agents
80
5.	
A 72-​year-​old male patient has been in ICU for five days. He is 
sedated and ventilated on a FiO2 of 0.75 and is receiving vaso­
active support, haemodiafiltration, and total parenteral nutrition (TPN). 
He has a diagnosis of multiorgan failure secondary to acute severe gall­
stone pancreatitis. Twelve hours earlier he had undergone a laparotomy 
to relieve abdominal compartment syndrome and has a laparostomy. He 
has not had any pancreatic tissue resected but intra-​abdominal fluid was 
sent for culture. On returning from theatre, his oxygen requirements 
had increased from 0.45 to 0.75. You have been asked to review the 
patient as the nursing staff are concerned that his latest blood tests, 
taken 4 hours ago, show an increased white blood count (WBC) of 
8 (from 4) and a C-​reactive protein (CRP) of 285 (from 26). He 
also has a new low-​grade pyrexia of 37.9ºC and they are concerned re­
garding his increased oxygen requirement. He is not on any antimicrobial 
agents but did receive prophylactic antibiotics intravenously consisting of 
cefuroxime .5 g and metronidazole 500 mg. During his time in theatre, 
his TPN line was disconnected.
The next most appropriate course of action is:
A	 Commence antibiotics for a ventilator-​associated pneumonia
B	 Continue the prophylactic antibiotics already given intraoperatively 
(cefuroxime and metronidazole) until the results of microbiological 
culture of peritoneal fluid are known
C	 Start intravenous meropenem  g TDS as this patient is likely to 
have infected pancreatic necrosis
D	 Take blood cultures and commence vancomycin for suspected TPN 
line sepsis
E	 Take cultures for a full septic screen
6.	
A previously well five-​month-​old boy has been transferred to ICU 
from the paediatric ward following admission with a reduced level 
of consciousness. Earlier he had been refusing to feed and had loose 
bowel motions. At times his body feels stiff. He does not have a rash. A 
clinical diagnosis of possible bacterial meningitis has been made. Blood 
results are still awaited and a lumbar puncture has not yet been per­
formed. No radiological imaging has been undertaken.
The next most appropriate course of action is:
A	 Administer IV amoxicillin
B	 Administer IV cefotaxime and ampicillin
C	 Administer IV ceftriaxone
D	 Administer IV ceftriaxone and vancomycin
E	 Perform a lumbar puncture and then give IV ceftriaxone
 
 
Questions
81
7.	
An 83-​year-​old man is in ICU recovering from an emergency lapar­
otomy and subtotal colectomy performed for toxic megacolon 
secondary to C. difficile colitis. He had recently received antibiotic 
therapy.
Which of the following classes of antimicrobial agents is least likely to 
have caused his C. difficile colitis:
A	 Cephalosporins
B	 Lincosamides
C	 Penicillins
D	 Quinolones
E	 Tetracyclines
 
Chapter 7 Antimicrobial agents
82
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TFFTF
Amphotericin is a mixture of two polyene macrolides (Amphotericin A 
and B) produced by Streptomyces nodosus. It is a fungistatic antibiotic which 
is active against a wide range of yeasts and yeast-​like fungi including, but 
not solely limited to Candida albicans. The drug binds to cell membrane 
sterols, leading to altered membrane permeability and ultimately leakage 
of intracellular components. Ribosomal binding and subsequent protein 
inhibitions are a feature of tetracycline antibacterial agents. Deterioration 
of renal function may occur in up to 80% of patients who receive the 
drug. Amphotericin is poorly absorbed from the GI tract, which is why it 
may be used for selective oral decontamination of the gut.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Amphotericin.
2.  FFFFF
Oseltamivir is a synthetic ethyl ester which is used in the treatment of 
influenza virus infections. It is an antiviral agent, which in its active form 
(oseltamivir carboxylate) selectively inhibits influenza A and B neuramin­
idase. At least 75% of an administered oral dose reaches the systemic 
circulation, but this is as oseltamivir carboxylate. Oseltamivir is a pro-​drug 
and requires ester hydrolysis to convert it to its active form. Only 3% of 
the drug is protein bound in the plasma. Resistance mutations are usually 
viral subtype-​specific and may be naturally occurring (i.e. no prior drug 
exposure is required).
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oseltamivir.
3.  TFTTT
Fluorinated quinolones are derived from nalidixic acid. The mode of ac­
tion of these drugs is to inhibit bacterial DNA gyrase, topoisomerase IV, 
and type II topoisomerases, thereby inhibiting bacterial DNA replication. 
Ciprofloxacin (one of several fluoroquinolones) can be used as a single 
agent against Yersinia pestis (plague) and may also be used for PEP against 
a number of bacterial bioterrorism organisms. Tendon rupture (Achilles) 
has been reported, a risk factor is co-​administration of corticosteroids. 
Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and neuropsychiatric disturbances 
have also been associated side effects of these drugs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
83
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Fluoroquinolones.
4.  FFFTF
Caspofungin is a semi-​synthetic lipopeptide (echinocandin) compound 
synthesized from a fermentation product of Glarea lozoyensis. It has 
poor oral bioavailability. The drug inhibits fungal beta (,3)-​D-​glucan. 
Beta (,3)-​D-​glucan is not present in mammalian cells. It is highly protein 
bound (97% bound to albumin) but is not an inhibitor of cytochrome 
P450. It achieves fungicidal activity with lysis and death of hyphal apical 
tips and branch points where cell growth and division occur. It may be 
useful in treating isolates with acquired or intrinsic resistance to other 
agents (e.g. fluconazole, amphotericin B).
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Caspofungin.
5.  FFTFT
Aciclovir is an antiviral agent active against herpes simplex (I and II) and 
varicella-​zoster virus. It is activated within the viral cell via phosphor­
ylation by a virus-​encoded thymidine kinase and thus has low toxicity 
for normal cells. Aciclovir triphosphate inhibits viral deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA) polymerase, which prevents further elongation of the viral 
DNA chain. Sars-​CoV-​2 is a ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus. The drug is 
eliminated by active tubular secretion in the urine (45–​80% unchanged). 
Precipitation of the drug can occur in renal tubules if administered 
too rapidly or if the patient is poorly hydrated. Doses should be re­
duced in the context of renal impairment, and it is 60% removed by 
haemodialysis.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aciclovir.
6.  FFFTT
Carbapenems are beta-​lactam derivatives and bind to penicillin-​binding 
proteins on the bacterial cytoplasmic cell membrane, thereby blocking 
peptidoglycan synthesis and thus cell wall formation. Imipenem exhibits 
20% plasma protein binding, meropenem exhibits 2% binding, and 
85–​95% for ertapenem. These drugs are broad-​spectrum antibiotics, 
including activity against anaerobic bacteria. Seizure activity may occur 
by one of two mechanisms. Firstly, co-​administration of imipenem and 
ganciclovir may lead to focal seizures. Carbapenems may also reduce 
sodium valproate levels, leading to seizure activity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 Antimicrobial agents
84
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Carbapenems.
7.  FFFFF
Neomycin, one of several aminoglycosides, is available in tablet form 
as a bowel sterilizing agent and to prevent hepatic coma. It is also avail­
able as a topical cream (bacterial skin infection and otitis externa) and 
an oral solution. Aminoglycoside drugs are active against Gram-​positive 
and Gram-​negative bacteria but not anaerobic organisms. They bind irre­
versibly to the bacterial 30S subunit of ribosomal proteins. They prolong 
the action of non-​depolarizing muscle relaxants by inhibiting presynaptic 
acetylcholine release and stabilizing the post-​synaptic membrane at the 
neuromuscular junction. These agents should be used with caution in 
patients with myasthenia gravis due to their effects on neuromuscular 
transmission, which could precipitate a myasthenic crisis.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aminoglycosides.
Single Best Answers
.  C
This patient has neutropenic sepsis as evidenced by a neutrophil count 
of less than 0.5 × 09 per litre together with a temperature of greater 
than 38°C. Suspected neutropenic sepsis should be considered an acute 
medical emergency and an immediate clinical assessment should be per­
formed including a history and examination, together with blood tests 
which should include (but not limited to) a full blood count, C-​reactive 
protein, lactate, and blood culture, including culture from any central 
venous access device if feasible (in this case, blood culture from the PICC 
line). While line infection might be the cause of this patient’s infection, 
at this stage it is by no means certain and removal of the line would 
be premature without definitive evidence of infection. An opportunistic 
skin commensal organism may indeed be responsible for this infection 
(given the clinical signs of a skin infection on examination). However, 
at this stage of treatment it is too early to offer a limited antibacterial 
agent. Additional G-​CSF doses have no part in the immediate manage­
ment of neutropenic sepsis even if the patient is already receiving it. 
In addition, superadded doses of prophylactic antibiotics are not indi­
cated in this scenario. NICE guidance states that all patients with sus­
pected neutropenic sepsis should be offered beta-​lactam monotherapy 
with piperacillin and tazobactam as initial empiric antibiotic therapy with 
or without an aminoglycoside unless there are patient-​specific or local 
microbiological indications. Answer C is therefore the single best answer.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
85
Further reading
NICE. Neutropenic Sepsis: Prevention and Management in People with 
Cancer, September 202. Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​
guida​nce/​cg5
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aminoglycosides, Piperacillin.
2.  E
This patient has high-​severity community-​acquired pneumonia based 
on CURB-​65 scoring and as such has more than a 5% mortality risk. 
He should be treated with dual antibiotics comprised of a macrolide 
and in severe cases a beta-​lactamase stable beta-​lactam for seven to 
ten days, together with consideration for intensive care assessment and 
management.
Further reading
NICE. Pneumonia in Adults: Diagnosis and Management, December 
204. Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guida​nce/​cg9/​chap​
ter/​reco​mmen​dati​ons#hospi​tal-​acqui​red-​pneumo​nia
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Macrolides, Penicillin.
3.  E
Despite a viral aetiology being a possible precipitant for viral myocar­
ditis, there is no evidence to support that administration of any antiviral 
agent in the acute setting affects outcome. The management of these 
patients is based on the best supportive care. There may be a role for 
individuals who have a chronic bacterial load several months after their 
initial presentation.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oseltamivir.
4.  A
This lady is at risk of multidrug-​resistant TB given her history of working 
in areas with a prevalence of multidrug-​resistant TB, likely exposure to 
cases of known multidrug-​resistant TB and exposure to subtherapeutic 
doses of TB drug treatment. Absence of a BCG scar increases the risk 
of TB acquisition generally. Resistance to a single anti-​TB agent requires 
modification of anti-​TB therapy. In this case, answer A is the correct 
response.
Further reading
NICE. Tuberculosis, May 206. Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​
guida​nce/​ng33/​chap​ter/​reco​mmen​dati​ons#strate​gic-​oversi​ght-​and-​
commis​sion​ing-​of-​tb-​pre​vent​ion-​and-​cont​rol-​act​ivit​ies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 Antimicrobial agents
86
5.  E
Around 80% of deaths in patients with severe acute pancreatitis are re­
lated to infectious complications. There is no evidence for prophylactic 
antibiotics. While IV-​line sepsis is a possibility, this should be confirmed 
before starting antibiotics. All ventilated patients are at risk of ventilator-​
associated pneumonia (VAP). But it is not unusual for an unwell ICU 
patient to have increased oxygen requirements following a laparotomy. 
Clear evidence of a VAP would then indicate appropriate antimicro­
bial therapy. Infected pancreatic necrosis should be considered in pa­
tients with pancreatic or extrapancreatic necrosis who deteriorate or 
fail to improve after seven to ten days, in which meropenem should be 
considered. A full septic screen and awaiting culture results is the best 
option.
Further reading
NICE. Pancreatitis, September 208. Available at: https://​www.nice.
org.uk/​guida​nce/​ng04/​chap​ter/​Reco​mmen​dati​ons#acute-​pancr​
eati​tis
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cephalosporins, Metronidazole.
6.  C
A lumbar puncture would be a high-​risk procedure in a patient with a re­
duced level of consciousness (a possible sign of raised intracranial pres­
sure). In addition, a lumbar puncture should not delay the administration 
of IV antibiotics. IV ceftriaxone with vancomycin is indicated in children 
and young people who have suspected bacterial meningitis and have had 
prolonged or multiple exposures to antibiotics. IV cefotaxime and ampi­
cillin are used in children less than three months of age (due to the risk 
of Gram-​negative bacilli infection or Listeria monocytogenes infection). IV 
amoxicillin is used in confirmed cases of L monocytogenes meningitis. IV 
ceftriaxone should be administered without delay in children aged three 
months or older with suspected bacterial meningitis.
Further reading
NICE. Meningitis (Bacterial) and Meningococcal Septicaemia in Under 
6s: Recognition, Diagnosis and Management, February 205. 
Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guida​nce/​CG02/​chap​ter/​
-​Guida​nce#man​agem​ent-​in-​second​ary-​care
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cephalosporins, Penicillin.
7.  E
C. difficile infection is associated with the use of broad-​spectrum anti­
biotics. A NICE (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence) 
evidence summary demonstrated that tetracycline antibiotics had no sig­
nificant association with C. difficile infection. Penicillins had an odds ratio 
of 2.7 to 3.25 with C. difficile infection. Quinolones had an odds ratio of 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
87
.66 to 5.65. Clindamycin (which is a lincosamide antibiotic) had an odds 
ratio of 2.86 to 20.43. Cephalosporins had an odds ratio of .97 to 4.47.
Further reading
NICE. Clostridium Difficile Infection: Risk with Broad-​Spectrum 
Antibiotics, March 205. Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​adv​
ice/​esm​pb/​chap​ter/​Key-​poi​nts-​from-​the-​evide​nce
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cephalosporins, Fluoroquinolones, 
Penicillin.
 
89
Chapter 8
Intravenous fluids and 
blood products
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Body fluid compartments:
A	 Due to its highly polar nature, water will distribute between all 
compartments
B	 Interstitial fluid has a similar electrolyte composition to plasma
C	 Intracellular fluid has a high sodium concentration and low potassium 
concentration
D	 Total body water makes up approximately 60% of total body weight
E	 Water is equally distributed between intracellular and intravascular 
compartments
2.	
 
Regarding human albumin solution (HAS)
A	 Albumin is the largest component of colloid oncotic pressure 
in blood
B	 Is a clear, straw-​coloured fluid
C	 Is contra-​indicated in immunocompromised recipients
D	 May prolong the action of warfarin
E	 The incidence of anaphylaxis is less compared to synthetic colloids
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8  Intravenous fluids and blood products
90
3.	
 
Regarding platelets
A	 All requested platelets will routinely be leucodepleted
B	 Group ABO-​matched platelets are necessary for transfusion
C	 Have a shelf life of up to two months
D	 One adult dose of platelets may be from several donors
E	 Platelet components must not be placed in a refrigerator
4.	
 
Regarding fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
A	 Cryoprecipitate is formed from FFP
B	 FFP is first-​line treatment for the reversal of warfarin
C	 Freezing is necessary to prevent bacterial growth
D	 It is not necessary to be group ABO specific for transfusion
E	 Must all be sourced from outside of the UK
5.	
 
Red blood cells
A	 A unit contains no clotting factors
B	 Have a shelf life of five days
C	 Leucodepletion is to reduce cytomegalovirus (CMV) risk
D	 Must be stored between –​3°C
E	 Must not be warmed
6.	
 
Regarding sodium chloride
A	 0.9% sodium chloride contains 54 milli-​osmoles per litre
B	 0.9% sodium chloride is isotonic with extracellular fluid
C	 Can cause a hyperchloraemic metabolic alkalosis
D	 Is completely absorbed when administered orally
E	 Normal saline contains buffering salts
 
 
 
 
Questions
91
7.	
 
Regarding Hartmann’s solution
A	 Infusions of Hartmann’s solution will not contribute to the 
development of acidosis
B	 Lactate is metabolized in all body cells
C	 Lactate is oxidized to glycogen and bicarbonate
D	 Lactate metabolism is increased by hypoxia
E	 Should not be administered with blood products
Single Best Answers
.	
You have been called to the emergency department (ED) by the 
paediatric registrar. They have asked for assistance regarding the 
immediate treatment of a 2-​week-​old baby who has been brought into 
ED following diarrhoea and vomiting at home. You are shown two 
different intravenous (IV) fluids: 5% glucose and 0.9% normal saline. 
Comparing these two IV fluids, which of the following is most likely to 
be correct?
A	 5% glucose is the resuscitation fluid of choice in neonates
B	 Both IV agents are effective volume expanders
C	 Both IV agents have equal osmolarity
D	 Dextrose is an isomer of glucose that cannot be metabolized
E	 The majority of glucose will move intracellularly
2.	
You are called urgently to the obstetric unit to assist with the 
management of a massive obstetric haemorrhage. As part of 
your immediate fluid resuscitation strategy, you are handed a  L bag of 
IV dextran. Considering the use of IV dextran, which of the following 
is most likely to be correct in the clinical context of massive obstetric 
haemorrhage?
A	 Can carry a blood-​borne infection risk
B	 Dextrans are formed via the binding of two dextrose molecules
C	 Dextrans are recognized precipitants in thromboembolism
D	 Dextrans are unable to be renally excreted
E	 Do not interfere with cross-​matching
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8  Intravenous fluids and blood products
92
3.	
You are assisting in the anaesthetic of a polytrauma patient who 
has sustained intra-thoracic, intra-​abdominal, and pelvic blunt 
force trauma. A preoperative CT scan demonstrates the following 
injuries: right-​sided pulmonary contusion with a flail segment; hepatic 
lacerations with associated haematoma formation; splenic rupture; 
free intra-​abdominal fluid; and an undisplaced fracture of the right acet­
abulum. Regarding the use of red blood cell (RBC) transfusion in this 
patient, which of the following is most likely to be correct?
A	 During RBC storage there is no active cell metabolism
B	 Haematocrit of packed RBCs transfused is equivocal to whole blood 
haematocrit
C	 Large RBC transfusions can lead to hypercalcaemia
D	 The main degradation product of haemoglobin from RBC 
transfusion is bilirubin
E	 The main role of the RBC additive citrate is as a buffer
4.	
You have been asked to review a patient with longstanding chronic 
kidney disease. They have been admitted following an acute deteri­
oration in their renal function secondary to diarrhoea and vomiting. 
Blood test results show an acute kidney injury 3 and severe metabolic 
acidosis. Treatments instigated so far include volume resuscitation, inser­
tion of a urinary catheter, and medical treatment of hyperkalaemia. The 
patient is due to be transferred to the regional haemodialysis unit. Prior 
to patient transfer, the renal team have asked for the patient to receive 
sodium bicarbonate. Regarding the use of sodium bicarbonate, which of 
the following is most likely to be correct?
A	 .26% solution is hypertonic compared with plasma
B	 Can cause skin necrosis
C	 Can enhance the secretion of weak bases
D	 Is not absorbed through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
E	 Will increase the potency of local anaesthetics
 
 
Questions
93
5.	
You have been called urgently to the endoscopy suite, where a 
patient is undergoing an oesophagoduodenoscopy (OGD) for 
bleeding oesophageal varices. A Sengstaken–​Blakemore tube is being 
prepared to be inserted to gain haemostatic control. Your assistant is 
preparing a rapid infusion system, and a gelatin-​type intravenous fluid is 
the priming agent. Regarding the use of gelatin-​type fluids, which is the 
most appropriate answer?
A	 Due to the high incidence of anaphylaxis some agents are no longer 
commercially available
B	 Exert their effects through influencing capillary hydrostatic pressure
C	 Gelatins are animal collagen derivatives
D	 Have active metabolites
E	 May cause a type  von Willebrand-​like syndrome
6.	
You are on the intensive care unit (ICU) ward round. A number 
of patients have been prescribed different IV fluids/​blood prod­
ucts to be administered during the day. Which of the following is most 
accurate regarding the distribution of the following IV fluids/​blood 
products?
A	 20% HAS is initially distributed into the plasma and later equilibrates 
with the extracellular fluid
B	 Duration of fluid administration has no impact on distribution
C	 Hartmann’s solution is initially distributed into the plasma and later 
equilibrates with the extracellular fluid
D	 Normal saline is initially distributed into the plasma and later 
equilibrates with all fluid compartments
E	 Packed red cells are initially distributed into the plasma and later 
equilibrates with the extracellular fluid.
7.	
You are preparing a teaching session for foundation doctors about 
the use of different IV fluids that they may be required to pre­
scribe. Regarding the following IV fluids, which is the most appropriate 
answer?
A	 5% glucose is isotonic with plasma
B	 0% Glucose should only be administered via a central line
C	 Colloids consist of a base solution of sterile water with added 
synthetic proteins
D	 Hartmann’s contains an equal proportion of calcium, potassium, and 
magnesium
E	 Ringer’s acetate contains an equal proportion of calcium, potassium, 
and magnesium
 
 
 
Chapter 8  Intravenous fluids and blood products
94
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FTFTF
Water carries no charge and will therefore distribute evenly 
between compartments. Interstitial fluid has a similar electrolyte 
composition to plasma with a high sodium and low potassium con­
centration. Intracellular fluid has a low sodium concentration and 
high potassium concentration; potassium is actively transported into 
cells to maintain this gradient. Water is the largest component of 
the human body, averaging 60% of overall body weight. This figure 
will vary slightly according to age and body habitus. The main fluid 
compartments within the body can be defined as intracellular and 
extracellular. Extracellular fluid can be further split into intravascular 
fluid, transcellular fluid, and interstitial fluid. Two-​thirds of body 
water is intracellular and one-​third extracellular. Approximately 80% 
of extracellular fluid is interstitial, 20% intravascular, and a very small 
proportion is transcellular.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Body fluid com­
partments pp. 286–​287.
2.  TTFFT
Albumin comprises the largest component of colloid oncotic pres­
sure in the blood. HAS is a clear, straw-​coloured fluid for infusion con­
taining albumin of different concentrations, which has been pooled from 
the venous plasma of healthy subjects. It is a colloid used for plasma 
volume replacement in haemorrhage, burns, and in the treatment of 
hypoalbuminaemic states. As HAS is prepared from donor blood, there 
is a theoretical risk of blood-​borne infections. It is, however, not contra­
indicated for use in immunocompromised individuals. Acidic drugs, such 
as warfarin, bind to albumin. Reductions in albumin concentration can 
therefore exaggerate the effects of such drugs. HAS, therefore, does not 
prolong the action of warfarin. Allergic reactions occur less frequently 
compared with synthetic colloids.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Human albumin solution.
3.  TFFTT
All platelets have been leucodepleted at source since 999. Group 
ABO-​matched platelets are preferred but not essential for transfusion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
95
However, group O platelets should not be given to group A, B, or AB 
recipients unless they have been tested negative for high titre antibodies 
due to haemolysis risk. Pooled platelets suspended in platelet additive 
solution (PAS) have the plasma extracted and will also reduce the haem­
olysis risk. Platelets can be stored for up to five days between 20–​24°C. 
An adult therapeutic dose (ATD) of platelets is obtained from the centri­
fugation of whole blood from four donations. A platelet-​rich layer forms, 
which is pooled and re-​suspended to create one unit. Alternatively, 
platelets can be obtained by single-​donor apheresis. Platelet components 
must not be frozen or placed in a refrigerator.
Further reading
Provan D, Baglin T, Dokal I, De Vos J. Oxford Handbook of Haematology, 
4th edition. Oxford University Press, 204. Platelet transfusion pp. 
768–​769.
4.  TFFTF
Cryoprecipitate is produced from FFP by slowly thawing it overnight, 
enabling cryoproteins (FVIII, von Willebrand factor (VWF), FXIII, 
fibronectin, and fibrinogen) to precipitate out of solution. Prothrombin 
complex concentrate and not FFP is recommended for the reversal of 
warfarin anticoagulation. FFP is obtained from whole blood donations 
or by apheresis. The reason plasma is rapidly frozen to less than –​25ºC 
is to maintain the activity of labile coagulation factors, rather than bac­
terial growth prevention. ABO-​compatible FFP should be used as the 
first choice but is not mandatory. Group O FFP should only be given to 
group O patients, since it may contain a high titre of anti-​A and anti-​B 
antibodies. Donation units of FFP sourced from outside the UK are only 
indicated for all children born after 996 to reduce the risk of transmis­
sion of vCJD.
Further reading
Provan D, Baglin T, Dokal I, De Vos, J. Oxford Handbook of Haematology, 
4th edition. Oxford University Press, 204. Fresh frozen plasma pp. 
770–​77.
5.  TFTFF
Units of RBCs do not contain any clotting factors. Units in the UK are 
supplied in an ‘optimal additive solution’ which allows the removal of all 
the plasma components and results in a less viscous product. Red blood 
cells have a shelf life of 35 days stored at 4°C. They should be stored 
between 2–​6ºC. All supplied blood in the UK has been leucodepleted 
at source since 999; this provides adequate CMV risk reduction for 
the majority of situations. Specific CMV seronegative blood products 
should be used for intrauterine transfusions and neonates. Red blood 
cell packs may be warmed through appropriate fluid-​warming devices, 
the transfusion should be given within 30 minutes of leaving the blood 
bank fridge.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8  Intravenous fluids and blood products
96
Further reading
Provan D, Baglin T, Dokal I, De Vos J. Oxford Handbook of Haematology, 
4th edition. Oxford University Press, 204. Transfusion of red blood 
cells pp. 764–​766.
6.  FTFTF
Sodium chloride is a clear, colourless fluid available in a range of con­
centrations. 0.9% solution contains 54 mmol of sodium and 54 mmol 
of chloride per litre, its overall osmolality is 308 milli-​osmoles per litre. 
0.9% solution is isotonic with extracellular fluid and distributed uniformly 
throughout this compartment. Due to this high chloride content, it can 
promote hyperchloraemic acidosis, not alkalosis. It is rapidly and entirely 
absorbed when given orally. It contains no buffering salts, preservatives, 
or antimicrobial agents.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Sodium chloride.
7.  FFTFT
Hartmann’s solution is a crystalloid fluid with a similar electrolyte com­
position to plasma. Lactate is added to serve as an alternative source 
of bicarbonate; the main buffer component of the extracellular fluid. 
Infusions of Hartmann’s solution may lead to respiratory acidosis as a 
result of carbon dioxide formed during lactate metabolism. Lactate is 
metabolized to glycogen, which is oxidatively metabolized to carbon 
dioxide and water. The carbon dioxide accepts an H+​ ion to form bicar­
bonate. Conversion of lactate into bicarbonate and glycogen occurs 
only in the liver. This process is dependent on cellular oxidative activity 
which will be inhibited by liver dysfunction, acidosis, and hypoxic states. 
Hartmann’s should not be administered with blood products as the cal­
cium ions in the solution can lead to clotting of the blood product.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice, st 
edition. Oxford University Press, 203. Chapter 7. Crystalloids.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Hartmann’s solution.
Single Best Answers
.  E
Due to its limited effect on the intravascular volume, 5% glucose is 
not used as a resuscitation fluid for neonates. However, solutions con­
taining a higher percentage of glucose are commonly used to treat neo­
natal hypoglycaemia. 5% glucose is not an effective volume expander. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
97
Normal saline will distribute equally between the extracellular com­
partments, providing better volume expansion. Dextrose does refer to 
a dextro-​rotatory isomer of glucose, but importantly it can be metab­
olized. The osmolarity of saline is 308 mOsm/​L, compared with 278 
mOsm/​L of 5% glucose. Once infused into the intravascular space glu­
cose is rapidly taken up into cells and metabolized, making E the correct 
answer. This gives an infusion of effectively free water, which is then 
equally distributed between all compartments; only a small portion is 
left intravascularly.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Body fluid com­
partments pp. 286–​287.
2.  E
Dextrans do not interfere with cross-​matching, making E the correct 
answer (although older preparations did). Dextrans are polysaccharide 
derivatives of sucrose, formed by the action of a bacterium containing 
the enzyme dextran sucrase. They are used for plasma volume replace­
ment and in the prophylaxis of thromboembolism. Dextrans reduce 
ADP-​induced platelet aggregation and decrease the effect of thrombin 
in platelets and thus exert an antithrombotic effect. Dextrans are avail­
able in different molecular weights, Dextran 40 and Dextran 70. Small 
molecules are excreted renally, and the large ones are metabolized by 
dextranases and excreted as carbon dioxide and water. Dextrans are 
synthetically produced and do not carry a blood-​borne infection risk. 
The main side effect is severe hypersensitivity reactions, which occur in 
 in 3300 uses.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice, st edi­
tion. Oxford University Press, 203. Chapter 7.2 Colloids.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dextrans.
3.  D
Bilirubin is the main product of haemoglobin degradation, increased 
levels may be detected when red blood cells are rapidly broken down, 
such as in haemolytic reactions. The haematocrit of packed red cells 
is much higher than whole blood, in the region of 70–​80%. Large 
transfusions can lead to citrate toxicity, where citrate binds with calcium 
causing a hypocalcaemic state. This can cause cardiac depression and 
hypotension. Several products are added to red blood cells; citrate acts 
as an anticoagulant by binding calcium ions. Phosphate acts as a buffer 
and glucose provides an energy source. There is ongoing cell metabolism 
while in storage, hence the need for an energy source. Cooling helps 
slow this process.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8  Intravenous fluids and blood products
98
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice, st 
edition. Oxford University Press, 203. Chapter 7.3 Transfusion 
products.
Provan D, Baglin T, Dokal I, De Vos, J. Oxford Handbook of Haematology, 
4th edition. Oxford University Press, 204. Transfusion of red blood 
cells pp. 764–​766.
4.  B
.26% sodium bicarbonate is almost isotonic with plasma, containing 50 
mmol each of Na+​ and HCO3–​ per litre, giving an osmolarity of 300 
mOsm/​L. It is highly irritant to tissues and may cause skin necrosis if 
extravasated. Sodium bicarbonate can be given orally and used as an 
antacid. It is water soluble and has a fast onset of action. It is absorbed 
through the GI tract, entering the systemic circulation and can cause 
metabolic alkalosis. Sodium bicarbonate will make the urine more alka­
line and can enhance the secretion of weak acids, this may be utilized in 
aspirin overdose. The addition of sodium bicarbonate to local anaes­
thetics will raise the pH of the solution. This increases the unionized 
fraction of local anaesthetic available and thus increases the speed of 
onset time, not the potency.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Bicarbonate pp. 
290–​29.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Sodium bicarbonate.
5.  C
Gelatins are a type of colloid fluid that can be used for plasma volume 
expansion. They are animal collagen derivatives produced by the thermal 
degradation of bovine gelatin. A significant side effect of gelatins is ana­
phylactic and anaphylactoid reactions, occurring in approximately  in 
0,000 administrations. However, they remain available for use, products 
in the UK include Gelofusin® 4%, a succinylated gelatin, and Haemaccel® 
3.5%, a urea-​linked gelatin. They exert their effect by causing a tem­
porary increase in plasma oncotic pressure, not hydrostatic pressure. 
Evidence regarding their effect on coagulation is inconclusive and they 
are not known to cause a type  von Willebrand-​like syndrome. In-​vitro 
studies suggest that gelatins are degraded by proteolytic enzymes into 
smaller peptides and amino acids. They do not have active metabolites.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 
4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Gelatins pp. 287–​289.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Gelatins.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
99
6.  C
Multiple factors determine fluid distribution between body compart­
ments, including the time over which the fluid is given. Other factors 
include the size and shape of molecules, hydrostatic pressure gradients, 
oncotic pressure gradients, and the endothelial barrier. Hartmann’s and 
normal saline will initially be distributed into the plasma and due to the 
high sodium content with equilibrating within the extracellular space. 
20% HAS remains within the plasma. It has a high oncotic pressure and 
will draw fluid into the intravascular space. Packed red cells will also 
remain within the plasma.
Further reading
Peck T, Hill S, Williams M. Pharmacology for Anaesthesia and Intensive 
Care, 4th edition. Cambridge University Press, 204. Body fluid com­
partments pp. 286–​287.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Human albumin solution.
7.  A
5% glucose has the same osmolality as plasma; it is isotonic. 5% glu­
cose contains 278 mmol/​L of glucose, with a matching osmolality of 278 
mOsm/​L. Hypertonic glucose solutions have a low pH and may cause 
venous irritation and thrombophlebitis, 20% or 50% glucose should be 
given via large central veins. Colloids are fluids which contain a base solu­
tion and electrolytes but with the addition of a colloid, a large molecule 
that does not diffuse across semi-​permeable membranes. Colloids may 
be natural, for example albumin, or synthetic, such as gelatins and dex­
trans. Per litre, Hartmann’s solution contains 2 mmol of calcium ions, 
5 mmol of potassium ions, and no magnesium. Per litre, Ringer’s acetate 
contains  mmol of calcium ions, 5 mmol of potassium ions, and  mmol 
of magnesium.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice, st 
edition. Oxford University Press, 203. Chapter 7. Crystalloids, 
Chapter 7.2 Colloids.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Hartmann’s solution.
 
 
 
 
101
Chapter 9
Pharmacological 
principles
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
Regarding the removal of drug from the plasma in first-​order 
kinetics
A	 Clearance is the amount of drug eliminated per minute
B	 The elimination rate of a given drug is constant
C	 The rate of elimination is equal to the clearance multiplied by the 
steady-​state drug concentration
D	 Clearance by metabolic organs is proportional to its extraction ratio
E	 Flow limited drugs are those with an extraction ratio considerably 
less than 
2.	
 
Regarding drug plasma concentration
A	 An intravenous loading dose is calculated by multiplying the desired 
plasma concentration by the drug’s volume of distribution
B	 In steady-​state conditions, the rate of drug elimination is in 
equilibrium with the rate of drug administration
C	 An oral maintenance dose is the hourly interval of administration 
multiplied by the elimination rate (per hour)
D	 During the terminal phase of elimination, a given drug’s plasma 
concentration is equal to tissue concentrations
E	 An increasing bolus dose (e.g. of propofol) will increase the speed 
of onset of peak effect
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9  Pharmacological principles
102
3.	
 
Regarding elimination zero order kinetics
A	 The half-​life is proportional to the drug concentration
B	 Clearance is a constant volume (l/​kg) cleared of drug per unit 
of time
C	 Drug elimination rate is constant
D	 Concentration declines linearly over time
E	 Volume of distribution varies as plasma concentration varies at 
equilibrium
4.	
Consider a semilog plot depicting the log of drug concentration on 
the x-​axis and the probability of analgesia on the y-​axis
A	 A curve shifted to the left indicates greater potency
B	 Median effective dose (ED 50) describes drug efficacy
C	 A partial agonist will always have submaximal efficacy
D	 Efficacy is increased with increased drug affinity for its receptor (F)
E	 The effects of a competitive antagonist may be overcome with an 
increased dose of agonist
5.	 

Bioavailability
A	 Is the fraction of the administered drug dose that undergoes first-​
pass metabolism
B	 An intravenously administered drug has 00% bioavailability
C	 Is calculated by dividing the area under the curve (AUC) of a plasma 
drug concentration vs. time plot after intravenous administration by 
the AUC after oral administration
D	 A drug administered completely via the sublingual route avoids first-​
pass metabolism
E	 First-​pass metabolism, by definition, relates only to hepatic 
metabolism before the active drug reaches the systemic circulation
 
 
 
Questions
103
6.	
 
Regarding the metabolism of drugs
A	 Oxidative reactions include deamination
B	 Conjugation facilitates renal excretion through the removal of a 
polar group
C	 Is a major contributor to the terminal elimination phase of a drug
D	 Plasma clearance of suxamethonium is independent of hepatic 
blood flow
E	 Phase II biotransformation inactivates a drug
7.	
 
Concerning the excretion of drugs
A	 Biliary excretion is terminal elimination
B	 Increasing plasma protein binding decreases active tubular secretion
C	 An ionized weak acid or base is more rapidly excreted in the urine 
than a non-​ionized drug
D	 The rate of excretion of a weak base may be increased by acidifying 
the urine
E	 The drug filtration rate is calculated by multiplying the glomerular 
filtration rate by the urinary drug concentration
Single Best Answers
.	
A 62-​year-​old male is in the intensive care unit (ICU), having 
undergone an emergency Hartmann’s procedure two days previ­
ously. He is sedated with propofol and remifentanil. A sedation break is 
planned with a view to possible tracheal extubation later that day. Which 
property of remifentanil best accounts for rapid weaning from sedation?
A	 68% unionized at pH 7.4
B	 70% plasma protein binding
C	 High potency
D	 Rapid ester hydrolysis
E	 Volume of distribution of 0.25–​0.4 L/​kg
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9  Pharmacological principles
104
2.	
A 20-​year-​old female is scheduled for incision and drainage of a 
perianal abscess. You plan total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) 
with target-​controlled infusion (TCI) of propofol supplemented with 
alfentanil. Within the Marsh pharmacokinetic model, which element is of 
the most importance in determining the rate of infusion?
A	 Body mass index
B	 Concurrent opioid use
C	 Drug distribution
D	 Elimination half-​life
E	 Infusion time
3.	
An 85-​year-​old female has arrived in theatre for management of 
a fractured neck of femur. A hemiarthroplasty is planned. Prior to 
spinal anaesthesia, you plan a femoral nerve block using a combination 
of lidocaine % with :200,000 adrenaline, and levobupivacaine 0.25%. 
What property of lidocaine is best attributable to its rapidity of onset 
of action?
A	 Lipid solubility
B	 Protein binding
C	 Site of administration
D	 Use of vasoconstrictor
E	 Volume of distribution
4.	
A 62-​year-​old male is undergoing an abdominoperineal resection. 
He is anaesthetised and ventilated with a mixture of desflurane, 
medical air, and oxygen. Which property of desflurane best accounts for 
its requirement of a Tec 6 vaporizer?
A	 Environmental toxicity
B	 High saturated vapour pressure
C	 Low blood:gas partition coefficient
D	 Low molecular weight
E	 Low oil:gas partition coefficient
 
 
 
Questions
105
5.	
An 80-​year-​old male patient is about to undergo an elective lap­
aroscopic hernia repair. He has essential hypertension controlled 
by two antihypertensive agents. A total intravenous anaesthetic (TIVA) 
technique is chosen as part of his anaesthetic management. You are pro­
gramming the TCI pump and are deciding which pharmacokinetic model 
to use. Which of the following would be the most appropriate to use?
A	 Use a plasma-​target Marsh model
B	 Use a plasma-​target Schneider model
C	 Use an effect-​site Marsh model
D	 Use an effect-​site Minto model
E	 Use an effect-​site Schneider model
6.	
A 59-​year-​old male is listed for laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 
He has a body mass index (BMI) of 46, and a background of 
obstructive sleep apnoea. You plan TIVA with propofol and remifentanil. 
Which weight is the optimal choice in calculating a propofol dosage for 
induction of anaesthesia in the context of morbid obesity?
A	 70 kg
B	 Actual body weight
C	 Adjusted body weight
D	 Ideal body weight
E	 Lean body weight
7.	
A patient with an eGFR >90 is receiving an infusion of drug ‘Z’ at a 
dose designed to maintain steady-​state plasma concentration. The 
infusion is stopped after nine hours of administration and the context-​
sensitive half-​time of the drug is measured at 300 minutes. Which drug is 
the patient most likely to have been receiving as drug ‘Z’?
A	 Alfentanil
B	 Fentanyl
C	 Midazolam
D	 Propofol
E	 Thiopental
 
 
 
Chapter 9  Pharmacological principles
106
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FFTTF
Clearance is the volume of plasma from which a substance is removed 
per unit time. This may either be systemic clearance (including metab­
olism) or intercompartmental clearance. The elimination rate is the 
amount of drug eliminated per minute. Clearance is constant. The elim­
ination rate varies on the given concentration within a volume, hence the 
need for clearance, which describes the constant volume of drug that is 
cleared in a given time. The rate of elimination is equal to the clearance 
multiplied by the steady-​state drug concentration. Clearance by meta­
bolic organs is proportional to its extraction ratio. Flow-​limited drugs 
are those which are increasingly dependent on the blood flow to a given 
metabolic organ as the extraction ratio approaches . Capacity-​limited 
drugs are those which are dependent on the metabolic activity of the 
organ, which would become impaired in liver impairment, for example.
Further reading
Freshwater-​Turner D, Roberts F. Pharmacokinetics and anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2007;7():27–​29.
O’Shaughnessy K. Principles of clinical pharmacology and drug therapy. 
In Warrell D, Cox T, Firth J (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, Vol , 
5th edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 0..
2.  TTFFF
When choosing a loading dose, the anaesthetist must consider the de­
sired plasma concentration (c). A semilog plot may be used to help 
extrapolate the initial concentration of a drug upon administration 
(modelling for complete distribution (Vd [l/​kg])). The dose is therefore 
a function of these two values (c.Vd). In steady-​state conditions, the rate 
of drug elimination is in equilibrium with the rate of drug administration.
One may depict intermittent oral dosing: a drug is administered approxi­
mately every half-​life to replenish the drug eliminated over that time. The 
same principle applies to constant infusions of a drug. However, the oral 
maintenance dose must also account for a fraction of oral bioavailability.
During the terminal phase of elimination, a given drug’s plasma concen­
tration is less than tissue concentrations. Drug returns from its distribu­
tion volumes to the plasma, where it undergoes permanent elimination.
Increasing a bolus dose will have no effect on the time of peak onset. It will 
increase the magnitude of such an effect, while the biophase remains constant.
Further reading
Freshwater-​Turner D, Roberts F. Pharmacokinetics and anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2007;7():27–​29.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
107
O’Shaughnessy K. Principles of clinical pharmacology and drug therapy. 
In Warrell D, Cox T, Firth J (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, Vol , 
5th edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 0..
3.  TFTTF
The half-​life is variable and is dependent on drug concentration.
The drug elimination rate is constant, often owing to the saturation of 
elimination processes. As the same amount of drug is eliminated per unit 
of time, a lesser concentration will achieve increased clearance. Clearance 
is therefore inversely proportional to the plasma concentration.
Concentration declines linearly over time. This is in contrast to first-​
order kinetics, in which the concentration declines logarithmically based 
on the half-​life.
Regardless of zero-​order kinetic elimination, the volume of distribution 
(Vd) remains constant as plasma concentration varies at equilibrium. Vd 
is dependent on the amount of drug present at a given time divided by 
the plasma concentration at that time.
Further reading
Freshwater-​Turner D, Roberts F. Pharmacokinetics and anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2007;7():27–​29.
O’Shaughnessy K. Principles of clinical pharmacology and drug therapy. 
In Warrell D, Cox T, Firth J (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, Vol , 
5th edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 0..
4.  TFTFT
A curve shifted to the left indicates that a lesser dose is required to 
produce a given clinical effect. This relates to greater drug potency.
As potency relates to the drug dosage required to produce a given clin­
ical effect, the median effective dose (ED 50) is a standardized means 
of comparing drug potencies. It does not relate to drug efficacy, which 
describes the maximum of a given drug.
By definition, a partial agonist will always have submaximal efficacy. 
Clinically, however, a submaximal response may not always be evident.
Efficacy is independent of drug affinity for its receptor. It describes the 
maximal functional response of an already assumed drug-​receptor com­
plex. Potency is increased with increased receptor affinity.
While the effects of a competitive antagonist may be overcome with an 
increased dose of agonist, those of a non-​competitive antagonist cannot.
Further reading
Freshwater-​Turner D, Roberts F. Pharmacokinetics and anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2007;7():27–​29.
Lambert D, McDonald J. Drug-​receptor interactions in anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2022;22():20–​25.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9  Pharmacological principles
108
5.  FTFTF
Bioavailability is the fraction of the administered drug dose that reaches 
systemic circulation in an active form.
By definition, an intravenously administered drug has 00% bioavailability.
Bioavailability is calculated by dividing the AUC of a plasma drug con­
centration vs. time plot after oral administration by the AUC after intra­
venous administration.
First-​pass metabolism refers to drug metabolism following its ‘first pass’ 
through the liver following gastrointestinal absorption. Therefore, a drug ad­
ministered completely via the sublingual route avoids first-​pass metabolism.
Drugs can undergo enzymatic biotransformation in the gut wall. First-​
pass metabolism relates to both gut and hepatic metabolism before the 
active drug reaches the systemic circulation.
Further reading
Freshwater-​Turner D, Roberts F. Pharmacokinetics and anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2007;7():27–​29.
6.  TFTTF
Amino acids undergo oxidative deamination. Other examples of oxidative 
metabolism include hydroxylation, dealkylation, and desulphurization.
Conjugation creates water-​soluble molecules through the addition of a 
polar group, rendering it hydrophilic. This subsequently aids renal excretion.
Metabolism and excretion are the two determinants of the terminal 
elimination phase of a drug, during which the active drug is completely 
removed from the body.
Drugs such as remifentanil and suxamethonium are cleared by plasma 
and tissue ester hydrolysis. Their hepatic extraction ratio is therefore 
low, meaning their metabolism is independent of hepatic blood flow. In 
contrast, most anaesthetic drugs are cleared hepatically.
While most phase II biotransformed metabolites are inactive, some 
retain activity (e.g. metabolites of morphine and midazolam are as 
potent as the parent drug).
Further reading
Freshwater-​Turner D, Roberts F. Pharmacokinetics and anaesthesia. BJA 
Education, 2007;7():27–​29.
O’Shaughnessy K. Principles of clinical pharmacology and drug therapy. 
In Warrell D, Cox T, Firth J (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, Vol , 
5th edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 0..
7.  FFTTF
Metabolites excreted in the bile may undergo subsequent enterohepatic 
recycling, whereby it is reabsorbed into the circulation. Biotransformed 
metabolites may undergo hydrolytic reactions back to the parent drug.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
109
Increasing plasma protein binding reduces glomerular filtration. It has 
no effect on active tubular secretion, which occurs while equilibrium is 
maintained between free drug and protein-​bound drug.
Ionized weak acids and bases are more rapidly excreted in the urine than 
a non-​ionized drug. Ionized drugs are polar. Their decreased lipid solu­
bility leads to less passive reabsorption across renal tubular cells.
The rate of excretion of a weak base may be increased by acidifying 
the urine. The rate of excretion of a weak acid may be increased by 
alkalinizing the urine.
The drug filtration rate is calculated by multiplying the glomerular filtra­
tion rate by the free drug plasma concentration.
Further reading
O’Shaughnessy K. Principles of clinical pharmacology and drug therapy. 
In Warrell D, Cox T, Firth J (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, Vol , 
5th edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 0..
Single Best Answers
.  D
Remifentanil has a context insensitive half time of 3–​5 minutes. This fa­
cilitates rapid weaning in the context of a prolonged infusion. While all 
the aforementioned properties are true, of most relevance is the rapid 
hydrolysis by non-​specific esterases within the plasma and tissues to a 
carboxylic acid derivative remifentanil acid. It is the quantity of these 
esterases that contribute to the drug’s clearance of 4.2–​5 L/​min, which 
is independent of renal and hepatic function. This enzyme system cannot 
be saturated at even high concentrations of remifentanil.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Remifentanil.
2.  D
A number of pharmocokinetic models for propofol exist including 
‘Marsh’ and ‘Schneider’.
Propofol administration should take into account lean body weight. 
Concurrent opioid use is important to consider with regard to de­
sired effect-​site concentration, as it will act synergistically with propofol. 
However, it does not form part of the Marsh pharmacokinetic model itself.
The distribution of propofol is based on a three-​compartment pharma­
cokinetic model which is employed in TCI programmes.
Further reading
Absalom A, Mani V, De Smet T, Struys MM. Pharmacokinetic models for 
propofol—​defining and illuminating the devil in the detail. Br J Anaesth, 
2009;03():26–​37.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9  Pharmacological principles
110
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Propofol.
3.  A
Lidocaine is 64–​70% protein bound. A high degree of protein binding 
is associated with a long duration of action. pKa and lipid solubility are 
associated with a rapid onset time.
Its volume of distribution does not relate to the rapidity of onset.
Its site of administration, dose, and use of a vasoconstrictor influence 
its degree of systemic absorption. In order of decreasing absorption, 
sites include the intercostal, caudal, epidural, brachial plexus, and sub­
cutaneous tissue.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Lidocaine.
4.  B
In comparison to other inhalational anaesthetic agents, desflurane is 
noted to be the most environmentally toxic.
Due to its high saturated vapour pressure (SVP) at room temperature, 
a conventional vaporizer would require uneconomical levels of fresh 
gas flow to dilute it to clinically useful concentrations. This, in combin­
ation with a boiling point close to room temperature, and a resultant 
steep gradient in SVP with temperature change, necessitates a separate 
vaporizer.
Its low oil:gas partition coefficient and molecular weight relate to 
its potency and have no significant bearing on the type of vaporizer 
required. Its low blood:gas partition coefficient is related to a more 
rapid speed of onset in comparison to other inhalational anaesthetic 
agents.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Desflurane.
5.  E
Using a Marsh pharmacokinetic model, either targeting a plasma 
or effect-​site concentration will result in higher doses of propofol 
being administered to the patient both during induction and main­
tenance, compared with the use of the Schneider model targeting an 
effect-​site concentration. This is due to the fact that the Schneider 
model modifies the induction and maintenance doses in relation 
to increasing age. Schneider does not target plasma concentra­
tion. Minto is a pharmacokinetic model used for remifentanil, not 
propofol.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
111
Further reading
Absalom A, Mani V, De Smet T, Struys MM. Pharmacokinetic models for 
propofol—​defining and illuminating the devil in the detail. Br J Anaesth, 
2009;03():26–​37.
Mulvey D, Al-​Rifia Z. Principles of total intravenous anaesthesia: prac­
tical aspects of using total intravenous anaesthesia. BJA Education, 
206;6(8):276–​280.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Propofol.
6.  E
In an obese patient, lean body weight is greater than ideal body weight.
In obesity, blood tends to distribute more towards non-​adipose tissues. 
This may produce increased drug plasma concentrations if dosages are 
calculated as mg/​kg based on actual body weight.
In morbidly obese patients, lean body weight should be used for TCI 
induction of anaesthesia. The total body weight should be used to calcu­
late TCI maintenance.
Further reading
Mulvey D, Al-​Rifia Z. Principles of total intravenous anaesthesia: prac­
tical aspects of using total intravenous anaesthesia. BJA Education, 
206;6(8):276–​280.
Thompson J, Hebbes C. Pharmacokinetics of anaesthetic drugs at ex­
tremes of body weight. BJA Education, 208;8(2):364–​370.
7.  B
Context-​sensitive half-​time (CSHT) is the time taken for the concen­
tration of a drug to fall to 50% of its steady-​state value following cessa­
tion of an infusion. Alfentanil, midazolam, propofol, and thiopental all 
have CSHTs, which increase as the duration of infusion increases until a 
plateau is reached. Out of these five drugs, fentanyl demonstrates the 
greatest magnitude of increase in CSHT—​if plotted graphically, it would 
display a sigmoid-​shaped curve.
Typical CSHT values following nine hours of infusion would be 80 mins 
for alfentanil, 80 mins for midazolam, 50 mins for propofol, and 200 mins 
for thiopental. Of interest remifentanil has a context-​insensitive half-​time, 
meaning its time to fall to 50% of its steady-​state plasma concentration is inde­
pendent of the duration of administration. This occurs because its metab­
olism is unsaturable due to the abundance of plasma and tissue esterases.
Further reading
Hill S. Pharmacokinetics of drug infusions. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care 
Pain, 2004;4(3):76–​80.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Remifentanil.
 
 
 
 
 
113
Chapter 0
Drugs affecting the 
central nervous system
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Regarding levetiracetam
A	 The mechanism of action of levetiracetam is through the blockade 
of voltage-​gated sodium channels
B	 Levetiracetam is rapidly and almost completely absorbed orally with 
near 00% bioavailability
C	 It is completely hepatically metabolized to inactive metabolites
D	 Levetiracetam has a prolonged half-​life of 36–​42 hours
E	 The dose does not need to be reduced in renal impairment as it is 
metabolized in the liver
2.	
 
Regarding haloperidol
A	 It is a butyrophenone derivative
B	 The main mode of action is through dopaminergic agonism
C	 Its use may lead to dystonia and akathisia
D	 Can be used to treat hiccupping
E	 It should generally be administered intravenously due to its poor 
bioavailability
3.	
The following drugs are likely to cause induction of the cyto­
chrome P450 system:
A	 Carbamazepine
B	 Gabapentin
C	 Levetiracetam
D	 Phenytoin
E	 Thiopental
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
114
4.	
 
The following are features of amitriptyline toxicity:
A	 Blurred vision
B	 Hypertension
C	 Hypersalivation
D	 Onset of clinical features within an hour of overdose
E	 Respiratory depression
5.	
The following drugs could be safely administered in a patient regu­
larly taking phenelzine:
A	 Glycopyrrolate
B	 Metaraminol
C	 Phenylephrine
D	 Topical cocaine
E	 Tramadol
6.	
The following effects are likely to occur after intravenous adminis­
tration of  g/​kg mannitol:
A	 Reduced plasma viscosity
B	 Loss of cerebral autoregulation
C	 Reduced cerebral blood flow
D	 Increased renal blood flow
E	 Hypernatraemia
7.	
 
Regarding benzodiazepine toxicity:
A	 Features may include ataxia and nystagmus
B	 Propylene glycol poisoning should be considered
C	 Following oral administration, the peak effect is usually within 60–​90 
minutes
D	 May lead to rhabdomyolysis
E	 Treatment with flumazenil is recommended
 
 
 
 
Questions
115
Single Best Answers
.	
You have an extremely anxious 30-​year-​old patient on your the­
atre list for surgical extraction of four wisdom teeth under general 
anaesthesia. She has a past medical history of generalized anxiety dis­
order and supraventricular tachycardia (for which she takes verapamil 
40 mg TDS). Her body mass index is 8. Today is her second attend­
ance to have this procedure. On the previous occasion, her anxiety in­
creased to such an extent that she fled the admission ward in terror. She 
is desperate to have her surgical procedure and requests sedating oral 
premedication. When considering these various benzodiazepine drugs, 
which of the following statements is most accurate?
A	 Diazepam has poor oral bioavailability due to its poor lipid solubility
B	 Lorazepam has an intermediate duration of action due to strong γ-​
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor binding
C	 Midazolam has rapid action due to the opening of its imidazole ring 
at physiological pH
D	 Temazepam has low clearance, so it should be avoided in day 
surgery due to its prolonged duration of action
E	 The efficacy of midazolam is reduced by co-​administration with 
verapamil
2.	
You are asked to review a patient on the intensive care unit. The 
patient is a 65-​year-​old female who is on day five of their admis­
sion following an emergency laparotomy for a perforated diverticulum, 
which resulted in four-​quadrant faecal peritonitis. The patient was 
extubated two days ago, but is requiring ongoing vasopressor support 
for the treatment of her sepsis. She was noted to be agitated on that 
morning’s consultant-​led ward round and a plan was documented to pre­
scribe dexmedetomidine if her agitation did not improve. Which is the 
most accurate description for this drug’s sedative effects?
A	 Agonism at the locus coeruleus increasing potassium conductance
B	 α-​adrenergic agonism to α2: α receptors in a ratio of 80:
C	 Direct α2 agonism in the cortex
D	 GABA agonism, modulating noradrenaline release
E	 Hyperpolarization in the spinal cord dorsal horns
 
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
116
3.	
You are called to the emergency department (ED) to attend to a 
25-​year-​old male with known poorly controlled epilepsy and severe 
autism. He has presented to the ED in status epilepticus—​this is his fourth 
admission in the past 2 months. The ED registrar administers a rapid bolus 
of drug ‘X’ at an appropriate dose to the patient to attempt to control 
their seizures. Two minutes later you observe that the patient has become 
apnoeic and when you look at the electrocardiograph (ECG) trace on the 
patient’s bedside monitor, you diagnose a complete heart block.
Which of the following drugs is most likely to be drug ‘X’?
A	 Diazepam
B	 Levetiracetam
C	 Lorazepam
D	 Phenytoin
E	 Sodium valproate
4.	
You have an obese 45-​year-​old female patient on your theatre 
list, booked for an elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy fol­
lowing their acute presentation of gallstones six months previously. Her 
liver function tests and amylase were mildly deranged during her pre­
vious admission; however, they have returned to baseline now on her 
preassessment blood tests. Past medical history includes epilepsy, which is 
controlled with carbamazepine. She has not experienced a seizure for five 
years and holds a driving licence. She is anxious about the implications of 
anaesthesia. Regarding her carbamazepine, which of the following effects 
should you be most aware of when planning her anaesthetic?
A	 Administering metronidazole will reduce plasma carbamazepine 
concentrations
B	 It decreases minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) requirements
C	 It prolongs the duration of activity of aminosteroid neuromuscular 
blocking drugs
D	 It shortens the duration of action of therapeutic fentanyl
E	 Its use increases sensitivity to ephedrine
5.	
You are asked to anaesthetise a 33-​year-​old female patient with 
myasthenia gravis. Her weight is 72 kg. Daily medication includes 
pyridostigmine 60 mg qds, prednisolone 30 mg daily, and azathioprine 75 
mg bd. The patient is listed for elective fixation of a large midline inci­
sional hernia which has been becoming increasing tender recently and 
the surgeons are keen that her surgery is expedited. Which of the fol­
lowing would be most appropriate to use during her anaesthetic?
A	 Atracurium 35 mg
B	 Mivacurium 5 mg
C	 Rocuronium 5 mg
D	 Suxamethonium 75 mg
E	 Vecuronium 2 mg
 
 
 
Questions
117
6.	
You have been called to review a 47-​year-​old female patient in 
intensive care who has been treated for delirium with clonidine, 
midazolam, and haloperidol. They have become progressively more agi­
tated and are observed to be sweating and blinking rapidly. When you 
examine them, you note their eyes have fixed deviation with upward and 
lateral gaze. They are also lacrimating and have a flushed facial appear­
ance. You request the nurse to check the patient’s temperature due to 
the sweating/​flushing which she reports back as 36.9°C. The patient’s 
pulse is elevated at 3 bpm.
Which drug treatment option would you consider the most appropriate 
management plan?
A	 Amisulpride
B	 Neostigmine/glycopyrronium bromide combination
C	 Olanzapine
D	 Prochlorperazine
E	 Procyclidine
7.	
You attend the ward to preassess a 69-​year-​old male patient listed 
on the trauma list for fixation of a hip fracture. The patient was 
admitted six hours ago, and the ward pharmacist is at the patient’s bed­
side performing medicines reconciliation. They report to you that there 
is a drug not presently accounted for on the patient’s ward drug chart 
that they note to be in the patient’s multi-compartment compliance aid. 
The patient tells you they were prescribed this drug for the treatment of 
depression and recalls they initially experienced nausea and abdominal 
pain but this settled with time. They were also instructed by their GP not 
to stop this medication abruptly.
If you were given the following additional information, which drug would 
you consider this most likely to be:
●	 Drug mechanism specifically involves 5-​hydroxytryptamine
●	 Metabolism is via hepatic cytochrome p450 system
●	 Known to inhibit cytochrome p450
●	 Side effects include hyponatraemia, altered taste, and increased risk 
of bleeding
A	Amitriptyline
B	 Bupropion
C	Duloxetine
D	Isocarboxazid
E	 Sertraline
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
118
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FTFFF
Levetiracetam, is a pyrrolidone derivative with a different mechanism 
of action to the other antiepileptic agents available. It appears to bind 
to synaptic vesicle protein 2A, therefore inhibiting intraneuronal cal­
cium release. It is rapidly and completely absorbed with extremely 
high bioavailability. It is minimally metabolized (24%) via hepatic 
hydrolysis to an inactive metabolite and renally eliminated. As a result, 
the dose should be reduced in patients with a glomerular filtration 
rate of less than 80 ml/​min/​.73 m2. Drug half-​life is around seven 
hours. Administration is not associated with cognitive impairment 
or drug-​induced weight gain but may cause behavioural changes and 
somnolence.
Further reading
Lyseng-​Williamson KA. Levetiracetam: a review of its use in epilepsy. 
Drugs, 20; 7(4):489–​54.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Levetiracetam.
2.  TFTTF
Haloperidol is a butyrophenone derivative that is commonly used for the 
management of acute confusional states. In addition, it is a potent anti­
emetic owing to central dopaminergic (D2) blockade. It also antagonizes 
post-​synaptic GABA receptors and α-​adrenergic receptors.
Dystonias are sustained muscle contractions causing repetitive abnormal 
movements. Akathisia is characterized by restlessness and appears to 
be a dose-​related phenomenon. These may occur within a few hours of 
administration but sometimes take a number of days. These extrapyram­
idal side effects are relatively common with the use of haloperidol and 
can include neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
It is well absorbed orally with a bioavailability of 50–​88%. It is highly 
protein bound with a large volume of distribution. Elimination depends 
on the route of administration but the half-​life can be anywhere from 0 
to 38 hours.
Further reading
Espi Forcen F, Matsoukas K, Alici Y. Anti-​psychotic induced akathisia 
in delirium: a systematic review. Palliat Support Care, 206;4(): 
77–​84.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Haloperidol.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
119
3.  TFFTT
Cytochrome P450 are a family of haem-​containing enzymes, some of 
which are found in the liver and are essential for metabolism by oxi­
dation to a more water-​soluble form of a wide variety of medications. 
The isoform nomenclature is based on the similarities between amino 
acid sequences with families coded numerically, subfamilies alphabetic­
ally from A to E and specific genes then coded numerically. The CYP3A 
family metabolizes around 40–​50% of known drugs. Enzyme induction 
takes place over several days or weeks.
Phenytoin, carbamazepine, and barbiturates are all inducers of the 
cytochrome P450 system, affecting a number of cytochrome enzymes 
including A2, 2C, and 3A4. Unlike many other antiepileptic agents, 
levetiracetam does not induce the CYP450 system. Gabapentin does 
not appear to affect the CYP450 system.
Some important anaesthetic substrates that may be affected by induc­
tion or inhibition of the CYP enzyme responsible for their metabolism 
include ketamine (CYP2B6); ibuprofen and diclofenac (CYP2C9); 
tramadol, codeine, oxycodone (CYP2D6); isoflurane and sevoflurane 
(CYP2E); alfentanil, bupivacaine, midazolam, ondansetron, fentanyl 
(CYP3A4). Some drugs can be metabolized by a number of different 
enzymes; for instance, paracetamol (CYPA2, CYP2E, CYP3A4), lido­
caine (CYPA2, CYP3A4), and ropivacaine (CYPA2, CYP3A4). Note 
that the likelihood of a clinically significant interaction will depend on a 
number of factors including oral bioavailability, the hepatic extraction 
ratio (i.e. whether drug metabolism is perfusion or enzyme limited) and 
the availability of alternative metabolic pathways.
Further reading
Asadi-​Pooya AA, Sperling MR. Antiepileptic Drugs: A Clinician’s Manual, 
2nd edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Clinically important drug 
interactions with antiepileptic drugs.
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Struys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Drug interactions in anaesthetic 
practice.
Martin A, Scahill L, Kratochvil C. Pediatric Psychopharmacology, 2nd edi­
tion. Oxford University Press, 200. Cytochrome P450-​mediated 
drug interactions.
4.  TFFFT
Clinical features of tricyclic antidepressant overdose are usually ap­
parent within four hours of overdose. Anticholinergic effects are initially 
apparent including blurred vision, dryness of the mouth, constipation, 
urinary retention, and drowsiness. Toxicity may result in pyramidal signs, 
acidaemia, respiratory depression, and sedation. Decreasing pH in­
creases the tricyclic antidepressant binding to sodium channels causing 
blockade resulting in QRS prolongation, arrhythmias (including ven­
tricular tachycardia and fibrillation) and seizures. Hypotension results 
from α adrenoreceptor antagonism.
 
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
120
Management includes supportive measures and active correction of 
acidaemia.
Amitriptyline has an oral bioavailability of 45% and is highly pro­
tein bound with a large volume of distribution. Metabolism occurs by 
N-​demethylation and hydroxylation with subsequent conjugation to 
glucuronide and sulphate. Nortriptyline is an intermediate active metab­
olite. The elimination half-​life is 2.9–​36. hours.
Tricyclic antidepressants remain a second-​line therapy in depression, but 
are also used as an adjunct in chronic pain management. Other examples 
include dosulepin, imipramine, and nortriptyline. Their therapeutic ef­
fect is a result of inhibiting the presynaptic reuptake of noradrenaline 
and serotonin within the central nervous system (CNS). In addition, 
they antagonize muscarinic cholinergic, α-​ adrenergic, and H and H2 
histaminergic receptors causing a wide range of side effects, which may 
include fatigue, sedation, and weakness.
Further reading
Bateman N, Jefferson R, Thomas S, Thompson J, Vale A. Toxicology 
(Oxford Desk Reference). Oxford University Press, 204. CNS Drugs.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Amitriptyline.
5.  TFTFF
Phenelzine is an antidepressant leading to the inhibition of monoamine 
oxidase (MAO) A and B through irreversible binding. Monoamine oxi­
dase is an enzyme present on mitochondrial membranes. MAO-​A 
preferentially metabolizes serotonin, noradrenaline, and adrenaline 
while MAO-​B metabolizes non-​polar aromatic amines. Moclobemide 
is a newer reversible MAO-​A inhibitor, and of note, the antibiotic 
linezolid is a reversible non-​selective monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
(MAOI).
Of greatest importance with regards to the MAOIs is the possibility 
of precipitating serotonin syndrome if drugs with serotonergic effects 
(such as pethidine and tramadol) are co-​administered or of grossly ex­
aggerated hypertensive effects from indirect sympathomimetics (such 
as metaraminol, ephedrine, and cocaine). In addition, MAOIs mark­
edly exaggerate the depressant effect of volatiles on blood pressure 
and CNS and inhibit plasma cholinesterase, prolonging the duration of 
suxamethonium.
Direct sympathomimetics such as phenylephrine and adrenaline can be 
administered with caution. Anticholinergics such as glycopyrrolate can 
be safely used. Morphine can be used safely although MAOIs can inhibit 
hepatic microsomal enzymes, therefore prolonging the action of opioids 
and enhancing their effect. To avoid the potential perioperative compli­
cations, irreversible MAOIs may be discontinued for at least two weeks 
(to allow for the regeneration of new enzymes) before proceeding 
with elective surgery, but only after consultation with a psychiatrist. 
Moclobemide may be omitted for 24 hours preoperatively.
 
 
Answers
121
Further reading
Allman K, Wilson I, O’Donnell A. Oxford Handbook of Anaesthesia, 
4th edition. Oxford University Press, 205. Psychiatric disorders 
and drugs.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Phenelzine.
6.  TFFTF
Mannitol is a low-​molecular-​weight alcohol presented as a hyperosmolar 
fluid used to reduce the volume and therefore the pressure of cerebro­
spinal fluid (CSF). It decreases the rate of CSF formation and reduces 
brain extracellular water across the blood–​brain barrier (which it does 
not cross when intact) into the plasma. The early plasma expansion re­
duces blood viscosity, which can aid regional cerebral microvascular flow 
and oxygenation.
It is freely filtered in the kidney and not reabsorbed, increasing the osmo­
lality of the filtrate and may lead to a diuresis five times that of the ad­
ministered volume.
Doses range from 0.25 to  g/​kg with an action within a few minutes, 
lasting for –​4 hours. Immediately after administration, it can be ex­
pected to increase blood pressure. It will lead to a significant reduction 
in intracranial pressure (ICP) with preservation of blood flow when 
autoregulation is intact. When autoregulation is defective it will lead to 
a minimal reduction in ICP with an increase in cerebral blood flow as 
vasoconstriction will not occur in response to reduced viscosity. Renal 
blood flow will also increase due to increased intravascular volume and 
the rate of renin secretion will fall. Diuresis of poorly concentrated urine 
will occur after –3 hours. Plasma sodium and potassium may fall with 
high doses.
Further reading
Nathanson M, Moppett IK, Wiles M. Neuroanaesthesia (Oxford 
Specialist Handbooks in Anaesthesia). Oxford University Press, 20. 
Pharmacology.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Mannitol.
Wijdicks EFM, Clark SL. Neurocritical Care Pharmacotherapy: A Clinician’s 
Manual. Oxford University Press, 208. Osmotic therapy.
7.  TTTTF
Benzodiazepines act via benzodiazepine receptors linked to GABAA 
receptors, enhancing the effect of GABA neurotransmitter, causing an 
increase in chloride permeability resulting in neuronal hyperpolarization, 
therefore decreasing excitability.
Peak effects after oral administration are typically within 60–​90 minutes. 
The offset will depend on a number of factors including redistribution to 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
122
fat and elimination. They are hepatically metabolized and so severe liver 
disease will delay elimination and increase the risk of toxicity. A number 
of benzodiazepines when metabolized will produce active compounds 
which can contribute to the toxic effects (diazepam in particular). 
Metabolites are renally excreted.
Features of overdose include drowsiness, ataxia, dysarthria, and nys­
tagmus. Coma, hypotension, bradycardia, and respiratory depression 
can follow especially if taken in conjunction with alcohol or opioids. 
Hypothermia and rhabdomyolysis have occurred in severe cases.
Parenteral preparations of diazepam and lorazepam contain propylene 
glycol as a diluent. Prolonged administration, e.g. by continuous infu­
sion, can rarely result in propylene glycol poisoning. Features can include 
severe lactic acidosis, cardiac arrhythmias, and skin necrosis. Of note, 
phenytoin also has propylene glycol as a diluent.
Although flumazenil is a competitive antagonist at benzodiazepine re­
ceptors and can therefore reverse the effects, it should be used with 
extreme caution as it may precipitate withdrawal or seizures. Its half-​life 
is only 45–​90 minutes, which is considerably less than the majority of 
benzodiazepines.
Further reading
Bateman N, Jefferson R, Thomas S, Thompson J, Vale A. Toxicology 
(Oxford Desk Reference). Oxford University Press, 204. CNS Drugs.
Nageshwaran S, Ledingham D, Wilson HC, Dickenson A. Drugs in 
Neurology. Oxford University Press, 207. Benzodiazepines.
Wijdicks EFM, Clark SL. Neurocritical Care Pharmacotherapy: A Clinician’s 
Manual. Oxford University Press, 208. Antidotes with overdose.
Single Best Answers
.  B
Diazepam is well absorbed orally and is highly lipid soluble and so has 
a rapid onset but results in redistribution and can accumulate. It has ac­
tive metabolites that prolong its duration of action. Lorazepam is poorly 
lipid-​soluble resulting in a slower onset of action and a small VD. It binds 
to GABA receptors strongly prolonging its effect. It does not form ac­
tive metabolites. Midazolam owes its potency to high lipid solubility and 
receptor affinity. Its imidazole ring opens in acidic pH conferring water 
solubility. It comes prepared in a solution with a pH of 3.5. At physio­
logical pH, the ring closes leading to lipid solubility thus rapid onset. Its 
high clearance, lipophilicity, and rapid elimination results in a short dur­
ation of action. Despite metabolites having minimal activity, renal failure 
may prolong the effects.
Temazepam has a relatively high clearance and small VD and therefore 
has a relatively short duration of action. Benzodiazepines are formed 
from a benzene ring (5-​carbon) joined to a diazepine ring (2-​nitrogen, 
 
 
Answers
123
5-​carbon) with a variety of side groups accounting for the differences 
between drugs. The different properties of some common benzodi­
azepines are summarized in Table 0.. Of note, higher lipid solubility 
is associated with a quicker onset. Elimination is through the hepatic 
p450 system and glucuronide conjugation. Indications for verapamil 
include the management of tachyarrhythmias, angina, and hyperten­
sion. Study evidence suggests an increased exposure to midazolam 
should be expected with co-​administration and manufacturers advise 
dose adjustment.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Benzodiazepines.
Nageshwaran S, Ledingham D, Wilson HC, Dickenson A. Drugs in 
Neurology. Oxford University Press, 207. Benzodiazepines.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Diazepam, Lorazepam, Midazolam, 
Temazepam.
2.  A
Dexmedetomidine is an imidazole derivative producing sedation, 
anxiolysis, and analgesia that is increasingly used for sedation in critical 
care patients.
It is an α-​adrenergic agonist to α2:α receptors in a ratio of 600: although 
this selectivity decreases with rapid administration. Their activation 
leads to increased potassium conductance causing hyperpolarization 
in the locus coeruleus, reducing activity in the noradrenergic path­
ways associated with arousal and vigilance and increasing stage 3 
non-​rapid eye movement sleep (N3). Its analgesic effects are due 
to its action on α2 receptors in the dorsal horns. In contrast, other 
anaesthetic agents such as barbiturates act on inhibitory GABAergic 
interneurons.
It causes a predictable decrease in mean arterial pressure and heart rate 
with no clinically significant respiratory depression. It decreases plasma 
adrenaline and noradrenaline concentrations and blunts the sympathetic 
response to surgery. It may cause fever, nausea, and discontinuation may 
lead to withdrawal reactions.
It has a distribution half-​life of six minutes and is highly protein bound with 
a VD of .33 L/​kg. It undergoes hepatic metabolism by glucuronidation 
and N-​methylation. 95% is excreted in the urine with a clearance of 39 
L/​hr and the half-​life is two hours. Of note, it crosses the placenta.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Dexmedetomidine.
Pryor KO, Veselis RA. Neuroscientific Foundations of Anesthesiology. 
Oxford University Press, 20. Anesthetic modulation of memory 
processing in the medial temporal lobe.
 
 
 
Table 0.  Pharmacokinetic parameters of some common benzodiazepines
Half-​life 
(hrs)
Half-​life 
of active 
metabolite 
(hrs)
Oral 
bioavailability 
(%)
Lipid 
solubility
Protein 
binding 
(%)
Volume of 
Distribution 
(l/​kg)
Active 
metabolites
Clearance 
(ml/​min/​
kg)
Midazolam
2–​3
–​
–​
44
High
96
0.8–​.5
Minimal
5.8–​9
Temazepam
5–​
–​
00
76
0.8
Minimal
6.6
Lorazepam
8–​25
–​
90
Poor
88–​92

None

Diazepam
20–​40
00
86–​00
High
99
0.8–​.4
Desmethyl­
diazepam, 
oxazepam, 
temazepam
0.32–​0.44
Answers
125
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dexmedetomidine.
Stevens RD, Hart N, Herridge MS. Textbook of Post-​ICU Medicine: The 
Legacy of Critical Care. Oxford University Press, 204. Sleep disorders 
and recovery from critical illness.
3.  D
Rapid boluses of phenytoin may result in hypotension, arrhythmias 
including complete heart block and ventricular fibrillation, and respira­
tory arrest. For this reason, when administered as a bolus, patients 
should be fully monitored, and the infusion slowed down or stopped 
should adverse features become apparent. The other agents mentioned 
are unlikely to result in arrhythmias in this situation, although benzodi­
azepines may result in respiratory arrest.
Phenytoin acts as a membrane stabilizer (rather than increasing the 
seizure threshold), by slowing inward sodium and calcium and outward 
potassium flux during depolarization in excitable tissue. As such it is a 
class I antiarrhythmic, shortening the cardiac action potential.
Oral absorption is 85–​95% complete. It is highly protein bound with 
a small VD. It is predominantly metabolized by CYP2C9. It is a potent 
enzyme inducer of CYP2C9, CYP2C9, CYPA2, and CYP3A4. Due to 
autoinduction, the dose may need to be increased, but this process takes 
several days to weeks.
Phenytoin exhibits zero-​order kinetics, otherwise known as non-​
linear kinetics, just above the therapeutic range; a small increase in an 
administered dose produces a much larger increase in plasma level. 
Hypoalbuminaemia, uraemia, hepatic disease, foods, and drugs may all 
influence free (i.e. active) levels.
Further reading
Asadi-​Pooya A, Sperling M. Antiepileptic Drugs: A Clinician’s Manual, 2nd 
edition. Oxford University Press, 205. Monitoring antiepileptic drugs 
and their toxicity.
Nageshwaran S, Ledingham D, Wilson HC, Dickenson A. Drugs in 
Neurology. Oxford University Press, 207. Phenytoin and fosphenytoin.
NICE. Phenytoin, 2022. Available at: https://​bnf.nice.org.uk/​drug/​
phenyt​oin.html#side​Effe​cts
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Phenytoin.
4.  D
Carbamazepine is an iminostilbene derivative related to the tricyclic anti­
depressants. It is used in the management of epilepsy, bipolar disorder, 
and trigeminal neuralgia. It causes a use-​dependent block of neuronal 
voltage-​gated sodium channels and stabilizes neurons by inhibition at L-​
type calcium channels. It is only available as an oral formulation.
 
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
126
It has 00% oral bioavailability and is 75% protein bound with a VD 
of  l/​kg. It is hepatically metabolized to an active epoxide and is a 
CYP3A4 enzyme inducer. It is excreted unconjugated in the urine and 
has an elimination half-​life of 6–​36 hours, which reduces with enzyme 
autoinduction over a number of weeks. Aminosteroid efficacy is reduced 
in patients on long-​term carbamazepine.
Long-​term use of carbamazepine increases hepatic fentanyl clearance, 
which may result in decreased durations of therapeutic concentrations 
and hence patients may need higher or additional doses of fentanyl 
in order to obtain satisfactory pain relief. Carbamazepine does not 
increase sensitivity to sympathomimetic drugs and does not decrease 
MAC requirements. Common side effects include nausea, drowsi­
ness, and ataxia. Co-​administration with metronidazole risks inhibiting 
carbamazepine metabolism, leading to potentially toxic plasma 
concentrations.
Further reading
Nageshwaran S, Ledingham D, Wilson HC, Dickenson A. Drugs in 
Neurology. Oxford University Press, 207. Carbamazepine and related 
antiepileptic drugs.
Nozari A, et al. Prolonged therapy with the anticonvulsant carba­
mazepine leads to increased plasma clearance of fentanyl. J Pharm 
Pharmacol, 209;7(6):982–​987.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Carbamazepine.
5.  C
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune condition where IgG antibodies 
form against the post-​synaptic acetylcholine receptor. It is characterized 
by fatigable muscle weakness and frequently involves ocular symptoms.
Pyridostigmine is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. Acetylcholinesterase 
is the enzyme found at the neuromuscular junction responsible for the 
degradation of acetylcholine, breaking it down to acetate and cho­
line. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors act by reversibly binding to acetyl­
cholinesterase preventing the breakdown of acetylcholine, therefore 
increasing the amount available to generate an action potential. In myas­
thenia gravis, pyridostigmine is used for its longer duration of action. In 
contrast, the duration of edrophonium and neostigmine is shorter; 0 
minutes and 40–​60 minutes with peak effects at 0.8–​2 minutes and 7–​ 
minutes, respectively. Along with neostigmine and edrophonium, pyrido­
stigmine does not cross the blood–​brain barrier due to the presence of a 
quaternary ammonium group. Other drugs which may be utilized in the 
management of the condition include azathioprine and glucocorticoids 
for their immunosuppressive actions.
As a general principle, neuromuscular blocking drugs should be avoided 
in patients with myasthenia and achieving muscle relaxation via sufficient 
anaesthetic depth is preferable or the use of regional or local anaes­
thetic techniques if possible. Careful anaesthetic management is even 
 
 
Answers
127
more critical if patients are established on acetylcholinesterase inhibitor 
medications.
If the use of neuromuscular blocking drugs is unavoidable, then non-​
depolarizing agents should be used. Due to the unpredictable response 
and the decreased numbers of functional acetylcholine receptors in 
myasthenia gravis, small doses of such agents should be given with titra­
tion to effect guided by a train of four monitor. Receptor density is typic­
ally 30% of normal levels hence dose requirement is often approximately 
30% of a standard intubating drug dose (NB: intubating doses are typ­
ically quoted as 0.6 mg/​kg rocuronium; 0.5 mg/​kg atracurium; 0. mg/​
kg vecuronium). Some sources however recommend even smaller initial 
doses such as 0.–​0.2 of the ED95 dose be used. Intubating doses are 
typically 2–​3 × ED95 doses, so very small doses may need to be repeated.
Depolarizing agents such as suxamethonium should be avoided com­
pletely as patients are typically resistant to their effect and additionally 
pyridostigmine, due to its action on pseudocholinesterase, may reduce 
its metabolic destruction. Mivacurium is also metabolized by plasma 
pseudocholinesterase so its metabolism would be similarly inhibited. 
Sugammadex is recommended for reversal due to unpredictability 
when using an anticholinesterase agent (neostigmine), hence the selec­
tion of rocuronium or vecuronium may be considered preferential over 
atracurium as a blocking agent should reversal be required. The dose 
of vecuronium presented would be completely excessive. If suxameth­
onium was utilized, then due to the reduced receptor density approxi­
mately 2.6× normal dose would actually need to be selected—​however, 
there would be a significant chance of phase II block occurring with this. 
Of note, azathioprine has been associated with prolongation of the 
effects of suxamethonium and inhibition of non-​depolarizing muscle 
relaxant agents.
Further reading
Collins C, Roberts H, Hewer I. Anaesthesia and perioperative consider­
ations for patients with myasthenia gravis. AANA J, 2020;88(6):485–​49.
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Anticholinesterases.
Kveraga R, Powlowski J. Anaesthesia for the Patient with Myasthenia 
Gravis, 2022. Available at: https://​www.uptod​ate.com/​conte​nts/​
ane​sthe​sia-​for-​the-​pati​ent-​with-​mya​sthe​nia-​gra​vis
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition, 
Oxford University Press, 206. Neostigmine.
Thavasothy M, Hirsch N. Myasthenia gravis. BJA CEPD Reviews, 
2002;2(3):88–​90.
6.  E
This scenario describes an oculogyric crisis to haloperidol. Oculogyric 
crises are an acute dystonia of the extraocular muscles. Features typically 
begin within 4 days of starting the medication or can be related to dose 
increases. Early signs may include restlessness and agitation followed 
 
 
Chapter 0  Drugs affecting CNS
128
by a fixed stare. Most usually there is fixed eye deviation upwards and 
laterally, but this has also been reported as a downward convergence. 
Other symptoms may include an arched neck, tongue protrusion, rapid 
blinking, lacrimation, and mutism. When caused by antipsychotic agents, 
features may include sweating, facial flushing, transitory hypertension, 
and difficulty micturating in association with hallucinations and delusions.
Other antipsychotic drugs such as prochlorperazine and olanzapine 
can precipitate dystonias. Other potential culprits may include 
metoclopramide, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). 
This scenario does not describe inadequate reversal. Amisulpride is a 
selective dopamine antagonist (high D2 and D3 receptor affinity). It is 
typically prescribed for acute psychosis in schizophrenia; no informa­
tion is presented in the scenario to support a diagnosis of schizophrenia. 
Additionally, administration of this drug alongside haloperidol should 
be avoided—​both drugs prolong the QT interval and this is noted as a 
severe drug interaction.
Management should include discontinuation of the suspected causa­
tive agent and administration of a centrally acting antimuscarinic such 
as procyclidine or benzatropine intravenously. The suggested dose of IV 
procyclidine is 5–​0 mg. Subsequent management should include consid­
eration of further oral doses of procyclidine.
Further reading
Allman K, McIndoe A, Wilson I. Emergencies in Anaesthesia, 2nd edition. 
Oxford University Press, 2009. Neurosurgery.
Puri B, Treasden I. Emergencies in Psychiatry. Oxford University Press, 
2008. The management of psychiatric and medical emergencies.
7.  E
Sertraline is a selective serotonin (5-​hydroxytryptamine) reuptake 
inhibitor (SSRI). They are probably the most widely used group of 
antidepressants in use. Other SSRIs include fluoxetine, paroxetine, and 
citalopram.
They have a generally favourable side effect profile in comparison to 
other groups of antidepressants. Side effects may include a rise or fall 
in heart rate, hypotension, hyponatraemia, nausea, abdominal pain, and 
hypersensitivity. They are extensively metabolized by the hepatic cyto­
chrome P450 system and renally excreted. Many antidepressants are as­
sociated with hyponatraemia, however, the highest risk is with SSRIs. 
Consideration should be given to selecting an alternative such as a tri­
cyclic antidepressant (TCA) or MAOI if severe. Altered taste has been 
reported with sertraline, amitriptyline, and bupropion.
Studies suggest SSRIs are associated with an increased risk of bleeding, 
however the overall chance of experiencing a significant event is rare. 
The proposed mechanism is the inhibition of the uptake of serotonin 
into platelets, leading to platelet dysfunction and reduced effectiveness 
of normal clotting processes. They are potent inhibitors of cytochrome 
 
 
Answers
129
p450, so vigilance with co-​administration of other drugs metabolized by 
these enzyme systems is required.
Abrupt cessation of many antidepressant drugs can lead to a with­
drawal or discontinuation syndrome. SSRIs, tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), selective noradrenaline 
reuptake inhibitors (e.g. duloxetine), and various atypical agents such as 
mirtazapine, venlafaxine, and trazodone have all been associated with this 
potential syndrome. Symptoms typically include insomnia, hyperarousal, 
nausea, balance disruption, and flu-​like symptoms. Appropriate gradual 
tapering of doses should be undertaken and patient education is key.
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs; for example, amitriptyline) selectively 
inhibit the presynaptic reuptake of noradrenaline (and variably among 
different agents, serotonin). Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs; 
for example, isocarboxazid) bind to mitochondrial monoamine oxi­
dase increasing the concentration of monoamines within the CNS. Both 
TCAs and MAOIs have potentially significant side effects and toxicity 
profiles when compared with SSRIs.
Other antidepressant drugs include trazodone (which is a mixed sero­
tonin receptor agonist/​antagonist) and bupropion (which is a weak nor­
adrenaline and dopamine uptake inhibitor and can be prescribed for its 
antidepressant effects or to support smoking cessation).
Further reading
Gelder M, Andreasen N, Lopez-​Ibor J, Geddes J. New Oxford 
Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd edition. Oxford University Press, 202. 
Antidepressants.
Ereshefsky L, Riesenman C, Lam YWF. Antidepressant drug interactions 
and the cytochrome P450 system. Clin Pharmacokinet, 995;29:0–​9.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Amitriptylin, Phenelzine, SSRIs.
 
131
Chapter 
Drugs affecting the 
cardiovascular system
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	 

Which of the following drugs antagonize alpha adrenoceptors?
A	 Clonidine
B	 Labetalol
C	 Phentolamine
D	 Phenylephrine
E	 Tamsulosin
2.	
A 45-​year-​old female patient presents to the preoperative assess­
ment clinic the day before she is scheduled to have a vaginal hys­
terectomy. Her lowest blood pressure (BP) measured is 65/​90. Which 
actions should be taken?
A	 Start an angiotensin-​converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (ACEi)
B	 Continue with surgery
C	 Inform GP
D	 Start metoprolol
E	 Refer the patient to the medical on-​call team
3.	
 
Drugs that can cause a reduction in systemic vascular resistance
A	 Dobutamine
B	 Dopamine
C	 Levosimendan
D	 Milrinone
E	 Noradrenaline
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Drugs affecting CVS
132
4.	
 
Clonidine
A	 Acts on post-​synaptic alpha-​2 receptors
B	 Can cause a transient increase in blood pressure
C	 Prolongs duration of local anaesthesia when co-​administered for 
neural blockade
D	 Elimination half-​life is reduced in renal impairment
E	 Oral bioavailability is 00%
5.	
A 33-​year-​old banker has been brought into the emergency 
department by his friends who were celebrating with him after 
the conclusion of an important deal. He is acutely agitated and confused 
with a blood pressure of 200/​0. They say no alcohol was consumed 
but one witnessed the patient snorting ‘something’. Which drugs would 
be beneficial in managing this case?
A	 Labetalol 50 mg IV
B	 50 ml of mannitol 20% IV
C	 Nimodipine sublingually
D	 Ramipril 5 mg orally
E	 Sodium nitroprusside infusion
6.	
 
Adrenaline
A	 Has enantiomers
B	 Will increase insulin requirements in diabetic patients
C	 5 ml :000 nebulized is appropriate for a one-​year-​old baby 
with croup
D	 Dose should be limited to 5 mcg/​kg/​30 mins in the presence of 
isoflurane
E	 0.3 ml :000 IM is appropriate management for an eight-​year-​old 
child in anaphylaxis
 
 
 
Questions
133
7.	
 
In pregnancy
A	 ACEi are safe to continue in the management of chronic 
hypertension
B	 Patients with type  diabetes should be taking 75 mg aspirin daily 
from 2 weeks
C	 Patients with gestational hypertension and blood pressure 45/​95 
mmHg should be treated with oral labetalol
D	 Pre-​eclamptic patients with blood pressure 45/​95 mmHg should 
be admitted to hospital
E	 Pre-​eclamptic patients with blood pressure 45/​95 mmHg should 
be treated with oral labetalol
Single Best Answers
.	
A 73-​year-​old male patient arrives at the pre-​op assessment clinic. 
He is scheduled for a hiatus hernia repair tomorrow. Initial ob­
servations show a respiratory rate of 8 breaths per minute, oxygen 
saturation of 97% on room air, blood pressure of 0/​70 mmHg, and a 
heart rate of 60 beats per minute. The nurse brings you the electrocar­
diograph (ECG) which shows a broad complex tachycardia. What is the 
most appropriate management?
A	 Adenosine 6 mg IV
B	 Amiodarone 300 mg IV
C	 Lidocaine 00 mg IV
D	 Sotolol 00 mg IV
E	 Synchronized DC cardioversion
2.	
A 68-​year-​old male patient monitored in cardiac intensive care, 
4 hours after coronary artery bypass surgery, enters witnessed 
ventricular fibrillation (VF). The most appropriate initial management is?
A	 Adrenaline  mg IM
B	 Amiodarone 300 mg IV
C	 Deliver up to three stacked direct current (DC) shocks
D	 Initiate open chest protocol
E	 Start cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) with DC shock as soon 
as possible
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Drugs affecting CVS
134
3.	
A 62-​year-​old male patient scheduled for a left total knee replace­
ment next week attends pre-​op assessment clinic. His best BP 
of three is recorded as 70/​5. He is known to be hypertensive and 
his regular medications include amlodipine 0 mg OD and candesartan 
6 mg OD. What would be the most appropriate next step in his 
management?
A	 He can continue to surgery with GP follow-​up post-​op
B	 Refer back to the GP, who will add in bendroflumethiazide
C	 Refer back to the GP, who will add in indapamide
D	 Refer back to the GP, who will switch candesartan to ramipril
E	 Start atenolol now and continue to surgery as planned
4.	
A 22-​year-​old male patient is being managed on the neuro inten­
sive care unit (ICU) with a severe traumatic brain injury. He is 
becoming progressively more tachycardic with a heart rate of 20 bpm. 
His BP is 95/​60 mmHg despite aggressive fluid filling and his urine output 
has been greater than 500 ml/​hr for the last two hours. Which of the 
following infusions would you start?
A	 Adrenaline
B	 Dobutamine
C	 Metaraminol
D	 Noradrenaline
E	 Vasopressin
5.	
An 8-​month-​old child has been admitted to the ICU with sepsis. 
She has had 60 ml/​kg in total of IV isotonic saline and a dopamine 
infusion has been started, running at 0 mcg/​kg/​min. She is peripherally 
cold and mottled, with a central capillary refill time (CRT) of four sec­
onds. Her blood pressure is 80/​50. What is your next step for managing 
her septic shock?
A	 Add in an adrenaline infusion
B	 Add in a milrinone infusion
C	 Add in a noradrenaline infusion
D	 Give a 20 ml/​kg bolus IV 5% albumin
E	 Start a vasopressin infusion
 
 
 
Questions
135
6.	
A 38-​year-​old man, who is paraplegic with a T4 spinal cord injury 
he acquired in his 20s, is in the post-​anaesthesia care unit (PACU) 
recovering from a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. You have been called 
to see him as his blood pressure has suddenly risen to 220/​5 mmHg. 
He is complaining of a headache and appears flushed and sweaty. After 
ensuring his urinary catheter is patent and his rectum is empty, what 
would you do?
A	 Administer –​2 tablets of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) sublingually
B	 Give hydralazine 20 mg IV
C	 Give labetalol 20 mg IV
D	 Start a magnesium sulfate infusion
E	 Start an IV GTN infusion
7.	
A 53-​year-​old female patient with asymptomatic hypertrophic car­
diomyopathy (HCM) has a general anaesthetic for a total abdom­
inal hysterectomy. Shortly after induction, her blood pressure falls to 90/​
55. What is the best way to manage this situation?
A	 500 ml IV fluid bolus and phenylephrine infusion
B	 Incremental 0 mcg boluses of adrenaline
C	 Insert a central line and start a noradrenaline infusion
D	 Obtain a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE)
E	 Reduce the depth of anaesthetic
 
 
Chapter   Drugs affecting CVS
136
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FTTFT
Clonidine is an alpha-​2 adrenoceptor agonist. Phenylephrine is a direct 
alpha-​ agonist. Labetalol is a selective alpha-​, beta-​, and beta-​2 
adrenoceptor antagonist. Phentolamine is a competitive alpha antag­
onist. Tamsulosin is a selective alpha-​ antagonist used in benign pros­
tatic hypertrophy.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Clonidine, Labetalol, Phentolamine, 
Phenylephrine.
2.  FTTFF
The GP referral to the surgeon should include documented evidence 
of blood pressure recordings below 60/​00 mmHg in the last year. 
If the blood pressure is being assessed in a secondary care environ­
ment (i.e. pre-​op assessment clinic), then blood pressure less than 
80/​0 mmHg is acceptable to proceed. The GP should, however, 
still be informed of readings in excess of 40/​90 mmHg so that the 
diagnosis of hypertension can be confirmed, investigated, and treated 
as necessary. Starting antihypertensives the day before surgery is not 
appropriate and any such interventions should also be managed by 
the patient’s GP.
Further reading
Hartle A, et al. AAGBI Guideline: The measurement of adult blood 
pressure and management of hypertension before elective surgery. 
Anaesthesia, 206;7:326–​337.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. ACE inhibitors.
3.  TTTTF
At low doses (5 mcg/​kg/​min) the beta-​adrenergic effects of dopa­
mine are predominant. The beta-​2 effect may lead to a reduction in 
systemic vascular resistance. Dobutamine also has a direct beta-​2 
agonist effect. Levosimendan is a calcium sensitizer, but also stimu­
lates ATP-​dependent K channels, leading to vasodilatation. Milrinone 
is a selective phosphodiesterase III inhibitor in cardiac and vascular 
muscle. It causes cAMP-​dependent protein phosphorylation and 
subsequent vascular muscle relaxation. The primary action of nor­
adrenaline is increasing systemic vascular resistance by acting at alpha-​
adrenergic receptors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
137
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dobutamine, Dopamine, Levosimendan, 
Milrinone, Noradrenaline.
4.  FTTFT
Clonidine stimulates pre-​synaptic alpha-​2 adrenoceptors, reducing 
noradrenaline release and thereby decreasing sympathetic tone. 
Dexmedetomidine acts on post-​synaptic alpha-​2 receptors. When 
administered IV, clonidine stimulates vascular alpha-​ receptors and 
causes a transient increase in blood pressure. The drug is absorbed 
rapidly when administered orally with a bioavailability of 00%. 65% of 
clonidine is excreted unchanged in the urine. The dose should be re­
duced if the eGFR is less than 0ml/​min. Clonidine cannot be removed 
by haemodialysis.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Clonidine, Appendix A.3.
5.  TFFFT
This patient has hypertensive encephalopathy caused by a sudden, 
sustained rise in blood pressure exceeding the upper limit of cerebral 
autoregulation. Likely secondary to cocaine use. The primary aim of 
therapy is prompt, titratable, lowering of arterial blood pressure. For 
this, short-​acting IV agents and infusions are the most useful.
Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) is a very fast-​acting and titratable vasodilator 
which acts to stabilize the smooth muscle cell membrane by interacting 
with sulfhydryl groups and preventing calcium influx necessary for con­
traction. Unfortunately, SNP has the potential to cause cyanide toxicity 
at higher rates of infusion. At higher plasma concentrations, the drug is 
metabolized by rapid non-​enzymatic hydrolysis in red blood cells. By this 
mechanism, each SNP molecule produces five cyanide ions. The man­
agement of cyanide ion toxicity includes administering either sodium 
thiosulphate or dicobalt edetate.
Labetalol is a non-​selective beta-​antagonist with 7: beta:alpha activity. 
Its antihypertensive effect is primarily through a reduction in peripheral 
vascular resistance while cardiac output and heart rate are maintained. 
It is the combined adrenergic antagonism that makes this drug especially 
useful in times of catecholamine excess, such as this case. The onset of 
action is within 2–​5 minutes when administered IV and may last up to 
6 hours. The BNF (British National Formulary) recommends a dose of 
50 mg over  minute to be repeated at 5 min intervals up to a maximum 
dose of 200 mg.
Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic widely used in the management of raised 
intracerebral pressure and cerebral oedema. A dose of 0.25–​2 g/​kg is 
recommended by the BNF. The dose stated here (0 g) is therefore 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Drugs affecting CVS
138
a significant underdosing. Sublingual nimodipine will have a rapid onset 
of action, but is uncontrollable and can have serious adverse effects 
including cerebral ischaemia and myocardial infarction. Ramipril has a 
time to peak effect of 3–​6 hours with its antihypertensive effect lasting 
for 24 hours. It is therefore neither fast-​acting, nor titratable, and there­
fore also inappropriate in this circumstance.
Further reading
Lamy C, Mas JL. Hypertensive encephalopathy. In Grotta JC, et al. (eds) 
Stroke, 6th edition. Elsevier, 206. Pages 640–​647.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. ACE inhibitors, Mannitol, Nimodipine, 
Sodium Nitroprusside.
6.  TTTFT
Adrenaline is a racemic : mixture of dextro and levo rotatory enantio­
mers. The D-​type has approximately /​2th to /​8th of the potency 
of the levo form. L-​adrenaline is available as an enantiopure preparation. 
Adrenaline increases plasma blood glucose, reduces endogenous insulin 
secretion, and increases the rate of glycogenolysis. Diabetic patients may 
require dose increases of their insulin.
Doses should be limited to 3 mcg/​kg/​30 mins in the presence of 
isoflurane (or  mcg/​kg/​30 mins for halothane) due to the risk of pre­
cipitating severe ventricular dysrhythmias. Paediatric IM doses of :000 
adrenaline doses for anaphylaxis are: child age <6 years =​ 0.5 ml (50 
mcg), child age 6–​2 years =​ 0.3 ml (300 mcg) and children >2 years =​ 
as per adult algorithm 0.5 ml (500 mcg).
Further reading
Resuscitation Council UK. Available at: https://​www.resus.org.uk/​
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Adrenaline, Insulin, Isoflurane.
7.  FTFTF
Pregnant patients with type  diabetes are at high risk of pre-​eclampsia, 
and therefore should take daily aspirin from 2 weeks. Other high-​risk 
factors for pre-​eclampsia include:
●	 Hypertensive disease during a previous pregnancy
●	 Chronic kidney disease
●	 Autoimmune disease
●	 Type 2 diabetes
●	 Chronic hypertension
For a patient with gestational hypertension, a blood pressure of 45/​
95 mmHg is regarded as mild, and therefore does not need admission or 
treatment. For a patient with pre-​eclampsia, however, a blood pressure 
of 45/​95 mmHg requires admission to hospital, but not treatment. ACE 
 
 
 
 
Answers
139
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are associated with 
an increased risk of congenital abnormalities if taken during pregnancy.
Further reading
NICE. Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management [CG07], 
200. Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guida​nce/​cg07
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. ACE inhibitors, Aspirin, Magnesium.
Single Best Answers
.  B
As per the Resuscitation Council UK 205 guidelines for tachycardia. 
The patient shows no adverse signs which would lead to a synchron­
ized shock. Adenosine or sotalol could be considered if it were 
a narrow complex tachycardia. This could, of course, be a regular 
narrow complex tachycardia with a bundle branch block, but without 
knowing that the patient has pre-​existing bundle branch block from 
previous ECGs, it should be assumed to be a new broad complex 
tachycardia.
Further reading
Resuscitation Council UK. Adult Tachycardia Algorithm, 205. Available 
at: https://​www.resus.org.uk/​sites/​defa​ult/​files/​202-​04/​Tach​ycar​
dia%20Al​gori​thm%202​02.pdf
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th 
edition. Oxford University Press, 206. Adenosine, Amiodarone, 
Lidocaine.
2.  C
The cardiac advanced life support algorithm states that if the ECG shows 
VF or pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT) then external cardiac mas­
sage can be delayed up to  minute to administer up to three consecu­
tive DC shocks. After cardiac surgery chest compressions are associated 
with potentially fatal complications and may not be necessary. The like­
lihood of success declines significantly with sequential shocks (78% —​> 
35% —​> 4%) and therefore resternotomy would be preferable to per­
forming a fourth shock. Adrenaline administration is not a part of the 
cardiac ALS protocol. Amiodarone may be helpful at a later time, but is 
not the best initial management.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Adrenaline, Amiodarone.
Society of Thoracic Surgeons Task Force on Resuscitation After Cardiac 
Surgery. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons expert consensus for the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Drugs affecting CVS
140
resuscitation of patients who arrest after cardiac surgery. Ann Thoracic 
Surg, 207;03:005–​020.
3.  C
After three readings, the lowest systolic BP should be below 80 
mmHg AND the lowest diastolic BP below 0 mmHg in order for 
elective surgery to proceed as planned with GP follow-​up post-​op. 
This patient would fit into the category of step 3 treatment, which 
involves the addition of a thiazide-​like diuretic, such as indapamide. 
The GP should be the one to start new antihypertensive medications, 
not the pre-​op assessment clinic. Non-​cancer elective surgery should 
be delayed for a minimum of six weeks to allow new antihypertensive 
medication to be established and a sustained improvement in BP 
achieved.
Further reading
Hartle A, et al. AAGBI Guideline: the measurement of adult blood 
pressure and management of hypertension before elective surgery. 
Anaesthesia, 206;7:326–​337.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. ACE inhibitors, Amlodipine, A2RA, 
Bendroflumethiazide.
4.  E
Cardiovascular instability is common in the patient with a severe trau­
matic brain injury progressing to brainstem death. Contributing factors 
include loss of vasomotor tone secondary to catecholamine depletion, 
diabetes insipidus (DI) secondary to acute posterior pituitary failure and 
myocardial depression secondary to catecholamine and cytokine tox­
icity. Early restoration of vascular tone can reduce the risks of excessive 
fluid administration. Vasopressin is considered the first-​line agent in this 
situation as it:
●	 Restores vasomotor tone
●	 Treats DI
●	 Minimizes catecholamine requirements
●	 Is less likely than noradrenaline to cause metabolic acidosis or 
pulmonary hypertension.
Vasopressin (8-​arginine-​vasopressin) is a synthetic nonapeptide, iden­
tical to human endogenous vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone). It has 
actions on multiple receptors via G-​protein linked receptors (V; vas­
cular smooth muscle constriction. V2; renal control of plasma volume 
and osmolality, V3; pituitary release of ACTH) and exhibits the same 
affinity as oxytocin for binding to oxytocin type receptors. Dosing is inde­
pendent of hepatic and renal function.
 
 
 
Answers
141
Further reading
Gordon J, et al. Physiological changes after brain stem death and man­
agement of the heart beating donor. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 
202;2(5):225–​229.
Sharman A, Low J. Vasopressin and its role in critical care. Cont Educ 
Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 2008;8(4):34–​37.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th 
edition. Oxford University Press, 206. Adrenaline, Dobutamine, 
Metaraminol, Noradrenaline, Vasopressin.
5.  A
This patient has cold shock. She is fluid and dopamine resistant. The 
next step in the paediatric sepsis algorithm is to start an adrenaline 
infusion. Noradrenaline or vasopressin would be the choice for warm 
shock. Milrinone would be the correct choice if she had cold shock with 
a normal blood pressure. In ‘cold shock’ there is typically low cardiac 
output, high systemic vascular resistance, and cool shut-​down periph­
eries. ‘Warm shock’, by contrast, describes high cardiac output, low 
systemic vascular resistance, and peripheral vasodilation with bounding 
pulses. Inadequate tissue perfusion is common in both forms.
Further reading
Brierley J, et al. Clinical practice parameters for haemodynamic support of 
paediatric and neonatal septic shock: 2007 update from the American 
College of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med, 2009;37:666–​688.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. Oxford 
University Press, 206. Adrenaline, Dopamine, Human albumin solution, 
Milrinone, Noradrenaline, Vasopressin.
6.  A
This man is experiencing autonomic dysreflexia. It is a medical emer­
gency resulting in severe hypertension following a disordered autonomic 
response to stimuli below the level of the spinal cord injury. Incidence 
is 50–​70% in patients with a spinal cord lesion above T6. The most 
common triggers are bladder distension and constipation, which is why 
these are checked first. Initial pharmacological management should be 
sublingual GTN or nifedipine. Both are fast-​acting, easy to administer, 
and readily available in a hospital environment. It is often associated 
with a bradycardia reflex, and therefore labetalol would not be the best 
choice. Hydralazine, magnesium, and IV GTN would all be considered as 
subsequent management options.
Further reading
Petsas A, Drake J. Perioperative management for patients with a chronic 
spinal cord injury. BJA Education, 205;5(3):23–​30.
Royal College of Physicians British Society of Rehabilitation Medicine, 
Multidisciplinary Association of Spinal Cord Injury Professionals, British 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Drugs affecting CVS
142
Association of Spinal Cord Injury Professionals, British Association 
of Spinal Injury Specialists, and Spinal Injuries Association. A Series 
of Evidence-​Based Guidelines for Clinical Management: Guideline 
Number 9: Chronic Spinal Cord Injury: Management of Patients in 
Acute Hospital Settings. Royal College of Physicians, 2008. Available 
at: https://​www.bsrm.org.uk/​downlo​ads/​sciweb​vers​ion.pdf
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. Oxford 
University Press, 206. Glyceryl trinitrate, Hydralazine, Magnesium.
7.  A
In the management of patients with HCM, the aim is to:
●	 Maintain sinus rhythm
●	 Keep sympathetic activity to a minimum to reduce chronotropy and 
inotropy
●	 Maintain left ventricular filling
●	 Maintain systemic vascular resistance (SVR).
In this case, it is likely that at induction, the patient who is relatively 
underfilled due to being fasted pre-​op, has a drop in her SVR and goes 
on to develop left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction. It would 
be ideal to obtain a TOE to formalize this diagnosis, however she must 
be managed while this is organized and treatment should be commenced 
immediately. Answers A and C will both lead to increased sympathetic 
activity and therefore be detrimental to her condition.
Further reading
Davies MR, Cousins J. Cardiomyopathy and anaesthesia. Cont Educ Crit 
Care Pain, 2009;9(6):89–​93.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. Oxford 
University Press, 206. Adrenaline, Noradrenaline, Phenylephrine.
 
 
143
Chapter 2
Drugs affecting the 
respiratory system
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
Recognized treatments for pulmonary arterial hypertension 
include:
A	 Warfarin
B	 Nebulized iloprost
C	 Digoxin
D	 Oxygen
E	 Pulmonary endarterectomy
2.	
In a patient suffering from acute severe asthma, it is appropriate 
to administer:
A	 Oxygen to maintain SpO2 88–​92%
B	 IV β2 agonist
C	 Nebulized β2 agonist
D	 Nebulized magnesium sulfate
E	 IV antibiotics
3.	
In the management of asthma during pregnancy, the following 
should be used as they would be in non-​pregnant patients:
A	 Oral theophylline
B	 Short-​acting β2 agonist
C	 Oral steroids
D	 Inhaled corticosteroids
E	 Long-​acting β2 agonist
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Drugs affecting RS
144
4.	
The following techniques can be used in the management of theo­
phylline poisoning:
A	 Encourage vomiting
B	 Ondansetron
C	 Haemodialysis
D	 Activated charcoal
E	 Potassium chloride
5.	
Regarding long-​term oxygen therapy (LTOT), which of the fol­
lowing statements are correct?
A	 Supplemental oxygen needs to be breathed for at least 5 hours 
day–​ to improve mortality
B	 The mortality benefit of LTOT comes from reducing pulmonary 
arterial pressure
C	 LTOT is only effective if, with it, oxygen saturations are 
maintained >92%
D	 LTOT is indicated in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) patients with PaO2 <8 and peripheral oedema
E	 LTOT can be used to treat isolated nocturnal hypoxaemia caused 
by COPD
6.	
The following effects are associated with the use of high oxygen 
concentrations:
A	 Pulmonary congestion
B	 Increased cerebral blood flow
C	 Increased vital capacity
D	 Reduced cardiac output
E	 Altered lymphocyte production
7.	
 
Salbutamol
A	 Is an agonist at the beta-​ adrenoceptor
B	 Crosses the placenta and can cause foetal tachycardia
C	 Causes a rise in plasma potassium concentration
D	 Potentiates the action of non-​depolarizing muscle relaxants
E	 Can cause lactic acidosis
 
 
 
 
Questions
145
Single Best Answers
.	
A 28-​year-​old primiparous woman is having a category 2 caesarean 
section for failure to progress at 39/​40. She does not report any 
significant medical history and has had an uncomplicated pregnancy to 
date. She has a spinal anaesthetic, which is working well. Following the 
delivery of a healthy baby, she suffers a severe post-​postpartum haem­
orrhage (PPH) due to uterine atony. She begins to complain of shortness 
of breath and her oxygen saturation begins to drop. What is the most 
likely cause?
A	 Amniotic fluid embolus
B	 Carboprost
C	 Ergometrine
D	 High spinal
E	 Oxytocin
2.	
A 32-​year-​old man has undergone an open appendicectomy. His 
only past medical history is a diagnosis of testicular cancer for 
which he had previously received bleomycin and had surgery with cura­
tive intent. He takes no regular medications now and has no known aller­
gies. On the day  postoperative ward round he is noted to be dyspnoeic 
with pleuritic chest pain and a dry cough. His oxygen saturations are 94% 
on 4 litres min–​ oxygen delivered by nasal cannulae. What is the most 
important action to take?
A	 Give therapeutic low molecular weight heparin
B	 Increase administered oxygen to target saturations of 98%
C	 Remove supplementary oxygen
D	 Request a chest X-​ray
E	 Take an arterial blood sample
3.	
A 26-​year-​old female presents four months after a lung transplant 
for cystic fibrosis with dyspnoea, hypoxia, and lethargy. She denies 
any cough. Her respiratory rate is 32 min–​, oxygen saturation 92% on 
0 L/​min–​ O2, heart rate 00 min–​, blood pressure 96/​58 mmHg, and 
temperature is 37.°C. Her chest X-​ray shows bilateral diffuse infiltrates. 
Given the likely diagnosis, what is the most important therapy?
A	 Diagnostic bronchoscopy
B	 Increase FiO2
C	 IV amoxicillin and clarithromycin
D	 Nebulized amphotericin
E	 Pulsed methylprednisolone
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Drugs affecting RS
146
4.	
A 70 kg, 54-​year-​old man has been intubated and ventilated in an 
intensive care unit (ICU) for three days. He is influenza positive. 
His chest radiograph shows diffuse bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. He has 
an increasing oxygen requirement and currently his FiO2 is 0.8 with pH 
7.22, PaO2 8 kPa, and PaCO2 6.4 kPa. He is on volume-​controlled ventila­
tion with PEEP 8 cmH2O, respiratory rate 20 min–​, and tidal volume 500 
ml. What should be the next step in optimizing his respiratory function 
prior to referral for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)?
A	 Exogenous surfactant replacement
B	 Inhaled nitric oxide
C	 Inhaled prostacyclin
D	 IV methylprednisolone
E	 Reduce tidal volume to 420 ml
5.	
A 32/​40 pregnant woman is seen in the emergency department. 
She has been sent in by her midwife who is concerned about her 
breathing following a routine appointment. She appears to be breath­
less at rest, using her accessory muscles and is somewhat anxious. She 
can speak short sentences and says that aside from the breathlessness 
she feels well in herself. Her observations are: respiratory rate 32 min–​
; saturations on room air 92%; blood pressure 24/​60 mmHg; heart 
rate 0 min–​; and temperature 37.3°C. Given the most likely diagnosis, 
what is the most appropriate action?
A	 Give IV co-​amoxiclav
B	 Give treatment dose low molecular weight heparin
C	 Request compression duplex ultrasound
D	 Request CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA)
E	 Start IV unfractionated heparin infusion
 
 
Questions
147
6.	
You have been asked to help in the management of a 4-​month-​
old boy who has presented to the emergency department with a 
barking cough. His mother describes a two-​day history of coryzal symp­
toms with his symptoms getting much worse tonight. On examination, he 
is agitated with moderate inspiratory stridor (which Mum says is there at 
rest, too), intercostal recession, reduced air entry throughout and satur­
ations of 88% on room air. After delivering oxygen, what action should 
be taken?
A	 Gently use a tongue depressor to see inside the mouth for any 
causes of upper airway obstruction
B	 Give 2 mg nebulized budesonide
C	 Give 5 ml :000 nebulized adrenaline
D	 Give oral dexamethasone 0.5 mg/​kg
E	 Insert an IV cannula and give IV hydrocortisone
7.	
You anaesthetize a 68-​year-​old man for a hip replacement. He 
is normally well except for severe gastro-​oesophageal reflux dis­
ease and osteoarthritis. He has no known allergies and has never had 
a problem with anaesthetics. He refused a regional anaesthetic and 
because of his reflux disease, you performed a rapid sequence induc­
tion with suxamethonium. The standard antibiotic prophylaxis for this 
operation is teicoplanin and gentamicin, so you give those before sur­
gery. Shortly after the surgeons make their incision, the patient’s oxygen 
saturations fall and he becomes very difficult to ventilate with high airway 
pressures. He has significant bronchospasm on auscultation and you 
determine that he is having an anaphylactic reaction. What is the most 
likely causative agent?
A	 Atracurium
B	 Chlorhexidine
C	 Gentamicin
D	 Suxamethonium
E	 Teicoplanin
 
 
Chapter 2  Drugs affecting RS
148
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TTTTF
Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean pulmonary arterial pres­
sure (MPAP) ≥25 mmHg at rest or 30 mmHg on exercise.
Pulmonary endarterectomy is only a valid treatment option specifically 
for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH). It is not 
a treatment for other forms of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). 
Diuretics are useful in the presence of heart failure or raised right atrial 
pressure. Iloprost is a prostacyclin analogue commonly used to treat pul­
monary hypertension in the UK.
Further reading
Elliot CA, et al. Pulmonary hypertension. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care 
Pain, 2006;6 ():7–​22.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Epoprostenol, Oxygen.
2.  FFTFF
Acute severe asthma is categorized by the presence of any one of:
PEF 33–​50% best or predicted
Respiratory rate ≥ 25 min–​
Heart rate ≥ 0 min–​
Inability to complete sentences in one breath
The oxygen saturation target for hypoxaemic patients suffering from 
acute severe asthma is 94–​98%. IV β2 agonists should be reserved for 
patients in whom inhaled therapy cannot be used reliably. High-​dose 
inhaled β2 agonists delivered by oxygen-​driven nebulizers should be 
used as the first-​line agents. A single dose of IV magnesium sulfate 
can be used in patients who do not have a good response to in­
haled bronchodilator therapy. Nebulized magnesium is not recom­
mended. Routine use of IV antibiotics is also not recommended in 
acute asthma.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society. British Guideline on the Management of 
Asthma. QRG 53, 206. Available at: https://​www.brit-​thora​cic.
org.uk/​docum​ent-​libr​ary/​gui​deli​nes/​ast​hma/​btss​ign-​ast​hma-​guidel​
ine-​quick-​refere​nce-​guide-​206
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Magnesium, Salbutamol.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
149
3.  TTTTT
Physiological changes in pregnancy can worsen or improve asthma. It is 
important for women to maintain good control of their asthma during 
pregnancy to avoid problems for themselves and their baby. All drug 
therapies for asthma should be used in pregnant patients as they would 
be for non-​pregnant patients.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society. British Guideline on the Management of 
Asthma. QRG 53, 206. Available at: https://​www.brit-​thora​cic.
org.uk/​docum​ent-​libr​ary/​gui​deli​nes/​ast​hma/​btss​ign-​ast​hma-​guidel​
ine-​quick-​refere​nce-​guide-​206
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aminophylline, Prednisolone, 
Salbutamol.
4.  FTFTT
Theophylline and related drugs are often prescribed in modified-​release 
formats. Therefore the symptoms of toxicity are often delayed.
Symptoms include:
Vomiting
Agitation
Restlessness
Dilated pupils
Tachycardia
Convulsions
Hypokalaemia
Vomiting should not be encouraged, rather it should be managed with 
antiemetics such as ondansetron. Hypokalaemia may occur rapidly, so 
must be closely monitored and managed with potassium chloride infu­
sion. Activated charcoal may be used to eliminate theophylline even if 
more than one hour has passed since ingestion.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aminophylline.
5.  TTFTF
For LTOT to be effective in prolonging life, it must be used for >5 hours 
day–​ with oxygen saturations maintained >90%. It is indicated in stable 
patients with PaO2 >7.3 kPa or between 7.3 kPa and 8.0 kPa if they have 
one or more of:
●	 Polycythaemia
●	 Peripheral oedema
●	 Pulmonary hypertension
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Drugs affecting RS
150
NICE guidance states that LTOT should not be offered to patients with 
isolated nocturnal hypoxaemia caused by COPD.
Further reading
Lumb A, Biercamp C. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and anaes­
thesia. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 204;4():–​5.
NICE. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in Over 6s: Diagnosis 
and Management [NG5], 208. Available at: https://​www.nice.
org.uk/​guida​nce/​ng5
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oxygen.
6.  TFFTF
Oxygen is the most widely used drug in anaesthesia and critical care. 
However, there is increasing doubt around the presumed benefits of 
hyperoxia and even maintaining normoxaemia during critical illness.
Within 2–​3 minutes of breathing 00% O2, nitrogen is eliminated from 
the lungs, which leads to atelectasis and a reduction in vital capacity, sec­
ondary to the loss of the ‘splinting’ effect. 00% oxygen causes cerebro­
vascular vasoconstriction which results in a decrease in cerebral blood 
flow. High oxygen concentrations cause reduced cardiac output from 8 
to 20% due to myocardial depression. Administration of 00% oxygen 
may also interfere with red blood cell formation. Hyperoxia causes an 
inflammatory response and cellular damage through the production of 
reactive oxygen intermediates. This inflammatory response can cause 
pulmonary congestion and a picture similar to acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS).
Further reading
Martin DS, Grocott MPW III. Oxygen therapy in anaesthesia: the yin and 
yang of O2. Br J Anaesth, 203;(6):867–​87.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oxygen.
7.  TTFTT
Salbutamol is a beta-​adrenergic agonist with greater activity at beta-​2 
receptors than beta-​. In high doses, the beta-​ actions lead to posi­
tive inotropic and chronotropic effects. The drug reduces the tone of 
the gravid uterus and 0% of an administered dose will cross the pla­
centa and can lead to foetal side effects. Salbutamol causes a drop in 
the plasma potassium concentration by shifting the ion intracellularly. 
Anxiety, insomnia, tremor, sweating, palpitations, ketosis, lactic acid­
osis, hypokalaemia, postural hypotension, and nausea and vomiting may 
occur following use of the drug.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Salbutamol.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
151
Single Best Answers
.  B
Given the history of PPH, it is more likely that her shortness of breath 
has been caused by a drug given as part of the PPH management 
protocol than an amniotic fluid embolus. At this stage in her procedure, 
we would expect the level of her spinal anaesthetic to be lowering, 
therefore answer D is also unlikely. Cough, respiratory disorders, and 
chest discomfort are all listed in the BNF (British National Formulary) 
as side effects of carboprost. It is contraindicated in asthmatic patients.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oxytocin.
2.  C
Bleomycin is a cytotoxic antibiotic used as chemotherapy for germ cell 
tumours and Hodgkin’s disease. Pulmonary toxicity can occur in 6–​0% 
of patients and can be fatal. Importantly, for the anaesthetist, even short 
periods of high inspired oxygen concentrations are implicated in rap­
idly progressing pulmonary toxicity. This is the case even in patients 
who are no longer taking bleomycin but have been exposed in the past. 
Supplemental oxygen should not be given except in an emergency to 
keep saturations at 88–​92%.
Further reading
Allan N, et al. Anaesthetic implications of chemotherapy. Cont Educ 
Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 202;2(2):52–​56.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oxygen.
3.  E
This patient has acute graft rejection. Over a third of all lung trans­
plant recipients will develop acute rejection in the first year after trans­
plant. The most obvious differential is respiratory sepsis. The patient 
does not have a spontaneous cough because the lung is denervated 
and the cough reflex lost. A diagnostic bronchoscopy would be useful 
but not therapeutic. Antibiotics should be given, but IV amoxicillin and 
clarithromycin would not be the best choice for an immunosuppressed 
patient. Nebulized amphotericin is used post-​op in lung transplant as 
fungal prophylaxis but is not the most important therapy here. The 
FiO2 delivered should be titrated to arterial blood gas results. Increasing 
immunosuppression with pulsed methylprednisolone is the treatment of 
choice for acute rejection.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2  Drugs affecting RS
152
Further reading
Allman K, Wilson I, O’Donnell A. Oxford Handbook of Anaesthesia, 4th 
edition. Oxford University Press, 206.
Fitzgerald M, Ryan D. Cystic fibrosis and anaesthesia. Cont Educ Anaesth 
Crit Care Pain, 20;(6):204–​209.
Nickson C. Lung Transplant. Life in the Fast Lane (liftl.com), 209. 
Available at: https://​litfl.com/​lung-​tra​nspl​ant/​
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Amphotericin.
4.  E
All of these strategies have been implemented at various times in the 
management of ARDS. However, the only strategy that has a strong 
evidence base for improving outcomes is protective ventilation with <6 
ml/​kg tidal volumes and plateau pressures <30 cmH2O. An inability to 
achieve lung-​protective tidal volumes and pressures is part of the ECMO 
referral criteria.
Further reading
Mackay A, Al-​Haddad M. Acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress 
syndrome. Cont Educ in Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 2009;9(5):52–​56.
Royal Brompton. ECMO Referral and Transfer Pathway, 2022. Available 
at: https://​www.rbht.nhs.uk/​our-​servi​ces/​clini​cal_​supp​ort/​criti​cal-​
care-​and-​anae​sthe​sia/​ecmo-​and-​sev​ere-​resp​irat​ory-​fail​ure/​ecmo-​
referr​als-​and-​trans​fer-​path​way
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Nitric oxide.
5.  B
The incidence of pulmonary embolism in pregnancy is common—​
between .4–​4.2%. Anticoagulants should be started promptly and con­
tinued until pulmonary embolism (PE) is excluded. Diagnostic testing is 
required, but it should not delay treatment. IV unfractionated heparin is 
preferred in massive PE with cardiovascular compromise. At term, IV 
unfractionated heparin should also be considered over low-​molecular-​
weight heparins (LMWH) as it is more easily manipulated around labour 
and delivery. Given that she feels well in herself and is afebrile, a diag­
nosis of infection or sepsis is less likely than a PE, but it would be prudent 
to observe closely and treat if indicated.
Further reading
RCOG. Thromboembolic Disease in Pregnancy and the Puerperium: 
Acute Management. Green-​top Guideline No 37b, 205. Available at: 
https://​www.rcog.org.uk/​media/​wj2lp​co5/​gtg-​37b-​.pdf
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Heparins.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
153
6.  C
This child has severe croup (laryngotracheobronchitis). It is important 
to keep the child as calm as possible, or his condition will deteriorate. 
Therefore, both A and E are incorrect. In mild versions of croup with 
minimal stridor and well-​maintained oxygenation, it would be appro­
priate to give just oral dexamethasone or nebulized budesonide if the 
child can’t tolerate oral medication and observe. However, in this case, 
he is demonstrating significant upper airway obstruction and so answer 
C is the most appropriate next action to take.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Adrenaline.
7.  E
Data from the NAP6 audit demonstrates that antibiotics are the most 
common trigger for anaphylaxis and teicoplanin is 7-​fold more likely 
than other antibiotics. Muscle relaxants and chlorhexidine are the 
next most common triggers. Bronchospasm was the presenting fea­
ture in 8% of cases. Hypotension was the most common presenting 
symptom seen in 47% of cases, and present at some point in all episodes. 
Suxamethonium anaphylaxis presents mostly with bronchospasm and is 
twice as likely a cause than other muscle relaxants. The onset is rapid for 
antibiotics and muscle relaxants but delayed with chlorhexidine. This is 
likely secondary to the mode of absorption being slower with topical or 
subcutaneous administration.
Further reading
RCOA. NAP6 Report: Anaesthesia, Surgery and Life-​threatening 
Anaphylactic Reactions, 208. Available at: https://​www.nation​alau​
ditp​roje​cts.org.uk/​NAP​6Rep​ort
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Atracurium, Mivacurium, Rocuronium, 
Suxamethonium, Vecuronium.
 
 
 
 
155
Chapter 3
Drugs affecting the 
gastrointestinal system
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Regarding ondansetron
A	 Alteration of the dose is required in patients with renal impairment
B	 Alteration of the dose is required in patients with hepatic 
impairment
C	 It impairs gastric motility
D	 60–​65% is absorbed following oral administration
E	 It acts both centrally and peripherally
2.	
 
Regarding terlipressin/​glypressin
A	 It is identical to endogenous human vasopressin
B	 Is a pro-​drug
C	 Causes vasoconstriction via V2 receptors
D	 Vasodilates via vascular oxytocin-​type receptors
E	 Has a longer half-​life than desmopressin
3.	
 
Regarding the drug cyclizine
A	 Is a non-​competitive H receptor antagonist
B	 Has anticholinergic activity at nicotinic receptors
C	 Has greater oral bioavailability than ondansetron
D	 Is metabolized in the liver by N-​demethylation
E	 Can produce tachycardia and hypotension due to alpha-​blockade
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Drugs affecting GIS
156
4.	
 
Regarding omeprazole
A	 Is a furan derivative
B	 Inhibits the activity of the gastric chief cell
C	 Has a smaller volume of distribution than ranitidine
D	 Is predominantly excreted unchanged by the kidney
E	 Is associated with a decreased incidence of ventilator-​associated 
pneumonia
5.	
 
Regarding the drug domperidone
A	 An intravenous dose should be administered over 5 minutes
B	 Has high first-​pass metabolism lowering oral bioavailability
C	 Decreases lower oesophageal tone while increasing gastric emptying
D	 Dose should be reduced in patients with renal impairment
E	 Is primarily excreted unchanged in the urine
6.	
 
Regarding the oral bioavailability of antiemetics
A	 Haloperidol bioavailability is less than 25%
B	 Ondansetron peak plasma concentration occurs between  to 
2 hours
C	 Domperidone undergoes minimal first-​pass metabolism
D	 Metoclopramide is variably first-​pass conjugated to sulphate
E	 The bioavailability of cyclizine is 80%
7.	
 
Glycopyrronium
A	 Is a quaternary ammonium compound
B	 Its vagolytic effect lasts 20–​30 minutes
C	 Is unable to cross the blood–​brain barrier
D	 Reduces gastric volume by 90%
E	 Antisialagogue activity lasts up to -​hour post IV administration
 
 
 
 
Questions
157
Single Best Answers
.	
You are reviewing a 37-​year-​old female patient in the intensive care 
unit (ICU). She underwent an emergency laparotomy three days pre­
viously for management of a perforated duodenal ulcer. She has a back­
ground of chronic non-​steroidal anti-​inflammatory drug (NSAID) use. 
She was successfully extubated on day two and has significantly improved 
clinically. You are planning continued treatment. In addition to cessation of 
NSAID use, what represents optimal management of her peptic ulcer dis­
ease (PUD)?
A	 H2 receptor antagonist (e.g. ranitidine) therapy for four weeks
B	 Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy (e.g. omeprazole, amoxicillin, 
and metronidazole)
C	 Offer Helicobacter pylori testing
D	 Omeprazole 0 mg once a day for eight weeks
E	 Omeprazole 40 mg once a day for four weeks
2.	
A five-​year-​old girl is scheduled for adenotonsillectomy surgery. 
She previously had severe postoperative vomiting following stra­
bismus surgery. Which treatment strategy is most likely to reduce the 
risk of postoperative vomiting?
A	 Avoidance of nitrous oxide intraoperatively
B	 Cyclizine 0.5–​ mg/​kg given at the end of surgery
C	 Dexamethasone 0.5 mg/​kg IV and ondansetron 0. mg/​kg IV, both 
given at the beginning of surgery
D	 Intraoperative intravenous fluid therapy of 0 ml/​kg of compound 
sodium lactate
E	 Ondansetron 0.5 mg/​kg IV given at the end of surgery
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Drugs affecting GIS
158
3.	
A 28-​year-​old male is about to be admitted to intensive care fol­
lowing a mixed overdose rendering him GCS 3/​5, necessitating 
intubation and ventilation in the emergency department (ED) resus. He 
is suspected of having ingested paracetamol and pregabalin while intoxi­
cated with alcohol. The timeframe of ingestion is unclear. He was last seen 
three hours prior to being found. Which plan represents optimal initial 
management?
A	 Await INR, VBG, U +​ E, FBC, and paracetamol level prior to 
deciding on treatment pathway
B	 Calculate the significance of ingestion (significant only if >75 mg/​kg/​
24 hours)
C	 Delay  hour until collecting a 4-​hour paracetamol level prior to 
deciding treatment pathway
D	 Give charcoal 50 g via a nasogastric tube
E	 Immediately commence acetylcysteine 50 mg/​kg infusion over 
one hour
4.	
A 42-​year-​old female is admitted to ICU, having been intubated 
and ventilated for management of hypoxic respiratory failure with 
associated septic shock secondary to community-​acquired pneumonia. 
On day two, she is clinically much improved, and is no longer requiring 
vasoactive support. However, she remains sedated, intubated, and ven­
tilated. Which strategy represents optimal management in prophylaxis 
against gastric stress ulceration and gastrointestinal bleeding?
A	 Cessation of corticosteroid therapy
B	 Enteral nutrition via a nasogastric tube
C	 Only treat if risk factors arise
D	 Ranitidine 50 mg eight hourly IV
E	 Withhold prophylactic enoxaparin
5.	
A seven-​year-​old girl has undergone strabismus surgery. She 
is vomiting in the post-​anaesthetic recovery unit, despite 
intraoperative administration of ondansetron 0.5 mg/​kg. She had a 
prolonged overnight fast, and did not receive intravenous fluids. Which 
treatment option represents the best management for her established 
postoperative vomiting?
A	 Dexamethasone 0.5 mg/​kg IV
B	 Droperidol 25 mcg/​kg orally
C	 Further single dose of ondansetron 0.5 mg/​kg IV
D	 Mandatory rehydration with oral fluids
E	 Metoclopramide 0.5 mg/​kg IV
 
 
 
Questions
159
6.	
A 43-​year male has been admitted to resus following an upper 
gastrointestinal haemorrhage. He has a background of alcohol 
abuse and is known to have oesophageal varices. Regarding the acute 
management of confirmed or suspected oesophageal variceal haemor­
rhage, which of the following represents optimal management?
A	 Antibiotic prophylaxis providing Gram-​negative cover
B	 Omeprazole should be given as an 80 mg IV bolus followed by 
infusion
C	 Propranolol should be titrated from 40 mg twice daily to 80 mg 
twice daily
D	 Somatostatin 50 μg IV bolus followed by 25–​50 μg/​hr infusion
E	 Terlipressin  mg should be administered IV every 4–​6 hours 
for 5 days
7.	
You are planning a presentation on enteral nutrition for multidis­
ciplinary teaching within your local ICU. Which statement aligns 
best with the properties of gastrointestinal absorption?
A	 Facilitated diffusion is independent of a given concentration gradient
B	 Only non-​ionized drugs may cross cell membranes
C	 The rate of diffusion across a given barrier is independent of the 
barrier surface area
D	 Weak acids have greater intestinal than gastric absorption
E	 Weak bases undergo greater gastric absorption than weak acids
 
 
Chapter 3  Drugs affecting GIS
160
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FTFFT
In patients with renal impairment, although systemic clearance is reduced 
resulting in an increase in the elimination half-​life, this is not clinically sig­
nificant, obviating dose reduction. Ondansetron undergoes significant 
hepatic metabolism by P450 enzymes. Although individual enzyme 
inhibition does not necessitate dose reduction, hepatic impairment pro­
longs the elimination half-​life to 5–​32 hours. It should be limited to 8 
mg/​24 days in hepatic impairment. Ondansetron does not impair gas­
tric motility. Large bowel transit time is increased. It is completely and 
passively absorbed. Oral bioavailability is 60–​65% following first-​pass 
metabolism. Ondansetron is a highly selective 5HT3 antagonist, acting 
both centrally and peripherally. It blocks small intestine afferent vagal 
activity and 5HT activity in the area postrema.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ondansetron.
2.  FTFTF
Vasopressin is a naturally occurring nonapeptide prohormone synthesized 
in the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the posterior hypothal­
amus. It is also available in three synthetic analogue forms: argipressin, 
terlipressin/​glypressin, and desmopressin. Endogenous vasopressin (or 
ADH) and its synthetic analogues act via G-​protein vasopressin recep­
tors V, V2, and V3, and also has affinity for oxytocin-​type receptors.
Argipressin (8-​arginine-​vasopressin) is identical to endogenous human 
vasopressin. Terlipressin/​glypressin is a pro-​drug which is metabol­
ized to form lysine-​vasopressin upon cleavage of three glycyl residues. 
Vasoconstriction is mediated via V receptors. V2 receptors regulate 
water reabsorption at the distal renal tubule and collecting duct. They are 
also located at endothelial cells, allowing von Willebrand factor release. 
Activation of oxytocin-​type receptors present in vascular smooth muscle 
results in the release of nitric oxide, leading to vasodilation. The half-​life 
of terlipressin is 50–​70 minutes, while that of desmopressin is 2–​3 hours.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Vasopressin.
3.  FFTTT
Cyclizine is a competitive H receptor antagonist, blocking central his­
tamine receptors within the vomiting area of the chemoreceptor trigger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
161
zone. Anticholinergic activity is mediated by central muscarinic (M, M2, 
and M3) blockade. The oral bioavailability of cyclizine is 80%, while that 
of ondansetron is 60–​65%. Cyclizine is metabolized to norcyclizine by 
hepatic N-​demethylation. This metabolite has little antihistamine activity. 
It has mild cardiovascular anticholinergic action. It can produce tachy­
cardia and hypotension due to alpha-​blockade.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cyclizine.
4.  FFTFF
Omeprazole is a benzimidazole derivative. Ranitidine is a furan deriva­
tive. It acts via a derivative that non-​competitively, irreversibly inhibits 
the gastric parietal cell H-​K-​ATPase, thereby inhibiting the function of 
the parietal cell ‘proton pump’. It is 95–​96% protein bound resulting in a 
lesser volume of distribution of 0.3–​0.4 L/​kg, compared to the .2–​.8 
L/​kg Vd of ranitidine. It is completely metabolized via oxidation to a sul­
fone, reduction to a sulphide, and hydroxylation. 80% of an oral dose is 
excreted in the urine. As with other proton pump inhibitors, omeprazole 
is associated with ventilator-​associated pneumonia.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Omeprazole.
5.  FTFFF
Domperidone is butyrophenone derivative. There is no IV prepar­
ation available due to adverse cardiovascular effects associated with 
rapid intravenous administration. 90% of the drug is metabolized by 
hydroxylation and oxidative N-​dealkylation. Oral bioavailability is 3–​
7% due to hepatic and gut wall metabolism. Domperidone increases 
lower oesophageal tone and increases the rate of gastric emptying. It 
appears to be more effective than metoclopramide in the treatment of 
established postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). Only 30% of 
domperidone is excreted in the urine. Its elimination half-​life is 7.5 hours. 
It does not accumulate in renal impairment.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Domperidone.
6.  FTFTT
Haloperidol has an oral bioavailability of 50–​88%. This is affected 
by extensive hepatic metabolism, including reduction to an active 
metabolite.
Ondansetron reaches its peak plasma concentration of 30 ng/​ml (fol­
lowing an 8 mg dose) in approximately .5 hours.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Drugs affecting GIS
162
Domperidone undergoes significant first-​pass metabolism. Oral bioavail­
ability is 3–​7%.
Metoclopramide is rapidly absorbed and is variably first-​pass conjugated 
to sulphate. Its bioavailability ranges between 32–​97%.
Cyclizine is well absorbed orally, with a bioavailability of 80%. Its peak 
plasma concentration reaches 70 ng/​ml at approximately 2 hours.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Cyclizine, Domperidone, Haloperidol, 
Metoclopramide, Ondansetron.
7.  TFTTF
Glycopyrronium is a quaternary ammonium compound in contrast to 
atropine, which is a tertiary amine. Its vagolytic activity last approxi­
mately 2–​3 hours. The time course of action is better matched to neo­
stigmine than atropine, leading to less late bradycardia. In view of its 
quaternary ammonium structure, glycopyrronium is unable to cross the 
blood–​brain barrier. However, drowsiness and headache are recognized 
sequelae of its use. It reduces gastric volume by 90% at four hours after 
administration. It reduces lower oesophageal tone and decreases antral 
motility. Glycopyrronium has a powerful antisialagogue effect, five times 
more potent than atropine. This activity lasts for up to eight hours after 
intravenous or intramuscular administration.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Glycopyrronium bromide.
Single Best Answers
.  C
This patient most likely has PUD secondary to chronic NSAID use. Its 
cessation, where possible, is important for treatment. NICE guidance 
suggests full-​dose proton pump inhibitor (PPI) or H2 receptor antag­
onist therapy (H2RA) for eight weeks for patients who have been taking 
NSAIDs.
Omeprazole 0 mg once a day for eight weeks is considered a low dose/​
on-​demand dose, and is inappropriate for initial treatment.
Offering Helicobacter pylori testing is the only option most in keeping with 
guidance. While the cause of her PUD is likely already known, were H. 
pylori to be suspected, testing should be offered prior to commencing 
eradication therapy if positive.
Omeprazole 40 mg once a day for four weeks represents ‘double dose’ 
PPI. It is not indicated for the initial treatment of PUD. Its time frame 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
163
of four weeks in the context of prior NSAID use is also inappropri­
ately short.
Further reading
NICE. Gastro-​oesophageal Reflux Disease and Dyspepsia in Adults: 
Investigation and Management [CG84], 204. Available at: https://​
www.nice.org.uk/​guida​nce/​cg84
2.  C
Nitrous oxide may be used for anaesthesia in children without increasing 
the incidence of PONV. Intraoperative intravenous fluid therapy during 
paediatric anaesthesia may be associated with decreased PONV. 
However, these findings are based on weak evidence. Ondansetron and 
dexamethasone exhibit a synergistic effect in reducing the incidence of 
PONV in both paediatric and adult patients.
Further reading
Carr A, et al. Guidelines on the Prevention of Post-​operative Vomiting in 
Children. Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain & 
Ireland, 206.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dexamethasone, Ondansetron.
3.  E
In any case of suspected paracetamol overdose where there is uncer­
tainty regarding the timescale of ingestion +​/​–​ a polypharmacy over­
dose has occurred with or without alcohol, then there should be no 
delay in administering acetylcysteine. Acetylcysteine provides an alter­
native supply of glutathione which is depleted in paracetamol overdose.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Paracetamol.
Wallace CI, Dargan PI, Jones AL. Paracetamol overdose: an evidence 
based flowchart to guide management. Emerg Med J, 2002;9:202–205.
4.  B
While the use of ranitidine and omeprazole is common in stress ulcer 
prophylaxis in ICU patients, the optimal management strategy is to try 
to establish enteral nutrition. Corticosteroid therapy is associated with 
the development of stress ulcers although it should only be discontinued 
if ongoing steroid treatment exposes more risk to the patient than stop­
ping its administration. This decision should be made on an individual 
case-​by-​case basis. Administration of enoxaparin per se does not cause 
an increase in the incidence of stress ulcer, although its use should be 
reviewed if the patient exhibits signs consistent with a gastrointestinal 
(GI) bleed secondary to stress ulcer formation. It should also be noted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3  Drugs affecting GIS
164
that the use of omeprazole and ranitidine is associated with ventilator-​
associated pneumonia in critically ill patients.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Omeprazole, Ranitidine.
5.  A
Dexamethasone has antiemetic properties and also exhibits a syner­
gistic effect with ondansetron. Mandatory rehydration with oral fluids 
is unlikely to be successful while the patient has ongoing vomiting. 
Metoclopramide is associated with extrapyramidal side effects including 
akathisia and oculogyric crises in children and should be avoided.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dexamethasone, Metoclopramide, 
Ondansetron.
6.  A
There is good evidence for the administration of antibiotic prophylaxis 
resulting in a survival benefit.
Omeprazole is indicated for the management of upper gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage secondary to major peptic ulcer bleeding. There has been 
no bleeding or survival benefit demonstrated in variceal bleeding.
Propranolol is indicated for prophylaxis of variceal bleeding in portal 
hypertension. It should be titrated from 40 mg twice daily to 80 mg twice 
daily. It has no role in acute management.
A comparison of somatostatin, octreotide, and terlipressin has failed to 
show a bleeding or survival benefit. Octreotide should be administered 
by 50 μg IV bolus followed by 25–​50 μg/​hr infusion, while somatostatin 
should be administered by 250 mg IV bolus followed by 250 mg/​hr infu­
sion. Terlipressin  mg is licensed for administration every 4–​6 hours for 
72 hours. Five days of treatment has not been demonstrated to have a 
survival benefit.
Further reading
NICE. Gastrointestinal Bleeding: The Management of Acute Upper 
Gastrointestinal Bleeding. NICE Guideline, 20.
NICE. Acute Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Over 6s: Management 
[CG4], 206. Available at: https://​www.nice.org.uk/​guida​nce/​cg4
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Omeprazole, Propranolol, Vasopressin.
Tripathi D, et al. UK guidelines on the management of variceal haemor­
rhage in cirrhotic patients. Gut, 205;64():680–​704.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
165
7.  D
Facilitated diffusion requires a concentration gradient. Active transport 
can take place against a concentration gradient.
Only non-​ionized drugs have sufficient lipid solubility so as to cross cell 
membrane lipids. Ionized, water-​soluble drugs pass through aqueous 
channels. Both are forms of passive diffusion.
The rate of diffusion across a given barrier is greatly dependent on the 
barrier surface area. Along with concentration gradient, permeability 
coefficient, and barrier thickness, this parameter is defined within Fick’s 
law of diffusion.
Although at a higher intestinal pH, weak acids will exist in a more ionized 
form, intestinal absorption is greater due to the larger surface area.
Weak acids undergo greater gastric absorption than weak bases. A weak 
acid (pKa 3–​5) will exist in the non-​ionized form in such acidic conditions 
(pH –​3), aiding absorption. A weak base, however, will exist in its ion­
ized, protonated form, reducing the rate of absorption.
Further reading
O’Shaughnessy K. Principles of clinical pharmacology and drug therapy. 
In Warrell D, Cox T, Firth J (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, Vol , 
5th edition. Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 0..
 
 
167
Chapter 4
Drugs affecting the 
renal tract
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
You are asked to see an 87-​year-​old lady who has been booked 
on the emergency list for a laparotomy following a contrast CT 
showing bowel obstruction. Her past medical history includes hyper­
tension, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis. Her regular medications are 
amlodipine, losartan, metformin, naproxen, and omeprazole. Her peri­
operative management should include withholding which medications?
A	 Naproxen
B	 Amlodipine
C	 Losartan
D	 Omeprazole
E	 Metformin
2.	
A 78-​year-​old man is in the post-​anaesthesia care unit (PACU) 
following endovascular AAA repair. Pre-​op bloods show Cr 37, 
Ur 0.6, eGFR 56. Current observations are respiratory rate 6 breaths 
per minute, oxygen saturations 96% on 4 L nasal O2, heart rate 84 beats 
per minute, and blood pressure 92/​54 mmHg (MAP 67). Which of the 
following could be used to reduce the risk of an acute kidney injury?
A	 Acetylcysteine
B	 0.9% Saline infusion
C	 .24% Sodium bicarbonate infusion
D	 Theophylline
E	 Haemodialysis
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting the renal tract
168
3.	
Which of the following affect transmembrane sodium transport 
in the kidney?
A	 Amiloride
B	 Spironolactone
C	 Acetazolamide
D	 Mannitol
E	 Dopamine
4.	
 
Which of the following are effects of loop diuretics?
A	 Vasodilatation
B	 Metabolic acidosis
C	 Hypernatraemia
D	 Hypomagnesaemia
E	 Conductive hearing loss
5.	
Which of the following medications may need to be dose adjusted 
in a patient with a glomerular filtration rate of 5 ml/​min?
A	 Erythromycin
B	 Gabapentin
C	 Heparin
D	 Lithium
E	 Phenytoin
6.	
 
Which of the following impair renal autoregulation?
A	 Bendroflumethiazide
B	 Ciclosporin
C	 Ketorolac
D	 Perindopril
E	 Sevoflurane
7.	
 
Which of the following cause renal failure by acute tubular necrosis?
A	 Clopidogrel
B	 Ciclosporin
C	 Gentamicin
D	 IV contrast
E	 Tacrolimus
 
 
 
 
 
Questions
169
Single Best Answers
.	
A 68-​year-​old man is in cardiac intensive care, day two post-​op 
on-​pump coronary artery bypass grafting ×4. He has been oliguric 
over the past 24 hours with urine output 0.3 ml/​kg/​hr and his creatinine 
has risen from 84 micromol/​L pre-​op to 48 micromol/​L. Other blood 
results: Urea 9, K 4.9, Na 32. How would you manage this situation?
A	 Six hourly bloods and ongoing review
B	 Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT)
C	 Dopamine
D	 Furosemide
E	 Intermittent haemodialysis (IHD)
2.	
A 72-​year-​old female with severe rheumatoid arthritis is on the 
ward being treated for cellulitis. She has developed haematuria 
and severe renal impairment. Crystals were seen on urine microscopy. 
Which of the following medications is the most likely cause?
A	 Ibuprofen
B	 Lansoprazole
C	 Methotrexate
D	 Simvastatin
E	 Vancomycin
3.	
A 68-​year-​old female presents to the emergency department 
with severe myalgia and weakness. Four months ago, she was 
diagnosed with hypertension and started taking amlodipine, aspirin, and 
simvastatin. In the emergency department (ED), her initial creatinine 
kinase (CK) is 6890 units/​L. She is diagnosed with rhabdomyolysis sec­
ondary to statin use. The most important therapy to prevent acute 
kidney injury (AKI) in this situation is:
A	 Bicarbonate
B	 Dialysis
C	 Isotonic saline
D	 Loop diuretics
E	 Mannitol
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting the renal tract
170
4.	
What is the preferred inotrope for maintaining mean arterial pres­
sure (MAP) during a live donor nephrectomy?
A	 Dobutamine
B	 Dopamine
C	 Metaraminol
D	 Noradrenaline
E	 Phenylephrine
5.	
You have anaesthetised a 36-​year-​old female for a laparoscopic-​
assisted nephrectomy. In addition to regular paracetamol, what 
postoperative analgesia would you prescribe?
A	 Diclofenac PR
B	 Epidural analgesia
C	 Fentanyl PCA
D	 Morphine PCA
E	 Oxycodone orally
6.	
You have been asked to anaesthetise a six-​year-​old boy with 
chronic renal failure on peritoneal dialysis for an appendicectomy. 
Which muscle relaxant would be the best choice in this case?
A	 Atracurium
B	 Cis-​atracurium
C	 Rocuronium
D	 Suxamethonium
E	 Vecuronium
7.	
You are anaesthetising a 54-​year-​old man for a cadaveric renal 
transplant. Following a cautious induction, his blood pressure is 
98/​57 mmHg. His arterial blood gas (ABG), on FiO2 0.5, shows:
pH 7.38, pCO2 5.2, pO2 28, Na 134, K 5.1, 
Lactate 1.4, HCO3–​ 23, BXS –​0.6, Hb 78.
You determine that he is intravascularly underfilled and would like to 
optimize his fluid status. Which fluid would be the best option to use?
A	 Hartmann’s solution
B	 Hydroxyethyl starch
C	 Mannitol
D	 Normal saline
E	 Packed red blood cells
 
 
 
 
Answers
171
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TTTFT
This patient is at very high risk for developing a perioperative AKI. 
Non-​steroidal anti-​inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as naproxen, 
carry a significant risk of nephrotoxicity, compounded when used 
in conjunction with angiotensin 2 receptor antagonists (A2RAs) and 
angiotensin-​converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEis). They also increase 
the risk of contrast-​induced nephropathy and therefore should be 
withheld. This patient is highly likely to need cardiovascular support 
perioperatively to maintain adequate perfusion pressure. It is therefore 
wise to withhold her antihypertensives until she regains her vascular 
tone. Any periods of hypotension and hypoperfusion will increase her 
risk of AKI. Metformin inhibits the metabolism of lactate and can cause 
lactic acidosis. This is particularly the case in patients with reduced 
renal function. Continuing omeprazole in this case will be beneficial for 
gastric protection.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. A2RAs, ACE inhibitors, Metformin, 
Omeprazole.
2.  FTTFF
Endovascular AAA repair requires a high IV contrast load and therefore 
has an associated risk of contrast-​induced (CI) AKI. The only therapy 
that has been shown to reduce the risk of developing CI AKI is avoid­
ance of hypovolaemia and adequate hydration with isotonic crystalloid. 
There is no proven benefit of sodium bicarbonate over saline despite 
theoretical benefits. There is insufficient evidence to suggest any benefit 
from any of the other options.
Further reading
Gross J, Prowle J. Perioperative acute kidney injury. BJA Education, 
205;5(4):23–​28.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aminophylline, Paracetamol, Sodium 
bicarbonate.
3.  TTFFT
Amiloride is a potassium-​sparing diuretic which blocks Na+​ absorption 
in the distal convoluted tubule in exchange for H+​ or K+​. Spironolactone 
antagonizes the actions of aldosterone. It causes reduced sodium 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting the renal tract
172
absorption by a reduction in the synthesis of Na+​ H+​ co-​transporter, 
as well as Na+​ channels. Dopamine stimulation of the dopaminergic re­
ceptors at the proximal convoluted tubule inhibits the Na+​ K+​ATPase, 
thereby producing natriuresis and diuresis. Acetazolamide is a carbonic 
anhydrase inhibitor. It effectively blocks HCO3–​ being reabsorbed in the 
proximal convoluted tubule, which leads to an increased concentra­
tion of Na+​ moving through to the distal convoluted tubule where the 
higher Na+​ load will lead to a greater K+​ secretion and water will follow. 
Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic, which exerts its effects on the tubule 
lumen by reducing the effective Na+​ concentration and thus reducing the 
reabsorptive gradient.
Further reading
Clarke P, Simpson K. Diuretics and renal tubular function. BJA, CEPD 
Reviews, 200;(4):99–​03.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Acetazolamide, Amiloride, Dopamine, 
Mannitol, Spironolactone.
4.  TFFTF
Loop diuretics produce a diuresis by inhibiting the Na+​ K+​2Cl–​ co-​
transporter in the ascending loop of Henle, thereby increasing Na+​ 
and water delivery to the distal convoluted tubule. By blocking this 
transporter, the oxygen consumption in the loop of Henle is reduced 
to basal levels and this may have a protective effect from ischaemia in 
the critically unwell. When given to patients with pulmonary oedema, 
the symptom of breathlessness improves before diuresis has oc­
curred because of vasodilatation and reduction of ventricular preload. 
Electrolytes are lost in the diuresis causing disturbances, including hypo­
kalaemia, hyponatraemia, hypomagnesaemia, and metabolic alkalosis. 
Ototoxicity, if it occurs, is sensorineural.
Further reading
Clarke P, Simpson K. Diuretics and renal tubular function. BJA, CEPD 
Reviews, 200;(4):99–​03.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Acetazolamide, Amiloride, Bendro­
flumethiazide, Dopamine, Furosemide, Mannitol, Spironolactone.
5.  TTFTF
Lithium has a very narrow therapeutic/​toxic ratio and therefore 
serum concentrations must be monitored. It is highly sensitive to 
changes in sodium and fluid status. Lithium is removed by haemodi­
alysis. Renal impairment has little effect on the pharmacokinetics of 
heparin and as such does not require dose adjustment. Renal dys­
function itself is however associated with coagulopathy and therefore 
 
 
 
 
Answers
173
caution is advised. Erythromycin is excreted renally and therefore 
the dose should be reduced in renal impairment. It is not removed 
by haemofiltration or dialysis and so the dose should remain halved 
for patients undergoing these therapies. Gabapentin is excreted 
unchanged in the urine. Clearance is proportional to creatinine clear­
ance, and therefore the dose should be reduced accordingly. In this 
patient, the BNF (British National Formulary) recommends a starting 
dose of 300 mg on alternate days in three divided doses. Gabapentin 
is removed by haemodialysis.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Gabapentin, Heparins, Lithium, 
Macrolides, Phenytoin.
6.  FTTTF
As renal perfusion pressure is reduced the kidney is usually able to 
maintain blood flow and glomerular filtration through autoregulation. 
The initial response is decreased afferent arteriolar tone by 
tubuloglomerular feedback and direct myogenic responses. At a later 
stage, reductions in renal perfusion pressure lead to renin being re­
leased which results in more angiotensin II. Angiotensin II stimulates 
a preferential increase in resistance at the efferent arteriole to main­
tain intraglomerular pressure and glomerular filtration rate (GFR). 
Angiotensin-​converting enzyme inhibitors therefore clearly impair 
this autoregulatory process. COX-​2 inhibition by NSAIDs reduces 
the effect of vasodilatory prostaglandins at the afferent arteriole 
and increases the vasoconstrictive response to angiotensin II at the 
efferent arteriole. Ciclosporin causes nephrotoxicity by impairing 
tubuloglomerular feedback mechanisms and thus autoregulation of 
renal blood flow. Bendroflumethiazide and sevoflurane have no effect 
on renal autoregulation.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. ACE inhibitors, Bendroflumethiazide, 
Ketorolac, Sevoflurane.
7.  FFTTF
Aminoglycosides cause acute tubular necrosis. Tubular epithelial cell 
damage leads to occlusion of the tubular lumen. IV contrast media cause 
direct tubular necrosis and renal ischaemia. Ciclosporin, clopidogrel, and 
tacrolimus cause renal failure by thrombotic microangiopathy.
Further reading
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aminoglycosides, Clopidogrel.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting the renal tract
174
Single Best Answers
.  B
Cardiopulmonary bypass is a well-​recognized risk factor for AKI. 
According to the 202 Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes 
(KDIGO) criteria, this patient has stage 3 AKI. Dopamine increases 
postoperative urine output, but does not improve outcome. Diuretics, 
such as furosemide, should be limited to managing fluid balance as hypo­
volaemia may worsen the AKI. There is increasing evidence that early 
initiation of renal replacement therapy (RRT) improves survival and renal 
function outcomes. In the UK continuous RRT is the predominant mode 
of delivery.
Further reading
Council of the Intensive Care Society. Standards and Recommendations 
for the Provision of Renal Replacement Therapy on Intensive Care 
Units in the United Kingdom. Council of the Intensive Care 
Society, 2009.
Gross J, Prowle J. Perioperative acute kidney injury. BJA Education, 
205;5(4):23–​28.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dopamine, Furosemide.
Webb S, Allen J. Perioperative renal protection. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit 
Care Pain, 2008;8(5):76–​80.
2.  C
All of these drugs can cause AKI. However, only methotrexate has been 
associated with crystal formation. The risk of methotrexate-​induced 
nephrotoxicity is increased with hypovolaemia and high plasma concen­
tration of the drug. Treatment is directed at volume repletion, washout 
of the crystals from the tubules with a loop diuretic, and alkalization of 
the urine.
Further reading
Anders H, Mulay S. Crystal nephropathies: mechanisms of crystal-​
induced kidney injury. Nat Rev Nephrol, 207;3:226–​240.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Ibuprofen.
3.  C
Plasma CK levels correlate with the severity of muscle injury. CK 
>5000 units/​L puts this patient at high risk of AKI. In addition to 
stopping statin therapy, the prevention of AKI in this case relies upon 
the correction of volume depletion and prevention of intratubular 
cast formation. Initially fluid resuscitation with isotonic saline at –​2 
L per hour is appropriate. Despite the potential benefits of a forced 
alkaline diuresis with bicarbonate, there is no clear evidence that it is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
175
more effective than saline. Mannitol administration is not of proven 
benefit and risks hypovolaemia and hypernatraemia. Loop diuretics 
are only indicated if volume overload is present. Dialysis may be re­
quired if AKI is established, but is not indicated purely for removal 
of myoglobin.
Further reading
Martinek A, Petejova N. Acute kidney injury due to rhabdomyolysis and 
renal replacement therapy: a critical review. Crit Care, 204;8:224.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Aspirin, Furosemide, Mannitol, 
Sodium bicarbonate, Statins.
4.  B
Maintenance of perfusion pressure at or above preoperative levels is 
essential in a live donor nephrectomy. Patients are usually preloaded with 
IV fluid and a positive balance is maintained throughout. If an inotrope is 
required, dopamine is the most commonly used. There is no evidence 
that it provides renal protection, but at low doses (–​5 mcg/​kg/​min) 
it causes a marked decrease in renal vascular resistance, with a corres­
ponding increase in renal blood flow. Also at low doses, beta-​adrenergic 
effects predominate, leading to positive inotropy, increased automaticity, 
cardiac output, and coronary blood flow.
Further reading
O’Brien B, Koertzen M. Anaesthesia for living donor renal transplant 
nephrectomy. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 202;2(6):37–​32.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dobutamine, Dopamine, Metaraminol, 
Noradrenaline, Phenylephrine.
5.  C
A multimodal analgesic regimen is the gold standard. There are special 
considerations however in patients with, or at risk of, renal impairment. 
NSAIDs are generally avoided due to the risk of nephrotoxicity, how­
ever, they can provide good analgesia and less nausea and vomiting. They 
could be used in this scenario for up to five days as long as the patient 
maintains good hydration. Oral analgesia will be unreliable in the imme­
diate postoperative period. Epidural analgesia is often avoided due to 
concerns regarding hypotension and underperfusion. A local anaesthetic 
infusion via a wound catheter would be a good addition to her analgesic 
regimen. Morphine is avoided due to the risk of accumulation of active 
metabolites and subsequent toxicity.
Further reading
O’Brien B, Koertzen M. Anaesthesia for living donor renal transplant 
nephrectomy. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 202;2(6):37–​32.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. Oxford 
University Press, 206. Diclofenac, Fentanyl, Oxycodone, Paracetamol.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4  Drugs affecting the renal tract
176
6.  C
A rapid or modified rapid sequence induction is required here. 
Suxamethonium should be avoided due to the risk of hyperkalaemia. 
With the availability of sugammadex, rocuronium is the best choice (N.B. 
in patients with severe renal impairment, the excretion of sugammadex 
and the ‘sugammadex-​neuromuscular blocker complex’ is prolonged and 
caution is advised). Chronic kidney disease (CKD) will prolong the action 
of rocuronium and vecuronium and therefore a peripheral nerve stimu­
lator must be used to monitor block. Atracurium and cis-​atracurium are 
metabolized through Hoffman degradation and ester hydrolysis which 
is independent of renal function. This makes them ideal muscle relax­
ants to use in the CKD population, but not appropriate when a rapid 
sequence induction is required.
Further reading
Guruswamy V. Anaesthesia for children with renal disease. BJA Education, 
205;5(6):294–​298.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Atracurium, Cisatracurium, Sugammadex, 
Suxamethonium, Vecuronium.
7.  A
Fluid loading to maintain cardiac output, optimize renal perfusion, and 
reduce blood viscosity may improve outcomes. Delivering liberal fluid 
administration at the beginning of surgery, while avoiding high total 
infusion volumes, is likely to be beneficial. Hartmann’s is the solution 
of choice as a balanced crystalloid. Normal saline can be detrimental 
to postoperative acid-​base balance and should therefore be avoided. 
Hydroxyethyl starch is associated with renal injury and must not be 
given, however, human albumin solution would be an acceptable alterna­
tive if a colloid were required. Mannitol is commonly used as an adjunct 
to fluid therapy in cadaveric renal transplant surgery, but is given as a 
0.5 g/​kg bolus at the time of clamp removal. Although this patient is 
anaemic, the Hb transfusion target in renal transplant is 70 g/​L. Allogenic 
cytomegalovirus (CMV)-​negative blood should be used with caution due 
to the risks associated with transfusion. Cell salvage should be used if 
there is any concern about high blood loss in these cases.
Further reading
Mayhew D, Ridgeway D, Hunter JM. Update on the intraoperative 
management of adult cadaveric renal transplantation. BJA Education, 
206;6(2):53–​57.
Scarth E, Smith S. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Hartmann’s solution, Mannitol, Sodium 
chloride.
 
 
 
 
177
Chapter 5
Drugs affecting the 
endocrine system
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Regarding dexamethasone:
A	 It can be administered orally
B	 Gastrointestinal calcium absorption is reduced
C	 It induces sodium and water retention
D	 It is metabolized in the lungs
E	 Plasma half-​life is 36–​54 hours
2.	
 
Regarding metformin:
A	 It triggers insulin release from pancreatic ß-​cells
B	 It inhibits intestinal disaccharidase, leading to a delay in absorption of 
monosaccharides
C	 It increases insulin receptor expression and tyrosine kinase activity
D	 It suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis
E	 It activates peroxisome proliferator-​activated receptor gamma 
(PPARɣ)
3.	
 
The following statements are true concerning glucagon:
A	 It is secreted by the ß-​cells of the islets of Langerhans
B	 Its use is associated with nausea
C	 It is positively inotropic
D	 Glucagon can cause tachyarrhythmias
E	 Use may cause hypokalaemia
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
178
4.	
A 48-​year-​old female presents with confusion. She is clinically 
euvolaemic, euthyroid, and haemodynamically stable.
Investigations are as follows:
●	 Na 20 mmol/​L
●	 K 4.6 mmol/​L
●	 Creatinine 59 µmol/​L
●	 Serum osmolality 260 mOsmol/​kg
●	 Urinary osmolality 264 mOsmol/​kg
●	 Urinary Na 40 mmol/​L
Which of the following drugs could have resulted in this clinical picture?
A	 Lithium
B	 Carbamazepine
C	 Fluoxetine
D	 3,4-​methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
E	 Bisoprolol
5.	
The onset of action of subcutaneously administered insulin can be 
affected by the following:
A	 Exercise
B	 Hypovolaemia
C	 The species of insulin used (e.g. porcine, bovine, or human)
D	 The choice of site
E	 The addition of zinc
6.	
 
Regarding levothyroxine:
A	 It acts by combining with a receptor in the cell nucleus to reduce 
DNA transcription
B	 The effects typically manifest within –​2 hours
C	 It increases the rate and depth of respiration
D	 It is conjugated with glucuronide and sulphate
E	 Elimination half-​life is 6–​7 days
7.	
You are due to anaesthetise a patient who is taking dapagliflozin. 
Which of the following statements regarding this drug are correct?
A	 It enhances glucose secretion in the proximal convoluted tubules via 
sodium-​glucose co-​transporter  (SGLT-​)
B	 It requires endogenous insulin to be effective
C	 Its use may lead to a reduction in blood pressure
D	 It is less effective when used in patients with renal failure
E	 It should be omitted during starvation due to the risk of ketoacidosis
 
 
 
 
Questions
179
Single Best Answers
.	
Which of the following best explains the mode of action of 
glibenclamide?
A	 It binds to the benzamido site on SUR receptor
B	 It is a dipeptidyl peptidase-​4 (DPP-​4) inhibitor
C	 It is a glucagon-​like peptide (GLP-​) analogue
D	 It is an α -​glucosidase inhibitor
E	 Receptor binding triggering pancreatic ß-​cell membrane 
depolarization
2.	
A patient is scheduled for morning surgery who is usually pre­
scribed 0 units of insulin detemir once daily at night. What, if any, 
adjustment should be made to the regimen prior to surgery?
A	 Admit the night before and start a variable rate insulin infusion
B	 No change is required
C	 Omit dose the night before
D	 Reduce dose to 5 units the night before surgery
E	 Reduce dose to 8 units the night before surgery
3.	
Which of the following steroid doses are equivalent when com­
pared with 20 mg hydrocortisone?
A	 Betamethasone 0. mg (relative glucocorticoid potency)
B	 Dexamethasone 0.75 mg (relative glucocorticoid potency)
C	 Methylprednisolone 50 mg (relative glucocorticoid potency)
D	 Prednisolone mg (relative mineralocorticoid potency)
E	 Prednisolone 20 mg (relative glucocorticoid potency)
4.	
A 65-​year-​old gentleman presents with abdominal pain, diarrhoea, 
wheezing, and flushing.
Investigations include:
●	 Urine 5-​hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) 64 µmol/​24 hr 
(reference range <50 µmol/​24hrs)
●	 Urine normetanephrine 32 µmol/​24hrs (reference range 
<900 µmol/​24hrs)
●	 Urine dopamine 42 µmol/​24hrs (reference range 
<700 µmol/​24hrs)
●	 CT demonstrates an ascending colon mass.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
180
Which medication should be instituted prior to proceeding with surgery?
A	 Fludrocortisone
B	 Methylprednisolone
C	 Octreotide
D	 Phenoxybenzamine
E	 Salbutamol inhalers
5.	
Which of the following best describes corticosteroids’ mechanism 
of action?
A	 By binding to a cytosolic glucocorticoid receptor, which translocates 
to the nucleus
B	 By formation of a complex with nuclear receptors to modulate 
transcription
C	 By forming complexes with cytokines to reduce their activity
D	 By reducing sodium channel opening times
E	 Through directly binding a G-​protein coupled receptor
6.	
You have anaesthetized a gentleman for resection of a phaeo­
chromocytoma. Pharmacological management of hypertension 
was instituted several weeks prior to the operation. Intraoperative 
hypertension and tachycardia have been difficult to manage during 
tumour handling and you have needed to administer a number of dif­
ferent agents. All hypotensive agents have been discontinued for over an 
hour and you are concerned as the patient has catecholamine-​resistant 
hypotension. Which medication is most likely to have contributed to this?
A	 Esmolol
B	 Glyceryl trinitrate
C	 Phenoxybenzamine
D	 Phentolamine
E	 Sodium nitroprusside
7.	
You have given a prophylactic five-​unit intravenous bolus of oxy­
tocin following uncomplicated lower segment caesarean section. 
Which clinical effect might you expect?
A	 A duration of action of 4–​6 hours
B	 Increased lower oesophageal sphincter tone
C	 Increased urine output
D	 Onset of action after 90 seconds
E	 Prolongation of QT interval
 
 
 
Answers
181
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  TTFFF
Dexamethasone is a synthetic glucocorticoid, used in anaesthesia mainly 
for its antiemetic effects. It is available as topical preparations, tablets, 
oral solution, and vials for injection. It is a potent glucocorticoid and so 
produces all the physiological effects:
●	 stimulation of and increased number of α and ß adrenoreceptors 
resulting in positive myocardial contractility and vasoconstriction
●	 reduced inflammatory response by reducing the release of cytokines 
and tumour necrosis factor
●	 increased risk of peptic ulceration
●	 reduced gastrointestinal calcium uptake and increased renal excretion
●	 increased glomerular filtration rate and stimulated tubular secretion
●	 stimulated gluconeogenesis
●	 inhibition of peripheral utilization of glucose
●	 fat redistribution
●	 enhanced lipolysis
●	 reduced conversion of amino acids to proteins
●	 inhibition of endogenous corticosteroid release
●	 reduced fibroblast proliferation
●	 organ maturation in the foetus
Of note, dexamethasone has little mineralocorticoid activity and so does 
not cause sodium or water retention. It is up to 77% protein bound with 
high uptake after administration in the liver, kidney, and adrenal glands. 
It is metabolized slowly in the liver and excreted largely as unconjugated 
steroids in the urine. Plasma half-​life is only 3.5–​4.5 hours but the bio­
logical effects persist considerably longer with a biological half-​life of 
36–​54 hours.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dexamethasone.
2.  FTTTF
Metformin is a dimethylbiguanide, and the only surviving member of the 
biguanide group (the other drugs resulted in a high rate of lactic acidosis 
and were withdrawn).
For metformin to be effective, there must be circulating insulin. There are 
a number of mechanisms of action but the main contribution to its effect 
is to stop glucose from rising through reduced hepatic gluconeogenesis. 
It is thought to reactivate hepatic adenosine monophosphate kinase 
(AMPK) and inhibit glucagon signalling, leading to a reduction in 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
182
In addition, metformin increases insulin receptor expression and tyro­
sine kinase activity therefore increasing insulin sensitivity. There is an 
increase in glucose transport type 4 protein (GLUT-​4) on skeletal muscle 
cell membrane enhancing insulin-​stimulated glucose uptake and muscle 
glycogenesis. It also inhibits intestinal disaccharidase leading to a delay 
in the absorption of monosaccharides and a reduction in the rate of 
increase of blood glucose.
Thiazolidinediones (e.g. pioglitazone) activate peroxisome proliferator-​
activated receptor gamma (PPARɣ) which forms a complex with ret­
inoid X receptor and bound retinoic acid. The activated receptor locates 
a nucleotide sequence termed the ‘peroxisome proliferator response 
element’ altering a range of genes involved in insulin sensitivity, glucose, 
and lipid metabolism.
Further reading
Bailey CJ, Davies MJ. Oxford Textbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 2nd 
edition. Oxford University Press, 20. Pharmacological therapy of 
hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Stubbs DJ, Levy N, Dhatariya K. Diabetes medication pharmacology. BJA 
Education, 207;7(6):98–​207.
3.  FTTFT
Glucagon is a polypeptide hormone secreted by the α-​cells of the pan­
creatic islets of Langerhans. Among its indications include the treatment 
of hypoglycaemia, cardiogenic shock, and potentially in β-​blocker and 
calcium channel blocker overdose. It acts via cell membrane receptors 
to activate adenylate cyclase through a Gs protein leading to increased 
intracellular cAMP and therefore calcium concentrations.
Onset of action is within  minute when administered intravenously and 
within 8–​0 minutes when given intramuscularly or subcutaneously. It 
leads to marked inotropy and to a lesser degree chronotropy. It does not 
increase the chance of arrhythmias. It reduces gastrointestinal tone and 
inhibits gastric and pancreatic secretions.
Metabolic effects include:
●	 gluconeogenesis
●	 glycogenolysis
●	 lipolysis, increased free fatty acids, and ketogenesis
●	 increased amino acid uptake and proteolysis
●	 increased calcium uptake into myocardial cells
●	 hypokalaemia secondary to increased insulin secretion
Diarrhoea, nausea, and vomiting and allergic phenomena may compli­
cate its use. The elimination half-​life is 3–​6 minutes.
Further reading
McEnvoy MD, Furse CM. Advanced Perioperative Crisis Management. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Beta blocker/​calcium channel blocker 
overdose.
 
 
 
Answers
183
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Glucagon.
4.  FTTTF
This patient has the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone 
(SIADH). Increased antidiuretic hormone (ADH) acts on G-​protein vaso­
pressin receptors leading to increased apical cell membrane aquaporin-​2 
in the distal renal tubule and collecting ducts increasing water reabsorp­
tion (via V2 receptors). SIADH is characterized by hyponatraemia (Na 
<35 mmol/​L), euvolaemia, low serum osmolality (<270 mOsmol/​kg), 
and concentrated urine (urinary Na >20 mmol/​L, urinary osmolality 
>00 mOsmol/​kg).
Causes of SIADH include:
●	 malignancy (e.g. carcinoma, thymoma, lymphoma, carcinoid)
●	 pulmonary (e.g. pneumonia, TB, sarcoidosis)
●	 intracranial (e.g. trauma, infection, subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
stroke, post-​surgical)
●	 others (e.g. HIV, Guillan–​Barré syndrome)
Drug causes include: carbamazepine (typically mild hyponatraemia, but 
in large doses can be severe), SSRIs, MAOIs, MDMA (ecstasy), oxytocin, 
and chemotherapeutic agents. Lithium causes nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus (hypernatraemia, raised serum osmolality). Bisoprolol has not 
been associated with sodium disturbance.
The underlying cause should be identified and treated. Water intake 
should be restricted although rarely saline infusion is required. Rapid cor­
rection should be avoided due to the risk of central pontine myelinolysis. 
Demeclocycline induces a nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and can be 
used for treatment. Specific V2-​receptor antagonists such as tolvaptan 
may also be used.
Further reading
Hirst C, Allahabadia A, Cosgrove J. The adult patient with hyponatraemia. 
Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 205;5(5):248–​252.
Pal A, et al. Disorders of the posterior pituitary gland. In Warrell DA, 
Cox TM, Firth JD (eds) Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 200. Chapter 3.3.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Vasopressin.
5.  TTTTT
All of the general factors that affect the absorption of other drugs sub­
cutaneously will affect that of insulin. Absorption is quicker in any scen­
ario leading to greater local or general blood flow such as exercise, a 
hotter climate, and massaging of the site. Injection at the abdomen and 
arm gives the quickest onset while it is slower at the leg. In contrast, 
factors reducing regional blood flow such as hypovolaemia and cool 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
184
climates will reduce absorption. These factors may have a noticeable 
effect on how quickly blood sugar rises and falls.
Human insulin is more lipophilic than porcine or bovine conferring 
a more rapid absorption and onset of action. There is an apparent 
increase in dose required of 20% when using bovine or porcine insulin 
when compared to human insulin.
In the circulation insulin is monomeric, but zinc formulations encourage 
insulin to form crystalline lattices. The size of these crystals can be al­
tered by varying the pH which will affect the speed of absorption. Other 
additives include protamine.
Further reading
Dayan C, Williams G. Diabetes. In Warrell DA, Cox TM, Firth JD (eds) 
Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 5th edition. Oxford University Press, 
200. Chapter 3...
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Insulin.
6.  FFTTT
Levothyroxine is a synthetically produced levoisomer of endogenous 
thyroxine (T4). Triiodothyronine (T3) is the active form of the hor­
mone. Approximately 35% of levothyroxine is converted to T3 periph­
erally (predominantly in the liver and kidney by deiodinases). T3 acts by 
combining with a receptor in the target cell nucleus to activate DNA 
transcription, thereby increasing the rate of RNA synthesis and protein 
synthesis.
After administration, effects typically manifest within 24 hours although 
the peak effect is at 6–​7 days. It leads to positive inotropy and 
chronotropy, an increase in systolic, and a fall in diastolic blood pressure 
and vasodilation. Due to an increase in the basal metabolic rate, there is 
an increase in respiratory rate and depth. Patients may exhibit a tremor, 
hyperreflexia, and an increase in gastrointestinal motility and appetite. 
Protein synthesis is enhanced as is lipolysis.
Levothyroxine is well absorbed orally and is highly protein bound with 
a very small VD. It is conjugated with glucuronide and sulphate and ex­
creted in the bile although 20–​40% is excreted unchanged. The elimin­
ation half-​life is 6–​7 days.
A T3 only formulation is available, with a lower corresponding dose, 
quicker onset, shorter time until peak effect and shorter elimination 
half-​life.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Levothyroxine.
Wass J, Owen K. Oxford Handbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 3rd 
edition. Oxford University Press, 204. Thyroid.
 
 
 
Answers
185
7.  FFTTT
Dapagliflozin is SGLT-​2 inhibitor, otherwise known as gliflozin. Other 
examples include canagliflozin and empagliflozin. In normal health, glu­
cose filtered in the urine is almost entirely reabsorbed. Around 90% of 
glucose in the urine is actively reabsorbed by the SGLT-​2 symporter in 
the proximal convoluted tubule and the remainder by SGLT-​. Gliflozins 
inhibit SGLT-​2 glucose reabsorption resulting in loss in the urine of up to 
70 g per day, resulting in reduced circulating glucose. This action does not 
require circulating insulin and is independent of insulin resistance, and re­
sults in a reduction in HbAc of around mmol/​mol. This effect is less 
pronounced in patients with severe renal impairment due to the reduced 
glomerular filtration of glucose. Use results in polyuria, reduction in sys­
tolic and diastolic blood pressure, and weight loss. Diabetic ketoacidosis 
has rarely been associated with their use and so it is recommended that 
they are omitted in fasting patients.
Further reading
Davey P, Sprigings D. Diagnosis and Treatment in Internal Medicine. Oxford 
University Press, 208. Diabetes mellitus.
Stubbs DJ, Levy N, Dhatariya K. Diabetes medication pharmacology. BJA 
Education, 207;7(6):98–​207.
van Baar MJB, et al. SGLT2 Inhibitors in combination therapy: from 
mechanisms to clinical considerations in type 2 diabetes management. 
Diabetes Care, 208;4(8):543–​556.
Single Best Answers
.  E
Glibenclamide is a sulphonylurea. They bind to a specific 
sulphonylurea site on the sulphonylurea receptor  (SUR) on pan­
creatic ß cells which is part of a transmembrane protein complex. 
This leads to the closure of a linked KATP channel, preventing potas­
sium efflux, which causes membrane depolarization. This opens 
adjacent L-​type calcium channels, causing calcium influx, thus acti­
vating calcium-​sensitive signalling proteins which ultimately leads to 
increased insulin secretion.
Meglitinides (e.g. repaglinide) bind to a different (benzamido) site on the 
SUR receptor causing the same changes as sulphonylureas. They are 
more rapidly acting with a shorter duration of action.
GLP-​ is an incretin hormone produced by the L cells of the gastro­
intestinal (GI) tract in response to glucose. Its effects include enhan­
cing insulin secretion, inhibiting glucagon secretion, reducing gastric 
emptying (slowing the rise in serum glucose), and promoting satiety. 
GLP-​ analogues (e.g. exenatide) must be given subcutaneously. 
GLP-​ is broken down by DPP-​4. The DPP-​4 inhibitors (otherwise 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
186
known as gliptins) such as sitagliptin can be used to improve glycaemic 
control.
α -​glucosidase inhibitors (e.g. acarbose) bind to the enzyme preventing 
the binding and cleavage of oligosaccharides into monosaccharides 
impeding carbohydrate digestion, and slowing serum glucose rise.
Further reading
Bailey CJ, Davies MJ. Oxford Textbook of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 2nd 
edition. Oxford University Press, 20. Pharmacological therapy of 
hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Sulfonylureas.
Stubbs DJ, Levy N, Dhatariya K. Diabetes medication pharmacology. BJA 
Education, 207;7(6):98–​207.
2.  E
The CPOC guidelines around use of long-​acting insulins suggests for 
once daily long-​acting insulin administered in the evening, the dose 
should be reduced by 20% regardless of whether surgery is in the 
morning or evening. If the long-​acting insulin is normally taken in the 
morning, then a dose reduced by 20% may be given on the morning 
of surgery.
Insulin detemir is a long-​acting insulin analogue. Other examples 
include glargine and degludec. Alterations in the insulin molecule pro­
long the duration of action. For instance, the action of detemir is de­
layed due to the addition of a fatty acyl chain that binds to plasma 
proteins like albumin. Glargine has two extra arginines extending the 
C-​terminal of the B chain, leading to it precipitating under the skin due 
to the change in pH.
A feature of the long-​acting insulin analogues is a ‘peakless’ profile with 
a long duration of action of between 8 and 36 hours. They are given 
either once or twice daily, often with pre-​prandial short-​acting insulin 
to cover mealtime peaks.
Further reading
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. Peri-​operative 
management of the surgical patient with diabetes 205. Anaesthesia, 
205;70:427–​440.
Centre for Perioperative Care. Guideline for Perioperative Care for 
People with Diabetes Mellitus Undergoing Elective and Emergency 
Surgery. CPOC, 202.
Dayan C, Williams G. Diabetes. In Warrell DA, Cox TM, Firth JD (eds) 
Oxford Textbook of Medicine, 5th edition. Oxford University Press, 
200. Chapter 3...
Stubbs DJ, Levy N, Dhatariya K. Diabetes medication pharmacology. BJA 
Education, 207;7(6):98–​207.
 
 
 
Answers
187
3.  B
See Table 5.. Hydrocortisone has equal mineralocorticoid and gluco­
corticoid potency and has the shortest half-​life of the available prepar­
ations at 8 hours. Prednisolone and methylprednisolone are four and five 
times the glucocorticoid potency respectively, but both have relatively 
lower mineralocorticoid potency. Importantly both dexamethasone and 
betamethasone lack any mineralocorticoid activity and have among the 
longest half-​lives. Fludrocortisone has the greatest relative mineralocor­
ticoid potency.
Cortisol is produced by the adrenal gland at a rate of around 0–​5 mg/​
day, but this increases significantly with stress. Awareness of the relative 
strengths of steroids is important peri-​operatively to guide replacement 
in patients lacking the intrinsic response to stress because of disease 
or from hypothalamic-​pituitary-​adrenal axis suppression from long-​term 
steroid use.
Glucocorticoid effects include maintaining circulatory tone, heightening 
mental awareness, gluconeogenesis, redistribution of body fat, enhanced 
lipolysis, and reduced amino acid to protein conversion. It produces pro­
found anti-​inflammatory effects. In contrast, mineralocorticoid action 
increases sodium reabsorption and potassium and hydrogen ion excre­
tion and increases arteriolar tone via the renin-​angiotensin-​aldosterone 
system.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Steroids.
McEvoy MD, Furse CM. Advanced Perioperative Crisis Management. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Perioperative adrenal crisis.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Prednisolone.
Table 5.  Table of relative glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid 
potencies of some common steroids
Glucocorti­
coid dose 
(mg)
Relative 
glucocorti­
coid 
potency
Relative 
mineralo­
corti­coid 
potency
Plasma 
half-​life 
(hrs)
Hydrocortisone
20


8
Prednisolone
5
4
0.8
6–​36
Methylprednisolone
4
5
0.5
8–​40
Dexamethasone
0.75
30
0
36–​54
Betamethasone
0.6
25
0
36–​54
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
188
4.  C
This patient has carcinoid syndrome, as evidenced by his symptoms and 
raised 24-​hour urine 5HIAA. The syndrome effects approximately 0% 
of patients with carcinoid tumours and is caused by tumour serotonin 
secretion. These neuroendocrine tumours most often occur in the GI 
tract but may also occur in the broncho-​pulmonary system. Other symp­
toms that may occur include lacrimation and rhinorrhoea.
The precursor for serotonin is tryptophan. Serotonin is metabolized 
via monoamine oxidase (MAO) to 5HIAA which is then excreted in the 
urine. Somatostatin is a polypeptide hormone that inhibits tumour hor­
mone release. It is also a potent inhibitor of growth hormone, insulin, 
and glucagon.
In addition to other standard preoperative planning for major surgery, 
patients should be assessed for the presence of right heart valvular dis­
ease. Due to the risk of perioperative uncontrolled hormone release, 
which may result in hypo-​ or hypertensive crises, a somatostatin ana­
logue should be instituted.
Octreotide is a short-​acting somatostatin analogue and is highly effective 
in improving symptoms. It may cause QT prolongation, bradycardia, 
conduction delay, abdominal cramping, and nausea. Further dosing 
of octreotide may be required preoperatively if symptoms remain 
uncontrolled.
Further reading
Powell B, Al Mukhtar A, Mills GH. Carcinoid: the disease and its implications 
for anaesthesia. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 20;():9–​3.
Strosberg JR. Diagnosis of Carcinoid Syndrome and Tumor Localization. 
UpToDate, 208. Available at: https://​www.uptod​ate.com/​conte​
nts/​diagno​sis-​of-​the-​carcin​oid-​syndr​ome-​and-​tumor-​local​izat​ion?sea​
rch=​carcin​oid&sou​rce=​search​_​res​ult&select​edTi​tle=​~50&usa​ge_​t​
ype=​defa​ult&displ​ay_​r​ank=​
Strosberg JR. Treatment of the Carcinoid Syndrome. UpToDate, 208. 
Available at: https://​www.uptod​ate.com/​conte​nts/​treatm​ent-​of-​
the-​carcin​oid-​syndr​ome?sea​rch=​carcin​oid%20s​yndr​ome&sou​rce=​
search​_​res​ult&select​edTi​tle=​~50&usa​ge_​t​ype=​defa​ult&displ​ay_​
r​ank=​
Young WF. Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis of Pheochromocytoma. 
UpToDate, 208. Available at: https://​uptod​ate.com/​conte​nts/​clini​
cal-​prese​ntat​ion-​and-​diagno​sis-​of-​pheoc​hrom​ocyt​oma
5.  A
Corticosteroids diffuse across cell membranes to react with cytoplasmic 
receptors to form a complex which translocates to the nucleus. Here it 
binds to ‘glucocorticoid response elements’ to influence the expression 
of pro-​ and anti-​inflammatory genes, stimulate protein synthesis, and in 
 
 
 
Answers
189
particular direct synthesis of lipocortins. Their actions are antiallergic, 
antitoxic, antishock, antipyretics, and immunosuppressive in action. They 
reduce the expression of a number of cytokines (including interleukin 
–​3, 6, TNF-​α, and ɣ-​interferon) and inhibit T-​cell and monocyte acti­
vation and migration. Very high doses may cause T-​cell lysis. In add­
ition, they act on specific receptors on the plasma membrane of the 
hypothalamic–​pituitary–​adrenal axis.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Prednisolone.
Torpey N, Moghal NE, Watson E, Talbot D. Renal Transplantation 
(Oxford Specialist Handbooks). Oxford University Press, 200. 
Immunosuppression.
6.  C
See Table 5.2. α-​blockade with either phenoxybenzamine or doxazosin 
is commenced at least 7–​4 days preoperatively, followed by selective 
ß-​blockade aiming to minimize dramatic haemodynamic responses to 
stimulation and tumour handling.
Phenoxybenzamine covalently binds to α-​adrenergic receptors produ­
cing irreversible blockade resulting in a decrease in peripheral vascular 
resistance and reflex tachycardia. Oral bioavailability is 20–​30%; it is 
metabolized by deacetylation in the liver and is excreted in the urine 
and bile. Due to its half-​life of 24 hours, it is usually discontinued 24–​48 
hours prior to surgery. All other agents mentioned above have short 
half-​lives and duration of action and so phenoxybenzamine is the most 
likely culprit.
Catecholamine release may be induced by tumour handling intraoperatively 
leading to dangerous hypertension and tachyarrhythmias or bradycardias. 
Hypertensive crises should be managed with a vasodilator such as phentola­
mine, sodium nitroprusside, glyceryl trinitrate, or nicardipine. Tachycardia 
and tachyarrhythmias should be managed with ß-​blockade using an agent 
such as esmolol.
Further reading
Connor D, Boumphrey S. Perioperative management of phaeochromo­
cytoma. BJA Education, 206;6(5):53–​58.
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Other antihypertensives.
Hardman JG, Hopkins PM, Stuys MMRF. Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia. 
Oxford University Press, 207. Cardiovascular drugs in anaesthetic 
practice.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Phenoxybenzamine.
 
 
 
Chapter 5  Drugs affecting the endocrine system
190
7.  E
Oxytocin is a naturally occurring polypeptide secreted by the posterior 
pituitary. It binds to specific receptors on the myometrium (of which 
there are a higher number during pregnancy), increasing the mem­
brane excitability and leading to calcium influx. This stimulates uterine 
contractions.
When administered intravenously, oxytocin will act within 30 seconds 
with effects typically lasting for about  hour. An intramuscular dose will 
take 3–​5 minutes to act and continue to act for 2–​3 hours.
Hypotension is common (due to vascular smooth muscle relaxation) on 
bolus administration and often leads to reflex tachycardia. QT prolonga­
tion and T-​wave flattening may occur. Oxytocin has no effect on the 
lower oesophageal sphincter tone. It is chemically similar to antidiuretic 
hormone and so promotes reduced urine output and water retention 
through a direct effect on the renal tubules. In high doses, this can lead 
to water intoxication and hyponatraemia.
Oxytocin is rapidly metabolized by hydrolysis in the liver and kidney 
with an elimination half-​life of –​7 minutes. Its use may cause reduced 
Table 5.2  Table of drugs used to manage hypertensive crises
Mode of  
action
CVS  
effects
Onset
Duration Half 
life
Phentol­
amine
Reversible 
competitive 
α-​adrenergic 
blockade. 3–​
5 × more αl activity 
compared with α2
Reduced 
SVR, reflex
tachycardia
–​0 mins 20–​40 
mins
0–​5 
mins
Sodium 
nitro­
prusside
Stabilizes smooth 
muscle membrane 
preventing calcium 
influx by interacting 
with sulfhydryl 
groups
Decreases 
systemic 
blood 
pressure, 
compensatory 
tachycardia
30–​20 
seconds
2–​5 mins
–​2 
mins
Glyceryl 
trinitrate
Metabolized to 
nitric oxide which 
activates guanylate 
cyclase causing 
vascular smooth 
muscle relaxation
Venodilation 
at lower and 
arteriovenous 
dilation 
at higher 
doses, reflex 
tachycardia in 
health
–​5 mins
0–​30 mins –​3 
mins
Esmolol
Competitive β-​
adrenoreceptors 
blockade, relative 
β selectivity
Fall in cardiac 
output of 
20%, dose 
dependent fall 
in heart rate
  min
2–​20 mins 9.2 
mins
 
Answers
191
fasciculations and increased dose requirement with the administration 
of suxamethonium.
Further reading
Gupta A, Singh-​Radcliff N. Pharmacology in Anesthesia Practice. Oxford 
University Press, 203. Oxytocin.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Oxytocin.
 
193
Chapter 6
Drugs affecting the 
haematological and 
immune systems
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
Erythropoietin
A	 Can be administered orally
B	 Acts as a mitosis-​stimulating factor
C	 Causes a dose-​dependent increase in blood pressure
D	 Is a glycoprotein
E	 Is removed by haemodiafiltration
2.	
 
Regarding thrombolytic agents
A	 Include tranexamic acid
B	 Are derived from recombinant DNA technology
C	 Streptokinase acts directly on plasmin
D	 Are administered by bolus dose
E	 Once used, lead to the generation of antithrombotic antibodies
3.	
 
Rivaroxaban
A	 Is a benzamidine-​based agent
B	 Indirectly inhibits factor Xa
C	 Affects platelet function
D	 Drug plasma levels may increase when administered with 
carbamazepine
E	 Drug plasma levels may decrease when administered with HIV 
protease inhibitors
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6  Haematological system
194
4.	
 
Eptacog alfa (activated Factor VII)
A	 Is a vitamin K dependent glycoprotein
B	 Activates Factor X on the surface of platelets
C	 May cause disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
D	 Can be used in conjunction with prothrombin complex
E	 Inhibitory antibody formation can occur following its use
5.	
 
Dabigatran
A	 Can be administered subcutaneously
B	 Is a non-​reversible direct thrombin inhibitor
C	 Inhibits thrombin-​induced platelet aggregation
D	 When co-​administered with verapamil, may lead to reduced plasma 
drug levels of dabigatran
E	 Co-​administration with St John’s wort prolongs the duration of the 
effect of dabigatran
6.	
 
Fondaparinux
A	 Inhibits thrombin formation
B	 Binds to antithrombin III
C	 Affects platelet function
D	 Is used in the management of patients with Glanzmann’s 
thrombasthenia
E	 Affects fibrinolytic activity
7.	
 
G-​CSF (Filgrastim)
A	 Reduces the duration of neutropenia in patients receiving cytotoxic 
chemotherapy
B	 Is used in the mobilization of PBPCs (peripheral blood 
progenitor cells)
C	 Is indicated in the management of myelodysplastic syndrome
D	 May cause thrombocytosis
E	 Is rarely associated with musculoskeletal pain in patients receiving 
the drug
 
 
 
 
Questions
195
Single Best Answers
.	
You are asked to review a 55-​year-​old woman in the emergency 
department who is having an ongoing upper gastrointestinal (GI) 
bleed. Her pulse is 40 bpm and her blood pressure is 98/​56. She is known 
to be anticoagulated with warfarin for recurrent massive pulmonary em­
bolisms (PEs). She is receiving IV fluids and packed red blood cells.
Regarding reversal of her warfarin, the next most appropriate action is:
A	 Give 4 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
B	 Give prothrombin complex concentrate
C	 Give prothrombin complex concentrate and vitamin K
D	 Give recombinant factor VIIa (Eptacog alfa)
E	 Give vitamin K
2.	
A 28-​year-​old male is on your intensive care unit (ICU) following 
a staggered mixed overdose 2 hours ago. He was brought to the 
ICU due to a reduced level of consciousness, requiring intubation for 
airway protection. It is unclear as to the nature of all the agents he in­
gested but it does include dabigatran. A clotting screen demonstrates 
severe derangement in haemostasis. The ICU nurse comments that he is 
starting to bleed from his IV line sites.
Regarding reversing the effects of dabigatran, the next most appropriate 
action is:
A	 Administer 4 units of FFP
B	 Administer idarucizumab
C	 Administer prothrombin complex concentrate
D	 Initiate haemodialysis
E	 Insert a nasogastric tube and administer activated charcoal
3.	
You are asked to assess a 74-​year-​old man in resus. He was found 
collapsed in the street and currently has a Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GCS) of 9/​5. A CT head scan without contrast has demonstrated a 
large subdural haematoma with midline shift. His case has been discussed 
with the regional neurosurgical unit, which has accepted the patient for 
neurosurgery. His only current medication is apixaban which he takes for 
secondary prevention of PEs as he is allergic to warfarin.
Regarding reversing the effects of apixaban, the next most appropriate 
action is:
A	 Administer 4 units of FFP
B	 Administer andexanet
C	 Administer ciraparantag
D	 Administer idarucizumab
E	 Administer prothrombin complex concentrate
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6  Haematological system
196
4.	
A 62-​year-​old patient with diffuse large B-​cell non-​Hodgkin 
lymphoma is on ICU. He was admitted from the oncology day 
unit where he had been receiving intravenous therapeutic agents for 
his lymphoma treatment which included a red blood cell transfusion 
for symptomatic anaemia. He became erythematous, and developed 
bronchospasm and hypotension requiring admission for vasoactive sup­
port. He received IM adrenaline, IV hydrocortisone, and chlorphenamine 
at the time of the reaction. He is about to commence haemodiafiltration 
as he has severely impaired renal function with severe metabolic acid­
osis. His electrolytes are within normal limits.
The most likely diagnosis is:
A	 An acute transfusion reaction
B	 An anaphylactic reaction to a chemotherapy agent
C	 Cytokine-​release syndrome
D	 Severe anaemia resulting in cardiac and renal failure
E	 Tumour lysis syndrome
5.	
You are asked to review a surgical patient on the ward. The 
patient is 22 years old and has a known diagnosis of melanoma for 
which he has been receiving treatment with curative intent. He has been 
receiving ipilimumab as part of his melanoma treatment. A PICC line is in 
place which appears clean and healthy. The only other significant finding 
in his past medical history is an open appendicectomy aged 2. Earlier 
today he was admitted to the ward via the emergency department with 
abdominal pain, bloody diarrhoea, nausea, and dehydration. There is a 
known norovirus outbreak in the local community and he is being bar­
rier nursed in a side room. After his second cycle of treatment, he was 
admitted for 3 days with sepsis but no source was identified. A recent 
staging CT scan, performed 3 weeks ago, showed a reduction in tumour 
burden. His white blood cell count and C-​reactive protein (CRP) are 
normal and he is apyrexial.
The most likely diagnosis is:
A	 An immune-​related adverse event associated with ipilimumab
B	 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis resulting from immunosuppressive 
treatment
C	 Malignancy associated bowel perforation
D	 Severe sepsis associated with immunosuppressive effects of 
cytotoxic chemotherapy
E	 Viral gastroenteritis
 
 
Questions
197
6.	
A 40-​year-​old patient is sedated and ventilated on ICU with severe 
ARDS. Fifty days ago he received an allogeneic stem cell trans­
plant. He has been ventilated on ICU for 4 days and has had multiple 
diagnostic procedures to try to determine the cause of his respiratory 
failure. Chest radiography demonstrates perihilar interstitial/​alveolar 
infiltrates with a ‘ground-​glass pattern’ on high-​resolution thoracic CT 
scanning. Bronchoalveolar lavage has failed to demonstrate causative mi­
crobes. He has been treated with high-​dose co-​trimoxazole. His periph­
eral blood film has been reported as normal.
The most likely diagnosis is:
A	 CMV pneumonitis as a result of immunosuppressive agents
B	 Interstitial pneumonitis secondary to immunochemotherapy agents
C	 Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
D	 Pulmonary graft versus host disease (GvHD)
E	 Recurrence of original lymphoproliferative disease
7.	
You are asked to review a 45-​year-​old woman with a history of 
breast cancer who was admitted to ICU for respiratory support 
following an emergency admission via the emergency department with 
breathlessness and chest pain. She is currently receiving high-​flow nasal 
oxygen therapy (60 L/​min, FiO2 0.8). Her chest X-​ray is consistent with 
pulmonary oedema. Prior to transfer to ICU she underwent a percutan­
eous coronary angiogram which demonstrated clear coronary vessels 
but a reduced LV ejection fraction. She is now complaining of pain in her 
right foot and leg. A haemostatic closure device over her right femoral 
artery has already been removed with no improvement in her symp­
toms. Her right pedal pulses are absent on doppler examination. Her 
breast cancer therapy was multimodal and included bevacizumab and 
paclitaxel.
The most likely unifying diagnosis is:
A	 Adverse vascular events secondary to bevacizumab
B	 Adverse vascular events secondary to paclitaxel
C	 Antiphospholipid syndrome
D	 Disseminated tumour emboli
E	 Malignancy associated vasculitis
 
 
Chapter 6  Haematological system
198
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FTTTF
Erythropoietin is a glycoprotein used in the treatment of anaemia and 
is administered either subcutaneously (for preference) or intravenously. 
Erythropoiesis results from its activity as a mitosis-​stimulating factor 
and differentiation hormone. In addition to erythropoiesis, it will also 
increase the platelet count but does not lead to thrombocytosis. A 
dose-​dependent increase in blood pressure does occur with this agent. 
Erythropoietin is not removed by haemodiafiltration.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Erythropoietin.
2.  FFFFF
Tranexamic acid exhibits antifibrinolytic activity and is not a thrombo­
lytic agent. The thrombolytic agent, streptokinase, is derived from 
beta haemolytic streptococci of Lancefield Group C. However, other 
thrombolytic agents are produced using recombinant DNA technology. 
Streptokinase acts indirectly on plasmin. Thrombolytic agents may be 
administered by bolus dose or intravenous infusion depending on the 
specific agent being used and the clinical regimen. Only streptokinase 
administration leads to the generation of antistreptokinase antibodies.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Thrombolytics.
3.  FFFFF
Rivaroxaban is an oxazolidinone derivative. It directly inhibits factor Xa 
in a dose-​dependent manner, leading to interruption of intrinsic and 
extrinsic coagulation pathways, but has no effect on thrombin or platelet 
function. A proportion of the drug undergoes oxidative degradation and 
hydrolysis via cytochrome P450 3A4. Other cytochrome subenzymes 
and non-​cytochromic mechanisms are also involved. Excretion is 50% 
renal, 50% faecal. Patients receiving CYP450 3A4 inducers, such as 
carbamazepine, will lead to reduced drug plasma levels of rivaroxaban. 
Likewise, the presence of a CYP450 3A4 inhibitor, such as HIV protease 
inhibitor, results in increased rivaroxaban plasma levels.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Rivaroxaban.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
199
4.  TTTFT
Activated factor VII is produced using recombinant DNA technology and 
is a vitamin K-​dependent glycoprotein. The agent binds to tissue factor, 
resulting in the activation of factors IX and X, leading to thrombin pro­
duction. Eptacog alfa also activates factor X on the surface of platelets, 
independently of tissue factor. Use of the drug may lead to the develop­
ment of thrombus or DIC, in situations where there is increased tissue 
factor expression. The use of prothrombin complex with eptacog alfa 
is not recommended due to the increased risk of thrombotic events. 
Inhibitory antibody formation may occur in patients with factor VII 
deficiency.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Eptacog alfa.
5.  FFTFF
Dabigatran is presented as an oral preparation in the form of a pro-​
drug, dabigatran etexilate. Hydrolysis of the pro-​drug by plasma and 
hepatic esterases produces dabigatran, which is a competitive, revers­
ible direct thrombin inhibitor preventing cleavage of fibrinogen to fibrin. 
Dabigatran also inhibits thrombin-​induced platelet aggregation. The dur­
ation of drug exposure is increased when dabigatran is administered to 
patients receiving amiodarone and dose limitation is advised. The nature 
of this interaction is unknown, however, amiodarone is an inhibitor of 
the efflux transporter P-​glycoprotein, of which dabigatran is a substrate. 
Verapamil is an inhibitor of P-​glycoprotein, therefore co-​administration 
would lead to an increased plasma drug level of dabigatran. St John’s wort 
(P-​glycoprotein inducer) would be expected to reduce the duration of 
effect of dabigatran.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dabigatran.
6.  TTFFF
Fondaparinux is a synthetic and specific inhibitor of activated Xa, medi­
ated by antithrombin III. It selectively binds antithrombin III, potentiating 
300-​fold the neutralization of factor Xa, thereby inhibiting thrombin for­
mation and thrombus generation. The drug is used in the treatment of 
acute PE/​DVT and can also be used in the prophylaxis of DVTs. The 
drug has no effect on platelet function. Management of Glanzmann’s 
thrombasthenia would require the use of an agent such as eptacog alfa. 
Fondaparinux has no effect on fibrinolytic activity or bleeding time.
Further reading
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Fondaparinux.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6  Haematological system
200
7.  TTFFF
G-​CSF (granulocyte colony-​stimulating factor) is used in the manage­
ment of patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy, to reduce the dur­
ation of neutropenia. It is also used for the mobilization of PBPCs in 
patients who will subsequently receive autologous PBPC transplantation. 
G-​CSF is not indicated in the management of myelodysplastic syndrome. 
Thrombocytopaenia, rather than thrombocytosis, occurs in at least 0% 
of patients. Musculoskeletal pain is a commonly occurring side effect.
Further reading
Datapharm. Accofil 48 MU/​0.5 ml Solution for Injection or Infusion in 
Pre-​filled Syringe, June 209. Available at: https://​www.medici​nes.
org.uk/​emc/​prod​uct/​3383/​smpc
Single Best Answers
.  C
The reversal of an anticoagulation agent depends on the degree of 
bleeding. In this case, this is a life-​threatening upper GI haemorrhage. 
Prothrombin complex concentrate is indicated for the reversal of war­
farin, however, administration in isolation should be avoided as the 
half-​life is approximately six hours. The addition of vitamin K will help 
maintain haemostasis. Vitamin K alone would not work quickly enough 
to antagonize the effects of warfarin. Recombinant factor VIIa would 
only be considered if all other measures had failed and after discussion 
with a haematologist. Fresh frozen plasma is not recommended for war­
farin reversal.
Further reading
McIlmoyle K, Tran H. Perioperative management of oral anticoagulation 
BJA Education, 208;8(9):259–​264.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Prothrombin complex.
2.  B
Dabigatran is a direct oral anticoagulant which reversibly inhibits 
thrombin. Activated charcoal is only indicated if ingestion has occurred 
within three hours of presentation to hospital. FFP is not indicated for 
the reversal of dabigatran. Idarucizumab is a monoclonal antibody frag­
ment that binds to dabigatran with 350 times the affinity of dabigatran to 
thrombin, thereby preventing dabigatran from exerting its anticoagulant 
effect. If available, this agent should be used first line in this situation. 
Administration of prothrombin complex concentrate would be con­
sidered a second-​line therapy. Haemodialysis is an option for clearing 
circulating dabigatran, but this will take time to be established and is as­
sociated with additional risk.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
201
Further reading
McIlmoyle K, Tran H. Perioperative management of oral anticoagulation 
BJA Education, 208;8(9):259–​264.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dabigatran.
3.  B
Apixaban is a factor Xa inhibitor. Administration of plasma is not re­
commended for its reversal. Idarucizumab is only licensed for use in 
the reversal of dabigatran. Ciraparantag is an investigational agent 
that is being developed as a ‘universal antidote’ to direct acting oral 
anticoagulation agents, fondaparinux, heparins, and low molecular 
weight heparins. It does not currently have a licence. Andexanet is modi­
fied recombinant factor Xa and as such binds to factor Xa inhibitors re­
sulting in the reversal of their anticoagulant effect. Prothrombin complex 
concentrate could be used if andexanet was not available.
Further reading
McIlmoyle K, Tran H. Perioperative management of oral anticoagulation 
BJA Education, 208;8(9):259–​264.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Prothrombin complex.
4.  C
While an anaphylactic reaction to chemotherapy is possible, the appro­
priate emergency management steps were undertaken and it would be 
usual for these to limit such a reaction. Severe renal impairment is not 
a typical feature of anaphylaxis. Tumour lysis syndrome (TLS) is usually 
associated with rapidly dividing tumours (such as Burkitt’s lymphoma 
and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia) that are chemo-​responsive re­
sulting in rapid tumour cell death. The typical features of TLS include 
hyperuricaemia, hyperphosphataemia, hyperkalaemia, and hypocal­
caemia which are not seen in this case. An acute transfusion reaction 
is possible but unlikely. Cytokine-​release syndrome (CRS) is a more 
likely diagnosis, especially given that the patient is receiving ‘intravenous 
therapeutic agents’ (N.B. not just cytotoxic chemotherapy agents) for 
the treatment of B-​cell lymphoma of which the monoclonal antibody 
rituximab is known to cause CRS. Severe anaemia would take time to 
result in significant end-​organ pathology and the clinical features fit more 
with an acute event.
Further reading
Kroschinsky F, et al. New drugs, new toxicities: severe side effects of 
modern targeted and immunotherapy of cancer and their manage­
ment. Crit Care, 207;2:89.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Allopurinol.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6  Haematological system
202
5.  A
Viral gastroenteritis could present with this constellation of symptoms 
but bloody diarrhoea is not a typical feature. Bowel perforation associ­
ated with his underlying malignancy seems unlikely, given the reduction 
in tumour burden and suggested response to therapy. CMV colitis can 
cause these symptoms in immunocompromised individuals but patients 
tend to be older and the clinical picture is not typical of an infectious pro­
cess. An immune-​related adverse event associated with his melanoma 
treatment should be seriously considered, especially if he has received 
a ‘checkpoint inhibitor’ such as ipilimumab or nivolumab. These agents 
are designed to improve the immune system’s innate function to target 
and destroy tumour cells. The net result is an inhibitor of the inhibitory 
components of the immune system but this can lead to an overwhelming 
inflammatory response. Diarrhoea and enterocolitis are complications 
of ipilimumab therapy and there should be a high index of suspicion 
of perforation, so urgent assessment and management are needed in 
these cases.
Further reading
Kroschinsky F, et al. New drugs, new toxicities: severe side effects of 
modern targeted and immunotherapy of cancer and their manage­
ment. Crit Care, 207;2:89.
6.  B
CMV pneumonitis and P. jirovecii are possible diagnoses but are unlikely 
given the failure to elicit any positive microbiological evidence of infec­
tion. GvHD commonly occurs in patients receiving stem cell transplants 
but pulmonary involvement typically occurs after 00 days. Recurrence 
of his original disease process is possible but seems unlikely as there is 
no other evidence suggestive of relapse. He will have been exposed to 
numerous agents during his initial treatment to reach remission, together 
with agents in the condition regimen pre-​transplant, that would be im­
plicated in drug-​induced pulmonary pneumonitis. The incidence of non-​
infectious, drug-​induced pneumonitis has been recorded as being as high 
as 5% in these patients.
Further reading
Kroschinsky F, et al. New drugs, new toxicities: severe side effects of 
modern targeted and immunotherapy of cancer and their manage­
ment. Crit Care, 207;2:89.
7.  A
Antiphospholipid syndrome can be present with hypoxaemia (sec­
ondary to multiple PEs) and peripheral vascular occlusion, but pul­
monary oedema is not a typical feature. Malignancy-​associated vasculitis 
is rare in breast cancer. Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody that has 
antiangiogenetic effects. These are utilized to impair tumour cell prolif­
eration by interrupting neoangiogenesis. However, these agents are also 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
203
associated with adverse vascular events including arterial hypertension, 
congestive heart failure, and arterial thromboembolism (in this case, 
exacerbated by the percutaneous procedure the patient underwent). 
Paclitaxel is used in the treatment of breast cancer but does not have 
vascular side effects. Disseminated tumour emboli are very unlikely in 
the clinical context.
Further reading
Kroschinsky F, et al. New drugs, new toxicities: severe side effects of 
modern targeted and immunotherapy of cancer and their manage­
ment. Crit Care, 207;2:89.
 
205
Chapter 7
Drugs in overdose
QUESTIONS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.	
 
The following agents produce predominantly hallucinogenic 
effects:
A	 Amphetamines
B	 Gamma-​hydroxybutyrate
C	 Lysergic acid diethylamide
D	 Synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists
E	 Synthetic cathinones
2.	 

The following agents are associated with hyperthermia:
A	 Belladonna alkaloids
B	 Gamma-​hydroxybutyrate
C	 Lysergic acid diethylamide
D	 Muscarinic mushrooms
E	 Synthetic cathinones
3.	
 
Ingestion of the following agents may lead to mydriasis:
A	 Desomorphine ‘Krokodil’
B	 Lysergic acid diethylamide
C	 Muscarinic mushrooms
D	 Phencyclidine derivatives
E	 Synthetic cathinones
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7  Drugs in overdose
206
4.	 

Regarding lysergic acid diethylamide:
A	 The agent is a semisynthetic ergoline drug
B	 Has a half-​life of approximately eight hours
C	 When administered orally, clinical effects are seen within five 
minutes of ingestion
D	 Synaesthesia occurs rarely
E	 Can be detected in a urinary drug screen
5.	
 
The following agents can be detected in the urine
A	 Buprenorphine
B	 Cannabinoids
C	 Cathinones
D	 Methadone
E	 Synthetic cannabinoid receptor antagonists
6.	 

Features associated with acute cathinone toxicity include:
A	 Central nervous system (CNS) depression
B	 Hypotension
C	 Miosis
D	 Muscle weakness
E	 Tachypnoea
7.	
 
Agents that are associated with the ‘stimulant syndrome’ include:
A	 Belladonna genera
B	 ‘Ecstasy’
C	 Lysergic acid diethylamide
D	 Mephedrone
E	 ‘Spice’
 
 
 
 
Questions
207
Single Best Answers
.	
You are asked to review a 40-​year-​old male in the emergency 
department (ED). He was initially found by a member of the 
public acting in a strange way but shortly after arrival by ambulance, he 
became extremely agitated. On your arrival to assess him he is being 
restrained by four security staff having assaulted a member of the ED 
nursing staff. No observations are possible but IV access was established 
by the ambulance crew and remains patent. He has received a total of 
5 mg of midazolam intravenously from the ED staff with minimal effect. 
He has stigmata of IV drug use and scarring consistent with self-​harming. 
He is known to the ED staff as a frequent attendee with drug-​related 
complications. The ambulance crew recovered a bottle labelled ‘bath 
salts’ found close to the patient.
The next most appropriate action is:
A	 Insert a urinary catheter for urgent urinary drug testing
B	 Obtain a collateral history
C	 Perform an urgent CT head scan
D	 Rapidly review the patient with a view to further sedation including 
intubation and ventilation
E	 Take blood for urgent toxicology
2.	
You are asked to review a 37-​year-​old female patient who is sed­
ated and ventilated on the intensive care unit (ICU). She was ini­
tially admitted to hospital with abdominal pain, vomiting, and watery 
diarrhoea, following ingesting ‘food that had been foraged in woodland’. 
Thirty-​six hours following her presentation to hospital she was admitted 
to ICU following a seizure on the ward. Since her transfer to ICU, she has 
developed acute hepatic impairment and acute renal failure.
Which of the following is the most likely causative agent that the patient 
has ingested?
A	 Amanita species
B	 Coprinus species
C	 Gyromitra species
D	 Orellanine species
E	 Psilocybe species (‘magic’ mushrooms)
 
 
 
Chapter 7  Drugs in overdose
208
3.	
A patient is known to have ingested an ‘unknown illicit drug’. The 
following clinical features are present in this patient: mydriasis, 
hypertension, seizure activity, and hyper-​reflexia.
Which of the following agents is most likely to have been ingested?
A	 Anticholinergic agent
B	 Cholinergic agent
C	 Hallucinogenic agent
D	 Opioid agent
E	 Sympathomimetic agent
4.	
You are asked to urgently attend the ED where a number of adult 
males have been brought to hospital following a public order dis­
turbance. They describe having experienced the following: breathless­
ness, cough, wheezing, lacrimation, and rhinorrhoea.
What is the most likely agent they have been exposed to?
A	 Ammonia
B	 Chloroacetophenone
C	 Chlorobenzylidenemalononitrile
D	 Phosgene
E	 Sulphuric acid
5.	
A usually fit and well 27-​year-​old female is brought to the ED having 
been found collapsed outside a night club with a reduced Glasgow 
Coma Scale (GCS) following a seizure and evidence of vomiting. She was 
intubated for airway protection by a pre-​hospital team and is currently 
sedated with a propofol infusion and is mechanically ventilated. She has a 
temperature of 39.9°C and is tachycardic and hypertensive.
Which of the following diagnoses is most likely?
A	 Amphetamine ingestion
B	 Heat stroke secondary to ingestion of ecstasy
C	 Malignant hyperpyrexia secondary to muscle relaxant use
D	 Malignant neuroleptic syndrome
E	 Phaeochromocytoma and non-​compliance with antihypertensive 
treatment
 
 
 
Questions
209
6.	
You are part of a major incident response at your local hospital 
following an explosion at a concert venue. There are possible re­
ports of an improvised device being detonated at the scene.
Which of the following is the most rapid form of detection?
A	 Chemical detector paper
B	 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
C	 Gas chromatography mass spectrometry
D	 Raman spectrometer
E	 Signs and symptoms of victims
7.	
A 64-​year-​old man who works in the nuclear industry is an in-​
patient on ICU having been transferred from the haematology 
ward. He initially presented to hospital with severe vomiting of unknown 
aetiology followed by the development of pancytopenia and neutro­
penic sepsis. In recent days he has begun to develop alopecia. Potential 
ingestion of an alpha radiation emitter has been postulated as a pos­
sible cause.
Which of the following alpha sources is considered to be the most 
dangerous?
A	 24Americium
B	 239Plutonium
C	 20Polonium
D	 232Thorium
E	 235Uranium
 
 
Chapter 7  Drugs in overdose
210
ANSWERS
Multiple-​Choice Questions
.  FFTTF
While it is possible for all of these agents to cause hallucinations, it is 
only a predominant feature with synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists 
(SCRAs) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Sympathetic stimulation 
occurs with cathinone and amphetamine use with hallucinations only 
occurring in more severe cases. Gamma-​hydroxybutyrate has sedative-​
hypnotic activity. SCRAs are not detected by routine drug screens and 
include ‘spice’. LSD is a potent hallucinogen.
Further reading
Dignam G, Bigham C. Novel psychoactive substances: a practical ap­
proach to dealing with toxicity from legal highs. BJA Education, 
207;7(5):72–​77.
2.  TFTFT
Agents that are stimulatory in nature are often associated with a raised 
temperature. In some cases, this can result in extreme hyperthermia. 
Muscarinic mushrooms are not associated with hyperthermia and 
gamma-​hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) is associated with hypothermia.
Further reading
Dignam G, Bigham C. Novel psychoactive substances: a practical ap­
proach to dealing with toxicity from legal highs. BJA Education, 
207;7(5):72–​77.
3.  FTFTT
Muscarinic mushroom ingestion results in a cholinergic-​mediated 
toxidrome of confusion, coma, seizure activity, miosis, bradycardia, 
bronchoconstriction, and lacrimation. Desomorphine ‘Krokodil’ is a 
synthetic opioid and as such, ingestion results in opioid-​related effects 
including CNS depression, miosis, bradycardia, respiratory depression, 
and decreased gastric motility.
Further reading
Dignam G, Bigham C. Novel psychoactive substances: a practical ap­
proach to dealing with toxicity from legal highs. BJA Education, 
207;7(5):72–​77.
4.  TFFTT
LSD is a semisynthetic ergoline drug, meaning it has a structural skeleton 
of the alkaloid ergoline. The drug undergoes hepatic metabolism via the 
cytochrome P450 enzyme system. It has a half-​life of approximately 2.5 
hours and when administered orally, clinical effects are seen within 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
211
minutes of ingestion. Synaesthesia is the development of cross-​sensory 
perception when, for example, auditory stimulation results in an invol­
untary change in visual perception. This is a recognized but overall fairly 
rare occurrence with LSD ingestion.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
5.  TTFTF
Routine urinary drug testing only detects a limited number of illicit drugs. 
However, it is always valuable to take serum and urine samples to be stored 
by the chemical pathology lab in case more specific testing may be required 
either locally, or at a poisons centre. SCRAs are not detected in routine 
urinary screening, hence their attractiveness to be used in individuals who may 
undergo routine testing. Both naturally occurring cathinones, such as ‘Khat’, 
and synthetic agents, such as mephedrone, are not routinely detectable.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Buprenorphine.
6.  FFFFT
Cathinone toxicity results in sympathomimetic toxidrome. Common fea­
tures include agitation, rigidity, seizures, mydriasis, hypertension, tach­
ypnoea, hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, and hyponatraemia. Toxicity is 
more likely when synthetic cathinones have been ingested compared 
with naturally occurring substances such as Khat.
Further reading
Dignam G, Bigham C. Novel psychoactive substances: a practical ap­
proach to dealing with toxicity from legal highs. BJA Education, 
207;7(5):72–​77.
7.  TTFTT
Common features of the stimulant syndrome include CNS excitation, 
sweating, dilated pupils, tachycardia, hypertension, bruxism (teeth grinding), 
hypertonia, and hyper-​reflexia. All of the listed agents may result in some or 
all of these symptoms/​signs except LSD which has more hallucinogenic prop­
erties. Ecstasy is the street name for 3,4-​methlyenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA). Belladonna ingestion, such as deadly nightshade, results in an anti­
cholinergic toxidrome. Spice is the street name for a synthetic cannabinoid 
receptor agonist. Mephedrone is a synthetic cathinone.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7  Drugs in overdose
212
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Atropine.
Single Best Answers
.  D
While all of the options are important elements within this patient’s 
management, the primary concern is to ensure patient and staff safety 
which may include induction of anaesthesia, intubation, ventilation, 
and continued sedation on intensive care. If the patient lacks capacity, 
then he should be treated in his ‘best interests’ in this emergency scen­
ario. Collecting urine for a rapid drug screen is an important subse­
quent step, although if this man has ingested a synthetic cannabinoid 
receptor agonist such as ‘spice’, this would not be routinely detected 
on current urine drug screens. A serum blood sample taken as soon 
as is practically possible is a sensible step to take with a request to 
the local pathology department to store the sample as it may need 
to be sent off to a tertiary toxicology centre in due course. The pos­
sibility of an acute intracranial event should always be considered in 
any individual with acute neurological symptoms. Obtaining a collat­
eral history, if possible, can often lead to invaluable information in 
making a diagnosis.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
2.  C
Psilocybin (derived from Psilocybe species) does cause abdominal 
pain and vomiting, but in addition is usually associated with neuro­
psychiatric symptoms typically occurring within 20–​240 minutes fol­
lowing ingestion. Amatoxin ingestion (derived from Amanita species) 
could fit with the symptom complex described but seizure activity 
is not a feature. Gyromitra species produce gyromitrin which under­
goes hydrolysis to a gamma-​aminobutyric acid (GABA) inhibitor, 
monomethylhydrazine, which when metabolized further results 
in hepatic damage. Coprine ingestion (derived from Coprinus spe­
cies) causes a disulfiram-​like reaction when ingested with ethanol. 
Orellanine species may result in renal failure but typically seven days 
following ingestion.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
 
 
 
 
 
Answers
213
3.  E
Cholinergic and opioid ingestion result in miosis. Hallucinogenic agents 
such as LSD cause mydriasis and agitation but are not associated with 
seizure activity. Anticholinergic agents are not associated with seizures. 
Sympathomimetic agents, such as synthetic cathinones and synthetic can­
nabinoids, cause the pattern of clinical features described.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
Dignam G, Bigham C. Novel psychoactive substances: a practical ap­
proach to dealing with toxicity from legal highs. BJA Education, 
207;7(5):72–​77.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Atropine, Morphine.
4.  C
Exposure to any of the agents may result in the clinical features de­
scribed. Phosgene, ammonia, and sulphuric acid exposure may cause 
identical symptoms and should be included in the differential diagnosis. 
However, following public order disturbance it is most likely that the 
patients have been exposed to chlorobenzylidenemalononitrile or ‘CS’ 
spray, commonly known as ‘tear gas’. UK police forces use a 5% w/​v 
CS gas spray with an organic solvent so that it can be aerosolized as the 
agent itself is a solid at room temperature. Chloroacetophenone (CN) is 
a less potent lachrymator, has a slower onset time yet is associated with 
greater toxicity than CS gas so its use has been largely superseded by CS. 
CN is the principal agent in mace.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
5.  A
Malignant neuroleptic syndrome is typically associated with the chronic 
use of antipsychotic agents, of which there is no history suggestive 
of their use. Phaeochromocytoma, while a possible diagnosis, seems 
unlikely, especially given the reduced GCS. Malignant hyperpyrexia 
should be considered if suxamethonium (a depolarizing muscle relaxant) 
was used to facilitate tracheal intubation but most pre-​hospital spe­
cialists would use rocuronium (a non-​depolarizing muscle relaxant). 
Suxamethonium can be a trigger for malignant hyperpyrexia, but it is not 
associated with non-​depolarizing agent use. Amphetamine usage would 
fit the clinical features described. Heat stroke, while a possible diagnosis, 
seems unlikely in the context of seizure activity.
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7  Drugs in overdose
214
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
Smith S, Scarth E. Drugs in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, 5th edition. 
Oxford University Press, 206. Dantrolene, Suxamethonium.
6.  E
The most rapid form of detection will be the signs and symptom com­
plexes of the victims of the attack. Detection equipment will take time to 
be deployed and used. Chemical detection paper uses a colour change to 
determine liquid nerve agents. Fourier-​transform infrared spectroscopy 
can be used in a hand-​held device which contains a molecular database 
of agents for comparison to the suspected agent. Raman spectrometers 
can also be used in portable devices. Gas chromatography-​mass spec­
troscopy is the most accurate technology available to detect single or 
multiple agents.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
7.  C
Americium is excreted from the body within a few days and little enters 
the bloodstream. Plutonium is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal 
(GI) tract. Polonium emits a very high number of alpha particles. Due 
to this high alpha decay, it emits a high amount of radiation. Thorium 
has low radioactivity. Uranium is excreted within a few days following 
ingestion.
Further reading
Bateman D, et al. Oxford Desk Reference: Toxicology. Oxford University 
Press, 204.
215
Index
For the benefit of digital users, indexed terms that span two pages (e.g., 52–​53) 
may, on occasion, appear on only one of those pages. 
Tables are indicated by t following the page number
A
ACE inhibitors  73
acetazolamide  7–​72
acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors  26
aciclovir  76, 83
activated Factor 
VII  94, 99
acute graft 
rejection  45, 5
acute kidney injury 
(AKI)  67, 69, 
7, 74–​75
contrast-​induced  
67, 7
acute respiratory 
distress syndrome 
(ARDS)  42, 49, 
46, 52
acute tubular 
necrosis  68, 73
adrenaline  , 66, 7–​72, 
32, 38
akathisia  8
albumin  9
alfentanil  55, 56, 6, 
allergy, local 
anaesthetics  34
alpha adrenoceptor 
antagonists  3, 36
α-​glucosidase 
inhibitors  86
altitude  5, 3
amatoxin  22
americium  24
amiloride  7–​72
aminoglycosides  76, 
84, 73
amisulpride  28
amitriptyline  4, 20
ammonia  23
amphetamines  208, 23
amphotericin  75, 82
anaphylaxis  47, 53
andexanet  20
angiotensin-​converting 
enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors  73
anticoagulation 
reversal  95, 200
antidepressants  4, 7, 
9, 20, 28
antiphospholipid 
syndrome  202–​3
apixaban  95, 20
argipressin  60
asthma 
acute severe  43, 48
capsaicin use  73
pregnancy  43, 49
atracurium  42, 44, 45, 
49, 76
autoionization  35
autonomic 
dysreflexia  35, 4
autoregulation  68, 73
azathioprine  27
B
bacterial meningitis  80, 86
barbiturate ring 
structure  24
benzodiazepines  4, 
5, 2, 22, 24t
betamethasone  87, 87t
bevacizumab  97, 202
bilirubin  97
bioavailability  02, 08
bleomycin  45, 5
blood:gas partition 
coefficient  , 6, 0
body fluid 
compartments  89, 
93, 94, 99
breathing circuit 
volume  9
buprenorphine  6
C
capsaicin  66, 72
carbamazepine  63, 68, 
6, 25
carbapenems  76, 83
carcinoid syndrome  
79, 88
cardiopulmonary 
bypass  69, 74
caspofungin  76, 83
cathinone 
toxicity  206, 2
cell membrane  5, 57
chloroacetophenone  23
chlorobenzylidenema
lononitrile (CS) 
spray  208, 23
2-​chloroprocaine  27, 32
chronic renal 
failure  70, 76
ciclosporin  73
cimetidine  34
ciprofloxacin  82
ciraparantag  20
cisatracurium  42, 45, 76
clearance  0, 06, 07
clonidine  2, 63, 67, 68, 
74, 32, 36, 37
Clostridium difficile  8, 86
cocaine
hypertensive 
encephalopathy  
32, 37
local anaesthetic  29, 35
codeine  55, 56, 60
co-​induction  6, 2
cold shock  34, 4
colloids  99
community-​acquired 
pneumonia  78, 85
context-​sensitive half-​
time  05, 
contrast-​induced 
acute kidney 
injury  67, 7
coprine ingestion  22
corticosteroids 
mechanisms of 
action  80, 88
relative potencies  87t
steroid equivalents  
79, 87
synthesis  24
cortisol  24, 87
creatinine kinase  69, 74
croup  47, 53
cryoprecipitate  95
crystal-​induced kidney 
injury  69, 74
CS spray  208, 23
cyclizine  55, 60, 62
 
Index
216
cytochrome P450 
system  3, 9
cytokine-​release 
syndrome  96, 20
D
dabigatran  94, 95, 
99, 200
dantrolene  40, 45
dapagliflozin  78, 85
desensitization  60
desflurane  7, 2t, 04, 0
desomorphine  20
dexamethasone  64, 77, 
8, 87, 87t
dexmedetomidine  
5, 23
dextrans  9, 97
dextrose  96–​97, 99
diamorphine  56, 57
diazepam  22, 24t
diclofenac  69
dobutamine  36
domperidone  56, 
6, 62
dopamine  36, 7–​72
dynorphin A  6
dystonia  8
E
edrophonium  43, 50
effective dose (ED)  39, 
44, 07
efficacy  07
elimination rate  02, 
06, 07
enflurane  7, 9, 2t
eptacog alfa  94, 99
ertapenem  83
erythromycin  6, 72–​73
erythropoietin  93, 98
esmolol  90t
etomidate  5, 7, 9, 20t, 
23, 24, 25
excretion of 
drugs  03, 08
F
fentanyl  57
filgrastim (G-​CSF)  
94, 200
first-​pass metabolism  08
fluconazole  34
fludrocortisone  87
flumazenil  22
flunarizine  72
fluoroquinolones  75, 82
fondaparinux  94, 99
fresh frozen plasma  90, 95
functional residual capacity 
(FRC)  9
G
gabapentin  65, 66, 70, 
72, 72–​73
gastrointestinal 
absorption  59, 65
gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage  
59, 64
G-​CSF  94, 200
gelatines  93, 98
gestational hypertension  
33, 38
glibenclamide  79, 85
gliflozins  85
glucagon  77, 82
glucagon-​like peptide  
(GLP-​) analogues  
85–​86
glucose  99
glyceryl trinitrate  90t
glycopyrronium  56, 62
glypressin  55, 60
graft rejection  45, 5
granulocyte colony-​
stimulating factor 
(G-​CSF)  94, 200
Gyromitra species  207, 
22
H
half-​life  07
hallucinogens  205, 20
haloperidol  3, 8, 6
halothane  7, 2t
inducing hepatitis  5, 
Hartmann’s 
solution  9, 96, 99
Helicobacter pylori 
testing  62
heliox  2, 8
heparin  72–​73
histamine-​induced 
bronchospasm  
54, 60
human albumin 
solution  89, 94
hydrocortisone  79, 
87, 87t
hypertension  3, 34, 
36, 40
gestational  33, 38
hypertensive crisis  80, 
89, 90t
hypertensive 
encephalopathy  
32, 37
hyperthermia  205, 20
hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy  
35, 42
I
ibuprofen  69
idarucizumab  200
imipenem  83
incompatibility  6, 22
inflammatory response  32
insulin 
absorption  78, 83
insulin detemir  79, 86
ipilimumab  96, 202
isoflurane  7, 2t
K
ketamine  5, 7, 8, 
9, 20t, 23, 25, 63, 
65, 68, 70
‘Krokodil’  20
L
labetalol  36, 37
laudanosine  49
levetiracetam  3, 8
levobupivacaine  33
levosimendan  36
levothyroxine  78, 84
lidocaine (lignocaine)  28, 
33, 34, 65, 7, 
04, 0
lithium  72–​73
local anaesthetic 
toxicity  28, 30, 36, 37
long-​term oxygen 
therapy  44, 49
loop diuretics  68, 72
lorazepam  22, 24t
lung transplantation  
45, 5
lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD)  206, 20–​
M
MACaw  0
MACbar  6
malignant hyperthermia  
4, 
mannitol  4, 2, 37–​38, 
7–​72
March pharmacokinetic 
model  04, 09, 0
massive obstetric 
haemorrhage  9, 97
median effective dose  07
megaloblastic anaemia  3, 9
meglitinides  85
Index
217
melanoma treatment  
96, 202
meningitis, bacterial  80, 86
mepivacaine  30, 37
meropenem  83
metabolism of 
drugs  03, 08
metformin  7, 77, 8
methadone  60
methaemoglobinaemia  
29, 35
methohexital  24–​25
methotrexate  74
methoxyflurane  2, 7
methylbarbiturates  24–​25
methylprednisolone  
87, 87t
metoclopramide  62
midazolam  2, , 
22, 24t
milrinone  36
mivacurium  23, 45, 
49, 27
monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors 
(MAOIs)  20, 29
morphine  5, 53, 56, 59
multidrug-​resistant 
tuberculosis  79, 85
muscarinic 
mushrooms  20
myasthenia gravis  84, 
6, 26
mydriasis  205
myocarditis, viral  78, 85
N
naloxone  52, 57
nefopam  67, 73
neomycin  84
neonatal 
resuscitation  9, 96
neostigmine  40, 43, 
46, 47, 50
neutropenic sepsis  77, 84
nimodipine  72, 37–​38
nitrous oxide  9, 2t
NMDA receptors  25
non-​steroidal anti-​
inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)  64, 69, 
57, 62, 7, 
73, 75
noradrenaline  36
O
obesity  05, 
obstetrics 
massive obstetric 
haemorrhage  9, 97
oxytocin  80, 90
post-​partum 
haemorrhage  
45, 5
uterine tone  4, 0
octreotide  64, 88
oculogyric 
crisis  7, 27–​28
oil:gas partition 
coefficient  , 6
omeprazole  56, 6, 
62, 64
ondansetron  55, 60, 6
opioids 
cardiovascular 
effects  52, 58
metabolism  5
receptors  55, 59, 6
tolerance  54, 60
Orellanine species  22
oseltamivir  75, 82
oxybarbiturates  24–​25
oxygen therapy  44, 
49, 50
oxytocin  80, 90
P
paediatrics 
chronic renal 
failure  70, 76
croup  47, 53
neonatal 
resuscitation  9, 96
postoperative nausea 
and vomiting  57, 
58, 63, 64
sepsis  34, 4
pancreatitis  80, 86
para-​amino benzoic acid 
(PABA)  34
paracetamol  64, 69, 
58, 63
peptic ulcer 
disease  57, 62
phaeochromocytoma  
80, 89
pharmacokinetic models  
04, 05, 09, 0
phenelzine  4, 20
phenothiazines  7
phenoxybenzamine  89
phentolamine  36, 90t
phenylephrine  36
phenytoin  6, 25
phosgene  23
pKa  29, 3, 35, 37, 57
plasma 
binding of local 
anaesthetics  3, 37
cholinesterase  48
drug plasma 
concentration  
0, 06
platelet transfusion  90, 94
plutonium  24
pneumonia  78, 85
pneumonitis, drug-​
induced  97, 202
polonium  209, 24
porphyria  34
postoperative nausea and 
vomiting  57, 58, 
63, 64
post-​partum haemorrhage  
45, 5
prednisolone  87, 87t
pre-​eclampsia  33, 38
pregabalin  72
pregnancy 
asthma  43, 49
hypertension  33, 38
pulmonary 
embolism  46, 52
prilocaine  35
prochlorperazine  66, 7
procyclidine  28
propofol  6, 8, 20t, 2, 
25, 09, 
infusion 
syndrome  6, 22
propranolol  64
proton pump 
inhibitors  6
psilocybin  22
pulmonary arterial 
hypertension  
43, 48
pulmonary 
embolism  46, 52
pyridostigmine  6, 26
R
ramipril  37–​38
ranitidine  6
red blood cell 
transfusion  90, 
92, 95, 97
remifentanil  52, 57, 03, 
09, 
renal autoregulation  
68, 73
renal transplantation  70, 
75, 76
Ringer’s acetate  99
rivaroxaban  93, 98
rocuronium  23, 39, 4, 44, 
47, 49, 76
ropivacaine  27, 32
S
salbutamol  44, 50
Schneider pharmacokinetic 
model  0
second gas effect  9
Index
218
selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)  28
semilog plot  02, 07
sepsis 
neutropenic  77, 84
paediatric  34, 4
serotonin syndrome  
58, 20
sevoflurane  7, 2t
sodium bicarbonate  92, 
98
sodium channels  33
sodium chloride  90, 96
sodium nitroprusside  
37, 90t
somatostatin  64
spinal cord injury  35, 
4
spironolactone  7–​72
steroids equivalents  
79, 87
mechanisms of 
action  80, 88
relative potencies  87t
synthesis  24
stimulant syndrome  
206, 2
streptokinase  98
stress ulcer prophylaxis  
58, 63
sugammadex  39, 44, 47, 
27, 76
sulphuric acid  23
suxamethonium  40, 4, 
42, 45, 46, 48, 49, 
20, 27
syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic 
hormone  78, 83
synthetic cannabinoid 
receptor agonists 
(SCRAs)  20
systemic vascular 
resistance  3, 36
T
tachycardia  33, 39
tamsulosin  36
teicoplanin  47, 53
temazepam  22–​23, 24t
Tensilon® test  43, 50
terlipressin  55, 60, 64
theophylline  44, 49
thiobarbiturates  24–​25
thiopental  8, 20t, 23, 
24–​25, 26, 
thorium  24
thrombolytic 
agents  93, 98
tolerance  54, 60
train-​of-​four  4, 47
tramadol  52, 58, 64, 70
tranexamic acid  98
transplantation 
lung  45, 5
renal  70, 75, 76
traumatic brain 
injury  34, 40
tricyclic antidepressants  
4, 9, 29
tuberculosis  79, 85
tumour lysis 
syndrome  20
U
uranium  24
urine drug testing  206, 
2
uterine tone  4, 0
V
variceal haemorrhage  
59, 64
vasopressin  40, 60
vecuronium  45, 49
ventricular fibrillation  
33, 39
viral myocarditis  78, 85
volume of 
distribution  20, 07
W
warfarin reversal  95, 
200
warm shock  4
X
xenon  , 6
Z
ziconotide  72
